Appletons' Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. 3 (James Grant Wilson and John Fiske, 1888)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/appletonscyclop03wilsuoft): the 1888 New York (D. Appleton) first edition, vol. 3 of 6 (Grinnell–Lockwood), ed. Wilson & Fiske — complete through END OF VOLUME III.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================



VOL.  III.
GRIN  NELL-LOCK  WOOD


>-^Ctr-^/


U  Appleton  &  Co


APPLBTONS'


CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN


BIOGRAPHY


EDITED BY

JAMES GRANT WILSON

AND

JOHN FISKE


As  it  is  the  commendation  of  a  good  huntsman  to  find  game  in  a  wide  wood,
so  it  is  no  imputation  if  he  hath  not  caught  all.  Plato.


VOLUME  III.
GRINNELL-LOCKWOOD


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1,  3  and  5  BOND  STREET
1892


Copyright,  1887,
By  D.  APPLETON  AND  COMPANY,


LIST OF PORTRAITS ON STEEL.


ARTIST

ENGRAVER

PAGE

Lincoln,  Abraham

Hester

Ball

Frontispiece

Hamilton,  Alexander

Trumbull

Ooisch

Face  56

Hancock,  Winfield  Scott

Boyardus

Hall

72

Harrison,  William  Henry

Marceau

Knight

96

Hayes,  Rutherford  Birchard

Landy

Hall

134

Irving,  Washington

Plumb

Hollyer

360

Jackson,  Andrew

Longacre

Hall

373

Jefferson,  Thomas

Brown

Hall

415

Johnson,  Andrew

Brady

Hall

436

Lee,  Robert  Edward

Bradley

Hall

668

SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS
TO  APPLETONS' CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


Adams,  Charles  Kendall,

President  of  Cornell  University.

Agassiz,  Alexander,
Author  and  Professor.

Allan,  Col.  William,

Aide-de-Camp  to  "  Stonewall "  Jackson.

Allibone,  S.  Austin,

Author  "  Dictionary  of  Authors."

Amory,  Thomas  C, .

Author  "  Life  of  General  Sullivan,"  etc.
Bancroft,  George,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States."

Barrett,  Lawrence,

Author  "Life  of  Edwin  Forrest."

Bayard,  Thomas  F.,

Secretary  of  State.

Bigelow,  John,

Author  "  Life  of  Franklin,"  etc.

Boker,  George  H.,

Poet,  late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Russia.

Botta,  Mrs.  Vincenzo,

Author  and  Poet.

Bradley,  Joseph  P.,

Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Brooks,  Phillips,

Author  "Sermons  in  English  Churches."

Carter,  Franklin,

President  of  Williams  College.

Champlin,  John  Denison,

Author  "Cyclopedia  of  Painters  and  Paintings."

Chandler,  William  E.,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Navy.

Clarke,  James  Freeman,

Author  "Ten  Great  Religions,"  etc.

Cooper,  Miss  Susan  Fenimore,

Author  "Rural  Hours,"  etc.

Conway,  Moncure  D.,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Coppee,  Henry,

Professor  in  Lehigh  University,  Pa.

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Western  New  York.

Courtenay,  William  A.,

Mayor  of  Charleston,  S.  C.

Cullum,  Gen.  George  W.,

Author  "  Register  of  West  Point  Graduates,"  etc.
Curry,  Daniel,

Late  Author  and  Editor.

Curtis,  George  Ticknor,

Author  "  Life  of  James  Buchanan,"  etc.

Curtis,  George  William,

Author  and  Editor.


Custer,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.,

Author  "  Boots  and  Saddles."
Daniel,  John  W.,

United  States  Senator  from  Virginia.

De  Costa,  Benjamin  F.,

Historical  Writer.

De  Lancey,  Edward  F.,

Ex-President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.

Didier,  Eugene  L.,

Author  "  Life  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe."

Dix,  Morgan,

Rector  of  Trinity  Church,  New  York.

Doane,  William  C,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Albany.

Drake,  Samuel  Adams,

Author  "Historic  Personages  of  Boston,"  etc.

Draper,  Lyman  C,

Secretary  of  Wisconsin  Historical  Society.

Dupont,  Col.  Henry  A.,

Of  Delaware,  late  U.  S.  Army.

Eggleston,  George  Cary,

Editor  New  York  "Commercial  Advertiser."

Fiske,  John,

Author  and  Professor.

Frothingham,  Octavius  B.,

Author  "Life  of  George  Ripley."

Gayarre,  C.  E.  A.,

Author  "  History  of  Louisiana."

Gerry,  Elbridge  T.,

Member  of  New  York  Bar.

Gilman,  Daniel  C.,'

President  of  Johns  Hopkins  University.

Goodwin,  Daniel,

Member  of  Illinois  Bar.

Greely,  Gen.  A.  W.,  TJ.  S.  A.,

Author  "Three  Years  of  Arctic  Service."

Green,  William  Mercer,

Late  P.  E.  Bishop  of  Mississippi.

Greene,  Capt.  Francis  Vinton,

United  States  Engineer  Corps.

Hale,  Edward  Everett,

Author  "Franklin  in  France,"  etc.

Hay,  Col.  John,

Author  "Life  of  Lincoln,"  etc.
Henry,  William  Wirt,

Of  the  Virginia  Historical  Society.

Higginson,  Col.  T.  W.,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States,"  etc.

Hilliard,  Henry  W.,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Brazil.

Hop  pin.  Professor  James  M.,

Of  Yale  College.


vm


SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS.


Howe,  Mrs.  Julia  Ward,

Author  "  Later  Lyrics,"  etc.

Huntington,  William  R.,

Rector  of  Grace  Church,  New  York.

Jay,  John,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Austria.

Johnson,  Gen.  Bradley  T.,

Member  of  Maryland  Bar.

Johnson,  Rossiter,

Author  "  History  of  the  War  of  1812,"  etc.

Johnston,  William  Preston,

President  of  Tulane  University.

Jones,  Horatio  Gates,

Vice-President  of  Pennsylvania  Historical  Society.

Jones,  John  William,

Secretary  of  Southern  Historical  Society.

Jones,  WiUiam  Alfred,

Author  "  Character  and  Criticism,"  etc.

Lathrop,  George  Parsons,

Author  "  A  Study  of  Hawthorne,"  etc

Latrobe,  John  H  B.,

Member  of  Maryland  Bar.

Lincoln,  Robert  T.,
Ex-Secretary  of  War.

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,

Author  "  Life  of  Hamilton."

Long,  Col.  Charles  Chaille,
Late  of  the  Egyptian  Army.

Lowell,  James  Russell,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  at  Court  of  St.  James.

Mathews,  William,

Author  "  Orators  and  Oratory,"  etc.

McMaster,  John  Bach,

Author."  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States."

Mitchell,  Donald  G.,

Author  "  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor,"  etc.

Mombert,  J.  I.,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Norton,  Charles  Eliot,

Professor  in  Harvard  University.

O'Connor,  Joseph,

Editor  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  "Post-Express."

O'Neal,  Edward  A.,
Governor  of  Alabama.

Parker,  Cortlandt,

Member  of  New  Jersey  Bar.

Parkman,  Francis,

Author  "  Frontenac,"  "  French  in  Canada,"  etc.

Partem,  James,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Phelan,  James,  M.C.,

Editor  Memphis,  Tenn.,  "  Avalanche."

Phelps,  William  Walter,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.

Pierrepont,  Edwards,

Ex- Attorney-General  United  Stetes.

Porter,  David  D.,

Admiral  United  States  Navy.


Porter,  Gen.  Horace,

Late  of  Gen.  Grant's  Staff.

Preston,  Mrs.  Margaret  J.,

Author  and  Poet.

Puron,  Dr.  Juan  G.,

Spanish  Author  and  Editor.

Bead,  Gen.  J.  Meredith,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Greece.

Reid,  Whitelaw,

Editor  New  York  "  Tribune."

Ricord,  Judge  Frederick  W.,

New  Jersey  Historical  Society.

Robinson,  Ezekiel  G.,

President  of  Brown  University.

Romero,  Mattias,

Mexican  Minister  to  the  United  States.

Royce,  Josiah,

Professor  in  California  University.

Sanborn,  Miss  Kate,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Schurz,  Gen.  Carl,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Sherman,  William  T.,

Late  General  of  United  States  Army.

Smith,  Charles  Emory,

Editor  Philadelphia  "  Press."

Spencer,  Jesse  Ames,

Author  and  Professor.

Stedman,  Edmund  C,

Author  "Poets  of  America,"  etc.

Stiles,  Henry  R.,  M.  D.,

Author  "  History  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y."

Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,

Author  "  Songs  of  Summer,"  etc.

Stone,  William  L.,

Author  "  Life  of  Red  Jacket,"  etc.

Strong,  William,

Ex-Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Stryker,  William  S.,

Adjutant-General  of  New  Jersey.

Tucker,  J.  Randolph,

Member  of  Congress  from  Virginia.

Waite,  Morrison  R.,

Chief  Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,

Author  and  Editor.

Washburne,  Elihu  B.,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  France.

Welling,  James  C,

President  of  Columbian  University.

Wilson,  Gen.  Jas.  Grant,

President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.

Winter,  William,

Poet  and  Theatrical  Critic.

Winthrop,  Robert  C,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Young,  John  Russell,

Miscellaneous  Writer.


To  this  list  other  names  will  be  added  as  the  work  progresses.


Among  the  Contributors  to  the  third  volume  of  u  Appletons1  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biogra-
phy "  are  the  following  :


Col.  William  Allan,

Aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Jackson.
Jackson,  Thomas  J.  ("  Stonewall  ").

Marcus  Benjamin,  F.  C.  S.
Hale,  Edward  Everett,
The  Livingston  Family,
and  other  articles.

S.  G.  W.  Benjamin,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Persia.
Articles  on  Painters  and  Sculptors.

Arthur  E.  Bostwick,  Ph.  D.
Harrison,  William  Henry,
Kendall,  Amos,
and  other  articles.

James  C.  Brogan.
Articles  on  Roman  Catholic  Clergymen.

Mrs.  Isa  Carrington  Cabell.
The  Howe  Family,
The  Kirkland  Family,
and  other  articles.

Lieut.  C.  G.  Calkins,  V.  S.  N.
Jones,  John  Paul,
Lawrence,  James.

Rev.  Jas.  Freeman  Clarke,  D.  D.
Hull,  William.

Prof.  Henry  Coppee,

Author.

Hooker,  Joseph.

Gen.  George  W.  Cullum,  U.  S.  A.
Halleck,  Henry  Wager.

George  William  Curtis.
Hawthorne,  Nathaniel.

Maturin  Livingston  Delaneld.
Lewis,  Francis,
Lewis,  Morgan.

Edward  F.  De  Lancey,

Ex-President  New  York  Genealogical  Society.
Heathcoate,  Caleb,
Johnson,  Sir  William,
Jones,  Thomas,  and  Family.

George  Cary  Eggleston,

Journalist,  and  Author  of  "  A  Rebel's  Recollections.'
Lee,  Robert  Edward.

Prof.  John  Fiske.

Hutchinson,  Thomas,
Jackson,  Andrew,
Lafayette,  Marquis  de,
Lee,  Charles,
Lee  Family,  of  Virginia.

Jeannette  L.  Gilder.
Kellogg,  Clara  Louise,


Bev.  D.  A.  GoodseU,  D.  D.
Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal Church.

Gen.  Adolphus  W.  Greely,  XJ.  S.  A.
Hall,  Charles  Francis,
Hayes,  Isaac  Israel,
Kane,  Elisha  Kent,
Lockwood,  James  Booth.

Jacob  Henry  Hager,

Journalist  and  Translator.
Hancock,  Winfield  Scott,
Lee,  Ann,
and  other  articles.

John  R.  G.  Hassard,

Author  and  Journalist.
Hughes,  John,  Archbishop.

Col.  John  Hay,

Author  and  Poet.
Lincoln,  Abraham.

Joel  T.  Headley,

Author  of  '•  Washington  and  his  Generals."
Knox,  Henry.

William  Wirt  Henry.
Henry,  Patrick.

Henry  W.  Hilliard,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Brazil.
Gwin,  William  M.,
King,  William  R.,
and  other  articles.

Edward  Hopper.

Hicks,  Elias.

Frank  Huntington.

Kent,  James,
Law,  John.
and  other  articles.

Rev.  William  R.  Huntington,  D.  D.
Huntington,  Frederick  Dan.

A.  S.  Isaacs,  Ph.  D.,

Editor  "Jewish  Messenger."

Articles  on  Hebrew  Clergymen.

John  Jay,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Austria.
Articles  on  the  Jay  Family.

Gen.  Bradley  T.  Johnson,

Late  of  Confederate  Army.

Johnston,  Joseph  E.,
and  other  articles.

Rossiter  Johnson,

Author  of  "  History  of  the  War  of  1812-'15."

Holmes,  Oliver  Wendell,
Hunter,  David,
and  other  articles.


CONTRIBUTORS  TO  THE  THIRD  VOLUME.


Col.  William  Preston  Johnston,

President  of  Tulane  University,  New  Orleans,  La.

Hampton,  Wade,
Johnston,  Albert  Sidney.

Rev.  John  William  Jones,  D.  D.,

Secretary  of  Southern  Historical  Society.

Lee,  Fitzhugh,

Lee,  George  Washington  Custis,
and  other  articles.

Rev.  Asahel  C.  Kendrick,  D.  D.,
Author  of  "Life  of  Emily  C.  Judson."

Adoniram  Judson  and  Family.

Charles  R.  King,  M.  D.
Rufus  King  and  Family.

Rufus  King.
Articles  on  the  King  Family.

Samuel  A.  King,

Aeronaut.
La  Mountain,  John,
and  other  articles  on  aeronauts.

John  H.  B.  Latrobe.
Kennedy,  John  Pendleton.

Col.  J.  Granville  Leach.

Articles  on  Pennsylvanians.

Henry  Cabot  Lodge,

Author.

Hamilton,  Alexander.

Neil  Macdonald.
Inglis,  Charles,
Jackson,  James,  of  Georgia,
and  articles  on  Canadian  statesmen.

Donald  G.  Mitchell.

Irving,  Washington.

Rev.  S.  E.  Ochsenford,  D.  D.

Articles  on  Lutheran  Clergymen.

Joseph  O'Connor,

Journalist.
Kendrick,  Asahel  Clark,
Kerr.  Michael  Crawford.

Francis  Parkman,  LL.  D.,

Historian.
La  Salle,  Robert  C.  de.

James  Parton,

Author  and  Essayist.
Jefferson,  Thomas.

James  Phelan,  M.  C,

Editor  "Memphis  Avalanche."
Houston,  Samuel,
Johnson,  Andrew,
and  other  articles.

Mrs.  Margaret  J.  Preston,

Author  and  Poet.

Hayne,  Paul  Hamilton.

Gen.  J.  Meredith  Read,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Greece.
Hudson,  Henry.


Frederick  W.  Ricord,

Librarian  of  the  New  Jersey  Historical  Society.
Herbert,  Henry  William,
Hornblower,  Joseph  C,
and  other  articles.

Hermann  Ritter.

Articles  on  South  and  Central  Americans.
Col.  Thomas  J.  Scharf,

Late  of  Confederate  Army.

Hill,  Ambrose  Powell.

Gen.  Carl  Schurz,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.
Hayes,  Rutherford  Birchard.

Rt.  Rev.  Edmund  de  Schweinitz,  D.  D.
Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Moravian  Church.

Gen.  Henry  H.  Sibley.

Little  Crow.

Miss  Esther  Singleton.
Kieft,  Wilhelm,
Laurens,  Henry,
and  other  articles.

Rev.  Jesse  Ames  Spencer,  D.  D.,

Author  of  "  History  of  the  United  States."
Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal Church.

Henry  R.  Stiles,  M.  D.,

Author  of  "History  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y."
Harrison,  Gabriel.

William  L.  Stone,

Author  of  "  Life  6f  Brant."

Hay,  John,
Johnson,  Sir  John,
and  other  articles.

Rev.  B.  T.  Tanner,  D.  D.

Articles  on  Colored  Clergymen.

William  Christian  Tenner,

Graduate  of  the  University  of  Paris.
Hugues,  Victor,
Lesseps,  Ferdinand  de,
and  other  articles.

Charles  Dudley  Warner.
Hawley,  Joseph  R.,
Howells,  William  Dean.

John  William  Weidemeyer.
Jefferson,  Joseph,
Kemble,  Charles  and  Frances  Anne,
and  other  dramatic  and  musical  articles.

Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson.

Halleck,  Fitz-Greene,
Hull,  Isaac,
Kemble,  Gouverneur,
Lenox,  James,
and  other  articles.

John  Laird  Wilson,

Author  and  Journalist.
Keene,  Laura,
Kidd,  William,
and  other  articles.

John  Russell  Young,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  China.
Jewell,  Marshall.


APPLETONS'

CYCLOP/EDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


GRINNELL

GRINNELL,  Joseph,  merchant,  b.  in  New  Bed-
ford, Mass.,  18  Jan.,  1789 ;  d.  there,  7  Feb..  1885.
He  came  to  New  York,  and  in  1815  aided  in  estab-
lishing the  firm  of  Fish  and  Grinnell.  His  two
younger  brothers  became  members  of  the  firm  in
1825,  and  in  1828  Joseph  retired,  and  his  place
was  taken  by  Robert  B.  Minturn.  Joseph  resided
at  New  Bedford  for  fifty-six  years,  and  was  presi-
dent of  the  Marine  bank,  the  Wamsutta  mills  com-
pany, and  the  New  Bedford  and  Taunton  railroad.
He  was  a  member  of  the  governor's  council  in
1839-'41,  and  in  1843-'51  was  a  representative  in
congress,  having  been  elected  as  a  Whig.  His
niece  and  adopted  daughter  married  the  poet  N.  P.
Willis. — His  brother  Henry,  merchant,  b.  in  New
Bedford,  Mass.,  in  1800 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30
June,  1874,  was  graduated  at  New  Bedford  acad-
emy in  1818,  and  in
the  same  year  be-
came clerk  in  a
commission  -  house
in  Pine  street,  New
York.  In  1825  he
was  made  a  member
of  the  firm  of  Fish
and  Grinnell,  after-
ward Grinnell,  Min-
turn and  Company.
He  was  much  inter-
ested in  geography,
and  especially  in  arc-
tic exploration,  and
in  1850,  at  his  own
expense,  fitted  out  an
expedition  to  search
for  Sir  John  Frank-
lin, from  whom  noth-
ing had  been  heard  in  five  years.  The  expedition
sailed  from  New  York  in  May,  1850,  under  com-
mand of  Lieut.  E.  J.  He  Haven,  with  Dr.  E.  K.
Kane  as  surgeon  and  naturalist.  It  discovered
land  in  lat.  75°  24'  21",  which  was  named  Grinnell
Land,  in  honor  of  Mr.  Grinnell.  In  1853,  in  con-
junction with  George  Peabody,  he  spent  $50,000
in  the  equipment  of  the  second  Franklin  search
expedition,  giving  it  also  his  personal  supervision.
This  expedition  was  placed  in  charge  of  Dr.  Kane,
and  the  government  bore  part  of  its  expenses.
Mr.  Grinnell  also  contributed  freely  to  the  Hayes
expedition  of  1860,  and  to  the  u  Polaris  "  expedi-
tion of  1871.  He  retired  from  business  in  1852,
but  in  1859  engaged  in  insurance. Mr.  Grinnell

VOL.  III. —  1


GRINNELL

was  throughout  his  life  an  earnest  advocate  of  the
interests  of  sailors,  and  was  the  first  president  of
the  American  geographical  society,  in  1852-'3,  and
a  vice-president  from  1854  till  1872. — His  daugh-
ter, Sylvia,  married  Admiral  Ruxton,  of  the  Eng-
lish navy,  and  in  1886  presented  to  that  society
a  crayon  portrait  of  her  father,  framed  in  wood
taken  from  the  ship  "  Resolute."  (See  Belcher,
Sir  Edward.) — Another  brother  of  Joseph,  Moses
Hicks,  b.  in  New  Bedford.  Mass.,  3  March,  1803 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Nov.,  1877.  entered  a  New
York  counting-house  in  1818,  and.  after  several
voyages  as  supercargo,  became  in  1825  a  member
of*  the  firm  of  Fish  and  Grinnell.  In  1839-41
he  was  a  representative  in  congress,  having  been
elected  as  a  Whig.  He  was  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Fremont  ticket  in  1856.  and  in  1869-'70
collector  of  the  port  of  New  York.  He  became
president  of  the  chamber  of  commerce  in  1843,  was
a  member  of  the  original  Central  park  commis-
sion, and  in  1860-'5  a  commissioner  of  charities
and  correction.  He  gave  liberally  toward  Dr.
Kane's  arctic  expedition  of  1853,  and  toward  the
National  cause  during  the  civil  war.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Union  club  from  4  Sept.,  1867,  till  5
Nov.,  1873.  Mr.  Grinnell  was  one  of  the  merchant-
princes  of  New  York,  and  enjoyed  the  friendship
of  Daniel  Webster  and  William  H.  Seward.

GRINNELL,  Josiah  Bushnell,  congressman,
b.  in  New  Haven,  Vt.,  22  Dec,  1821.  He  was
graduated  at  Oneida  institute  in  1843  and  at  Au-
burn theological  seminary  in  1847,  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  preached
seven  years  in  Union  Village,  N.  Y.,  Washington,
D.  C,  and  New  York  city.  He  founded  the  Con-
gregational church  at  Grinnell,  Iowa,  in  1854,  and
preached  there  gratuitously  for  several  years,  but
afterward  retired  from  the  ministry  and  became  an
extensive  wool-grower.  He  was  a  member  of  The
state  senate  in  1856-'60,  special  agent  of  the  post-
office  department  in  1861-3,  and  in  1863-7  was  a
representative  in  congress,  having  been  elected  as
a  Republican.  He  was  a  special  agent  of  the
treasury  department  in  1868,  and  in  1884  was  ap-
pointed commissioner  of  the  .U.  S.  bureau  of  animal
industries.  When  in  the  Iowa  senate  Mr.  Grinnell
took  an  active  part  in  the  formation  of  the  state
free-school  system,  and  was  also  the  correspondent
and  confidant  of  John  Brown,  entertaining  him
and  his  company.  "  In  my  library,"  says  Mr.
Grinnell  in  a  recent  letter,  "  secretly,  in  the  gleam
of  bayonets,  and  near  a  miniature  arsenal  for  the


GRISCOM


GR1SWOLD


protection  of  a  score  of  ex-slaves,  he  wrote  a  part
of  his  Virginia  proclamation."  Mr.  Grinnell  was
active  in  aiding  the  escape  of  fugitive  slaves,  and
at  one  time  a  reward  was  offered  for  his  head.  He
has  been  connected  with  the  building  of  six  rail-
roads, and  has  laid  out  five  towns,  including  that
of  Grinnell,  Iowa,  which  was  named  for  him.  He
gave  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  building-lots  in
that  town  to  Grinnell  university,  now  merged  in
Iowa  college,  and  was  for  some  time  its  president.
He  has  published  "  Home  of  the  Badgers "  (Mil-
waukee, Wis.,  1845);  "Cattle  Industries  of  the
United  States  "  (New  York,  1884) ;  and  numerous
pamphlets  and  addresses.

GRISCOM,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Hancock's
Bridge,  Salem  co.,  N.  J.,  27  Sept.,  1774;  d.  in  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  20  Feb.,  1852.  His  education  was
acquired  at  the  Friends'  academy  in  Philadelphia,
and  later  he  was  given  charge  of  the  Friends'
monthly-meeting  school,  in  Philadelphia,  with
which  he  continued  for  thirteen  years.  In  1806  he
removed  to  New  York,  where  he  was  actively  en-
gaged in  teaching  for  twenty-five  years.  He  was
one  of  the  first  to  teach  chemistry,  and  gave  public
lectures  on  this  subject  to  his  classes  early  in  1806.
When  the  medical  department  of  Queen's  (now
Rutgers)  college  was  established  in  1812,  he  was
appointed  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  natural
history,  which  he  held  until  1828.  His  colleague,
Dr.  John  W.  BVancis,  said  of  him  that  "for  thirty
years  Dr.  Griscom  was  the  acknowledged  head  of
all  teachers  of  chemistry  among  us"  in  New  York.
He  was  the  projector  of  the  New  York  high-school,
an  institution  on  the  Lancaster  or  monitorial  sys-
tem of  instruction,  which  had  great  success  from
1825  till  1831,  under  his  supervision.  For  many
years  Dr.  Griscom's  lectures  were  given  in  the
"  New  York  Institution,"  which  had  been  built  in
1795  for  an  almshouse.  Halleck,  in  his  "  Fanny,"
thus  alludes  to  the  building  and  its  occupants :
"  It  remains
To  bless  the  hour  the  Corporation  took  it

Into  their  heads  to  give  the  rich  in  brains
The  worn-out  mansion  of  the  poor  in  pocket,

Once  'the old almshouse,'  now  a school of
wisdom,

Sacred  to  Scudder's  shells  and  Dr.  Griscom."
From  1832  till  1834  he  had  charge  of  a  Friends'
boarding-school  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  also  lecturing
in  various  places  on  chemistry  and  natural  philoso-
phy. Subsequently  he  resided  in  Haverford,  Pa.,
and  then  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  where  he  was  town
superintendent  and  trustee  of  public  schools,  and
also  was  associated  in  the  reorganization  of  the
common-school  system  of  New  Jersey.  During  his
residence  in  New  York  he  was  instrumental  in  or-
ganizing the  Society  for  the  prevention  of  pauper-
ism and  crime,  which  was  the  parent  of  many  im-
portant reform  movements.  For  many  years  he
contributed  abstracts  of  chemical  papers  from  the
foreign  journals  to  Silliman's  "  Journal  of  Science."
He'  was  also  the  author  of  "  A  Year  in  Europe "
(New  York,  1823),  and  "Monitorial  Instruction"
(1825).  See  a  "  Memoir  of  John  Griscom,"  by  his
son  (New  York,  1859).— His  son,  John  Raskins,
physician,  b.  in  New  York  city,  14  Aug.,  1809 ;  d.
there,  28  April,  1874,  was  educated  in  the  Collegi-
ate school  of  Friends,  and,  after  studying  medicine
under  Dr.  John  D.  Godman  and  Dr.  Valentine
Mott,  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1832.  A  year
later  he  was  appointed  assistant  physician  to  the
New  York  dispensary,  becoming  physician  in  1834.
From  1836  till  1840  he  was  professor  of  chemistry
in  the  New  York  college  of  pharmacy. In  1842  he


was  made  city  inspector,  but  a  year  later  became
visiting  physician  of  the  New  York  hospital,  and
continued  as  such  until  within  a  few  years  of  his
death.  In  1848  he  was  appointed  general  agent  of
the  commissioners  of  emigration,  which  office  he
filled  until  1851.  Dr.  Griscom  was  identified  with
the  management  of  the  New  York  prison  associa-
tion, the  Juvenile  reformatory,  the  Home  for  the
friendless,  the  New  York  sanitary  association,  the
Social  science  association,  and  the  New  York  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science  and  art,  of
which  he  was  one  of  the  founders  and  first  presi-
dent. He  wrote  much  and  ably  on  medical,  sani-
tary, hygienic,  and  scientific  topics,  contributing
largely  to  the  medical  journals,  and  was  the  author
of  "  Animal  Mechanism  and  Physiology "  (New
York,  1839) ;  "  Uses  and  Abuses  of  Air  for  the  Venti-
lation of  Buildings  "  (1850) ;  "  An  Oration  before  the
Academy  of  Medicine  "  (1854) ;  "  Prison  Hygiene  "
(Albany,  1868) ;  "  Use  of  Tobacco  and  the  Evils
resulting  from  It "  (New  York,  1868) ;  and  "  Physi-
cal Indications  of  Longevity  "  (1869).

(JRISWOLD,  Alexander  Viets,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Simsbury,  Conn.,  22  April,  1766 ;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  15  Feb.,  1843.  He  manifested  great
precocity  in  childhood,  and  learned  to  read  fluently
at  three  years  of  age.  It  was  intended  that  he
should  receive  a  collegiate  training  at  Yale,  but  the
Revolutionary  war  prevented.  Instead  of  going  to
college,  young  Griswold  took  to  himself  a  wife  in
1785.  He  next  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of
law,  at  the  same
time  continu-
ing his  labors
on  the  farm.
He  was  con-
firmed by  Bish-
op Seabury,  on
his  first  visit  to
Simsbury  par-
ish, and  became
a  communicant
at  the  age  of
twenty.  Not
liking  the  law
as  a  profession,
he  resolved  to
study  for  the
ministry.  He
was  received  as
a  candidate  for
holy  orders  in
the  summer  of
1794,  and  dur-
ing his  preparatory  course  officiated  as  lay  reader  in
several  neighboring  towns.  He  was  ordered  deacon
by  Bishop  Seabury,  3  June,  1795,  and  ordained  priest
by  the  same  bishop,  1  Oct.,  1795.  During  the  next
ten  years  he  had  charge  of  three  parishes  where  he
had  served  as  lay  reader  before  ordination — Plym-
outh, Harwinton,  and  Litchfield,  Conn.  He  also
taught  the  district  school  in  the  winter,  and  did  not
disdain  manual  labor  among  his  parishioners.  In
1804  he  accepted  an  urgent  call  to  the  rectorship
of  St.  Michael's  church,  Bristol,  R.  I.  Six  years
later  he  was  invited  to  Litchfield,  and  was  prepar-
ing to  remove  thither,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
episcopate  over  a  diocese  of  which  he  was  the  first
and  only  bishop,  i.  e.,  "  The  Eastern  Diocese,"  con-
sisting of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  Massa-
chusetts, and  Rhode  Island.  This  was  in  May,
1810.  At  first,  through  modesty  and  self-distrust,
he  positively  declined  the  office ;  but  others  urged
his  acceptance,  and  he  at  last  yielded.  He  was
consecrated  in  Trinity  church,  New  York,  29  May,


dC^.\  g  ^


,2S


GRISWOLD


GRISWOLD


1811.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown
in  1810,  from  Princeton  in  1811,  and  from  Harvard
in  1812.  In  addition  to  his  episcopal  duties,  Bishop
Griswold  continued  in  charge  of  his  parish  at  Bris-
tol, R.  I.,  but  in  1830  removed  to  Salem,  Mass.,  as
it  was  nearer  to  Boston,  and  accepted  the  rector-
ship of  St.  Peter's  church.  In  1835,  however,  he
resigned  this  charge,  and  devoted  himself  wholly
to  his  episcopal  work.  Suffering  from  the  infirmi-
ties of  age  and  from  ill  health,  he  proposed  to  the
convention,  in  June,  1838,  the  election  of  an  assist-
ant. An  eminent  presbyter  was  chosen,  but  de-
clined. In  1842  another  election  was  held,  and  the
Rev.  Dr.  Eastburn,  of  New  York,  was  chosen.  It
was  the  last  ordaining  act  of  the  venerable  dioce-
san to  consecrate  Dr.  Eastburn  to  his  office,  which
was  done  in  Trinity  church,  Boston,  29  Dec,  1842.
On  the  death  of  Bishop  White,  in  1836,  Bishop
Griswold,  under  the  canon,  became  the  presiding
bishop.  With  health  much  broken  he  continued
to  work  to  the  last,  and  the  end  came  suddenly.
He  was  on  his  way  to  call  on  Bishop  Eastburn  on
15  Feb.,  1843,  when,  just  as  he  reached  the  door,  he
fell,  and  died  instantly  of  heart  disease.  Bishop
Griswold's  publications  were  various  sermons  and
addresses  on  special  occasions;  "Discourses  on
the  Most  Important  Doctrines  and  Duties  of  the
Christian  Religion"  (Philadelphia,  1830);  "The
Reformation  and  the  Apostolic  Office"  (Boston,
1843) ;  and  "  Remarks  on  Social  Prayer  Meetings  "
(1858).  See  "  Life  of  Bishop  Griswold,"  bv  Rev.  I.
S.  Stone,  D.  D.  (Philadelphia,  1844.)— His  grand-
nephew,  Casimir  Clayton,  artist,  b.  in  Delaware,
Ohio,  in  1834,  is  the  son  of  Ezra  Griswold,  who  as-
sisted in  editing  and  publishing  the  first  newspaper
in  Columbus,  Ohio.  Casimir  studied  wood-engrav-
ing in  Cincinnati,  and  removed  to  New  York  about
1850.  His  only  instruction  in  painting  was  from
an  elder  brother.  His  first  picture  was  exhibited
at  the  National  academy  in  1857,  and  he  was  made
an  associate  in  1866,  becoming  an  academician  in
1867.  In  1859  he  was  one  of  the  original  members
of  the  Artists'  fund  society.  Mr.  Griswold  has  lived
in  Rome  since  1872.  Among  his  works  are  "De-
cember" (1864) ;  "Winter  Morning"  (1865);  "The
Last  of  the  Ice  "  (1867) ;  "  August  Dav,  Newport "
(1868) ;  "  Early  Spring  "  (1869) ;  "  Purgatory  Point,
Newport "  (1870) :  "  Lago  de  Nemi "  (1874) ;  "  Monte
Spinelli,  Unitria";  and  "Mar  Albano."

GRISWOLD,  Hattie  Tyng,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  26  Jan.,  1842.  Her  father  was  Rev.
Dudley  Tyng.  Miss  Tyng  removed  in  early  life  to
Wisconsin,  and  became  a  teacher  in  the  high-school
at  Columbus  in  that  state.  In  1863  she  married
Eugene  S.  Griswold.  She  is  the  author  of  many
tales  and  poems  in  periodicals,  and  has  published
"Apple-Blossoms,"  poems  (Chicago,  1878),  and
"  Home  Life  of  Great  Authors  "  (1886).  One  of  her
best-known  pieces  is  "  Under  the  Daisies."

GRISWOLD,  John  Augustus,  manufacturer,
b.  in  Nassau,  Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  11  Nov.,  1818;
d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y..  31  Oct.,  1872.  He  went  to  Troy
in  1839,  and  was  for  a  time  an  inmate  of  the  family
of  his  uncle,  Gen.  Wool.  He  became  interested  in
the  Rensselaer  iron  company,  in  which  he  was
afterward  the  principal  partner.  He  was  mayor  of
Troy  in  1850,  and  was  an  active  supporter  of  the
National  government  during  the  civil  war,  aiding
in  raising  three  regiments  of  infantry,  as  well  as
the  "  Black-horse  cavalry."  and  the  21st  New  York,
or  "Griswold  light  cavalry."  In  1861,  in  connec-
tion with  C.  S.  Bushnell  and  John  F.  Winslow,  he
contracted  to  build  Ericsson's  "  Monitor,"  and  it
was  mainly  due  to  him  that  the  vessel  was  com-
pleted in  the  hundred  days  allowed  by  the  govern-


^$&^AZ4SS&C


ment  for  her  construction.  The  "Monitor"  was
built  at  great  pecuniary  risk,  as  her  price,  $275,000,
was  not  to  be  paid  till  it  had  been  practically
shown  that  she  could  withstand  the  enemy's  fire  at
the  shortest  ranges.
Mr.  Griswold  was
elected  to  congress
in  1862  as  a  war
Democrat,  but  sub-
sequently joined
the  Republicans,
and  was  re-elected
by  them,  serving  al-
together from  1863
till  1869.  He  was
an  efficient  member
of  the  committee  on
naval  affaire,  and
effectively  defend-
ed the  policy  of
the  government  in
the  construction  of
monitors  when  it
was  attacked  in
the  house. He  also

aided  in  building  the  monitor  "  Dictator."  In  1868
he  was  the  Republican  candidate  for  governor  of
New  York,  but  was  defeated,  though  his  party
claimed  that  he  received  a  majortiy  of  the  vote's
actually  cast.  Mr.  Griswold  did  much  to  advance
the  prosperity  of  Troy,  and  contributed  liberally
to  its  charities.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Rensselaer
polytechnic  institute  in  1860-'72.

GRISWOLD,  Matthew,  governor  of  Connecti-
cut, b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,  25  March,  1714;  d.  there,
28  April,  1799.  He  was  a  representative  in  the
legislature  in  1751,  a  member  of  the  council  in
1759,  and  in  1775  was  one  of  the  committee  of
safety,  and  an  ardent  patriot.  He  was  also  a  judge,
and  afterward  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court,
lieutenant-governor  of  the  state,  and  governor  in
1784-'6.  In  1788  he  was  president  of  the  State  con-
vention that  ratified  the  constitution  of  the  Cnited
States.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1779. — His  son,  Roger,  governor  of  Connecticut,
b.  in  Lvme,  Conn.,  21  Mav,  1762;  d.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  25  Oct.,  1812,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1780,
studied  law,  and  began  to  practise  in  Norwich  in
1783,  becoming  eminent  in  his  profession.  He  re-
turned to  Lyme  in  1794,  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Federalist^  and  served  five  successive  terms,  from
1795  till  1805.  About  1798  Mr.  Griswold  had  a
personal  difficulty,  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  with
Matthew  Lyon,  of  Vermont,  for  which  an  un-
successful effort  was  made  to  expel  the  latter.  He
declined  the  office  of  secretary  of  war  offered  him
by  President  Adams  just  before  the  end  of  his  term
in  1801,  and  in  1807  was  made  a  judge  of  the  Con-
necticut supreme  court.  He  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Pinckney  and  King  ticket  in  1809,
lieutenant-governor  of  Connecticut  in  1809— "11,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  chosen  governor,  dying
in  office.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1811,  and  from  Yale  in  1812.  Gov.
Griswold  was  an  earnest  Federalist,  and  was  re-
garded as  one  of  the  foremost  men  in  the  nation
in  talents,  political  knowledge,  eloquence,  and  legal
ability.  \Vhile  he  was  governor,  he  refused  to  fur-
nish four  companies  of  troops  for  garrison  purposes
at  the  president's  requisition,  as  they  were  not
wanted  to  "repel  invasion."

GRISWOLD,  Unfits  Wiluiot,  editor,  b.  in
Benson,  Vt.,  15  Feb..  1815;  d.  in  New  York  city,
27  Aug.,  1857.  Much  of  his  early  hie  was  spent  in
travel,  partly  in  the  interior  of  the  United  States.


GRISWOLD


GROSE


rfZf<^  /t^^^u^&fa


and  partly  in  central  Europe.  As  a  youth  he  was
apprenticed  to  the  publisher  of  a  newspaper,  where
he  acquired  a  knowledge  of  type-setting  and  the
routine  of  a  publication-office,  and  sometimes
acted  as  assistant  editor.  Tiring  of  the  press-room,
he  studied  theology,  and  became  a  minister  of  the
Baptist  denomination.  He  preached  with  success.
and  had  obtained  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  when  he  sud-
denly forsook  the  pulpit  to  become  a  journalist  and
book-compiler. Prom  1841  till  1843  he  edited,  with

freat  credit,  "Graham's  Magazine,"  published  in
'hiladelphia.  Thereafter  he  became  associate  edi-
tor of  several  weekly  newspapers  in  Boston  and
New  York  city,  among  them  the  "  New  Yorker,"
"  Brother  Jonathan,"  and  "  New  World."  In  1852
he  edited  the  "International  Magazine"  in  New

York  city,  which
was  for  a  time  a
rival  to  Harper's,
but  was  afterward
absorbed  by  that
periodical.  Gris-
wold  was  an  indus-
trious worker,  and
his  publications
show  him  to  have
been  a  thoughtful
writer  and  a  man  of
extensive  reading.
But  his  estimates
of  contemporary
American  writers,
with  manyof  whom
he  came  into  liter-
ary and  personal
rivalry,  is  frequent-
ly partial  and  perverted.  His  works  include  "  Poets
and  Poetry  of  America"  (Philadelphia,  1842),
which  has  passed  through  twenty  editions;  "Bio-
graphical Annual "  (1842) ;  "  Christian  Ballads  and
other  Poems"  (1844);  discourse  on  the  "Present
Condition  of  Philosophy  "  (1844) ;  "  Poets  and  Poet-
ry of  England  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  "  (1845) ;
"  Prose  Writers  of  America"  (1846);  "  Washington
and  the  Generals  of  the  Revolution,"  in  connection
with  other  writers  (2  vols.,  1847) ;  "  Napoleon  and
the  Marshals  of  the  Empire,"  with  Horace  B.
Wallace  (2  vols.,  1847) ;  "  Female  Poets  of  Amer-
ica "  (1848) ;  "  Sacred  Poets  of  England  and  Amer-
ica" (1849);  "The  Republican  Court"  (New  York,
1854) ;  and  "  Scenes  in  the  Life  of  the  Saviour."
He  also  compiled  "Curiosities  of  American  Lit-
erature," which  was  attached  to  an  American
edition  of  Isaac  D'Israeli's  writings,  and  edited  the
earliest  edition  of  Milton's  prose  works  published
in  the  United  States.  He  was  also  one  of  the  edi-
tors of  the  "  Works  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe  "  (3  vols.,
New  York,  1850),  and  to  this  publication  he  fur-
nished a  biographical  sketch,  which  has  been  much
criticised.  At  the  close  of  Griswold's  career  he
was  engaged  in  a  revision  of  his  several  works  on
American  literature.

GRISWOLD,  Stanley,  senator,  b.  in  Torring-
ford,  Conn..  14  Nov.,  1763;  d.  in  Shawneetown,  111.,
21  Aug.,  1815.  After  working  on  his  father's  farm
and  attending  the  district-school,  he  entered  Yale,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1786.  He  was  then  prin-
cipal of  a  high-school  for  a  year,  studied  divinity,
and  on  20  Jan.,  1790,  was  installed  as  colleague
pastor  at  New  Milford,  Conn.,  where  his  eloquence
and  social  qualities  made  him  popular.  He  ear-
ly became  an  admirer  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  who
was  then  regarded  by  most  of  the  New  England
clergy  as  little  less  than  an  atheist,  and  in  17!)7  he
was  excluded  from  the  association  of  ministers  of


which  he  was  a  member  on  account  of  alleged  het-
erodoxy. His  congregation,  however,  supported
him,  and  he  continued  to  preach  in  New  Milford
till  1802,  when  he  resigned.  In '1801  he  delivered
a  sermon  at  a  Democratic  jubilee  in  Wallingford,
Conn.,  avowing  political  sentiments  so  unusual  for
a  New  England  clergyman  that  he  became  widely
known.  After  preaching  for  a  short  time  in  Green-
field, Mass.,  he  abandoned  the  pulpit,  and  in  1804
edited  with  spirit  and  ability  a  Democratic  news-
paper at  Walpole,  N.  H.  In  1805  he  was  appointed
by  President  Jefferson  secretary  of  Michigan  terri-
tory, but  shortly  afterward  resigned  on  account  of
some  difficulty  with  the  governor,  Gen.  William
Hull,  and  removed  to  Ohio.  In  1809-'10  he  served
in  the  IT.  S.  senate,  having  been  appointed  to  fill  a
vacancy,  and  was  afterward  U.  S.  judge  for  the
Northwest  territory,  holding  this  office  at  the  time
of  his  death.  He  published  the  sermon  alluded  to
above,  with  the  title  "  Overcome  Evil  with  Good  "
(Hartford,  1801 ;  2d  ed.,  New  Haven,  1845).

GROESBECK,  William  Slocomb,  lawyer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  24  July,  1815.  He  received  an
academic  education,  studied  law,  practised  in  Cin-
cinnati, and  was  in  1851  a  member  of  the  State  con-
stitutional convention.  In  1852  he  was  a  member
of  the  commission  to  codify  the  laws  of  Ohio.  He
was  in  congress  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  3  March,
1859,  serving  on  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs,
was  a  member  of  the  peace  congress  in  1861,  and
in  1862  a  member  of  the  Ohio  state  senate.  He
was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  National  union  con-
vention held  in  Philadelphia  in  1866,  and  was  one
of  the  counsel  for  President  Johnson  in  the  im-
peachment trial  of  1868.  Mr.  Groesbeck  was  nomi-
nated for  the  presidency  in  1872  by  a  convention
of  Liberal  Republicans  who  were  dissatisfied  with
Horace  Greeley,  but  the  ticket  was  entirely  for-
gotten during  the  excitement  ,of  the  canvass,  al-
though Mr.  Groesbeck  received  a  single  electoral
vote  for  the  vice-presidency.  He  was  appointed  in
1878  U.  S.  delegate  to  the  International  monetary
congress  held  in  Paris.

GROOME,  James  Black,  statesman,  b.  in  Elk-
ton,  Cecil  co.,  Bid.,  4  April,  1838.  He  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1861,  joined  the
Democratic  party,  and  was  a  member  of  the  con-
vention that  framed  the  present  constitution  of
Maryland,  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  dele-
gates in  1871  and  1873,  and,  on  the  election  of
Gov.  Whyte  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1874,  became
governor  for  the  remainder  of  the  term.  He  then
returned  to  Elkton,  and  engaged  in  the  practice  of
law  until  1879,  when  he  became  U.  S.  senator,  re-
taining his  seat  until  1885.

GROSE,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Dayton,  Ohio,
16  Dec,  1812.  Both  of  his  grandfathers  served  in
the  Revolution,  and  his  father  was  a  soldier  in  the
war  of  1812.  The  son  received  a  common-school
education.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Pierce  ticket,  and  an  unsuccessful  Democratic  can-
didate for  congress  in  1852,  but  joined  the  Repub-
lican party  on  its  formation  and  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1856.  He  was  chosen  a  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  in  1860,  but  resigned  m
August,  1861,  and  recruited  the  36th  Indiana  in-
fantry, of  which  he  became  colonel.  At  Shiloh  his
regiment  was  the  only  part  of  Buell's  army  that
joined  in  the  first  day's  fight,  and  after  the  engage-
ment he  commanded  a  brigade.  He  was  with  the
Army  of  the  Cumberland  in  all  its  important  battles,
served  through  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and,  at  the
request  of  Gens.  Sherman  and  Thomas,  was  pro-
moted brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  receiving
notice  of  his  appointment  while  under  fire  in  front


GROSS


GROSS


of  Atlanta.  He  was  at  Franklin  and  Nashville,
and  after  the  close  of  hostilities  was  president  of  a
court-martial  in  Nashville  till  January,  1866.  He  was
collector  of  internal  revenue  in  1866-'74,  an  unsuc-
cessful Republican  candidate  for  congress  in  1878,
and  one  of  a  commission  to  build  three  state  hos-
pitals for  the  insane,  in  1884-'6.  In  1887  he  was
again  a  member  of  the  Indiana  legislature.

GROSS,  John  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ger-
many in  1737 ;  d.  in  Canajoharie,  N.  Y.,  25  May,
1812.  During  the  Revolution  he  was  exposed  to
many  perils  as  pastor  of  a  church  on  the  frontier.
At  its  close  he  removed  to  New  York  city.  He
was  professor  of  German  in  Columbia  in  1784-'95,
and  professor  of  moral  philosophy  in  1787-'95.
He  was  a  regent  of  the  University  of  New  York
in  1784,  and  a  trustee  of  Columbia  in  1787.  He
became  wealthy  by  buying  soldiers'  land-warrants.
The  last  ten  years  of  his  life  were  spent  on  a  farm.
The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Columbia  in  1789.  He  published  "  Natural  Prin-
ciples of  Rectitude"  (New  York,  1795).

GROSS,  Samuel  David,  surgeon,  b.  near  Eas-
ton,  Pa.,  8  July,  1805 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  6  May,
1884.  He  studied  medicine,  was  graduated  at  Jef-
ferson medical  college  in  1828,  and  began  practice
in  Philadelphia,  employing  his  leisure  in  translat-
ing medical  works  from  the  French.  He  settled
in  Easton  in  1829,  in  1833  was  appointed  demon-
strator of  anatomy  in  the  Medical  college  of  Ohio,
at  Cincinnati,  and  in  1835  professor  of  pathological
anatomy  in  the  same  institution.  Here  he  deliv-
ered the  first  systematic  course  of  lectures  on  mor-
bid anatomy  ever  given  in  the  United  States.
Five  years  later  he  became  professor  of  surgery  in
the  University  of  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  in  1850  suc-
ceeded Dr.  Mott  in  the  University  of  New  York.
By  request  of  his  associates,  he  returned  to  Ken-
tucky and  resumed  work  there,  after  only  a  single
session  in  New  York. He  was  one  of  the"  founders

and  early  presidents
of  the  Kentucky
state  medical  socie-
ty. While  in  Louis-
ville he  published
an  elaborate  "  Re-
'port  on  Kentuckv
Surgery"  (1851),  in-
cluding a  biography
of  Dr.  Ephraim  Mc-
Dowell, of  Danville,
in  that  state,  in  sup-
port of  the  claims
that  he  was  the  orig-
inator of  ovarioto-
my in  1809.  In  1856
he  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  surgery  in
Jefferson  medical
college,  Philadel-
phia, which  post  he  Occupied  until  within  two  years
of  his  death,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  ad-
vancing years  and  desire  for  repose.  He  founded
with  Dr.  T.  G.  Richardson  in  1856  the  "  Louisville
Medical  Review,"  a  bimonthly,  of  which  only  six
numbers  were  issued.  They  afterward  established
in  Philadelphia  the  "North  American  Medico-
Chirurgical  Review,"  which  continued  to  appear
till  the  civil  war.  Shortly  after  settling  in  Phila-
delphia he  founded,  with  Dr.  Da  Costa,  the  Philadel-
phia pathological  society,  of  which  he  was  the  first
president.  In  1862  Dr.  Gross  was  made  a  member
of  the  Royal  medical  society  of  Vienna.  In  1867
he  was  elected  president  of  the  American  medical
association,  and  in  1868  a  member  of  the  Royal


c^f. *d>  fa-pti.


medieo-chirurgical  society  of  London,  and  of  the
British  medical  association.  In  1872,  during  his
second  visit  to  Europe,  the  University  of  Oxford,  at
its  one  thousandth  commemoration,  conferred  on
him  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  C.  L. ;  and  that  of
LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  the  University  of  Cam-
bridge. He  was  a  member  of  numerous  medical  and
surgical  associations  at  home  and  abroad,  and  was
unanimously  elected  president  of  the  International
medical  congress  which  met  in  Philadelphia  in
September,  1876.  Dr.  Gross  made  many  original
contributions  to  surgery.  In  1833  he  made  experi-
ments on  rabbits,  with  a  view  to  throwing  light  on
manual  strangulation,  which  are  described  in
Beck's  "  Medical  Jurisprudence."  He  was  the  first
to  suggest  the  suturing  of  divided  nerves  and  ten-
dons, wiring  the  ends  of  bones  in  certain  disloca-
tions, laparotomy  in  rupture  of  the  bladder,  and
many  other  operations,  and  was  the  inventor  of
numerous  instruments,  including  a  tourniquet,  an
instrument  for  extracting  foreign  bodies  from  the
ear  or  nose,  and  an  apparatus  for  the  transfusion
of  blood.  His  original  investigations  were  varied,
though  often  carried  on  with  insufficient  means
and  amid  adverse  surroundings.  He  began  in
early  life  to  contribute  to  medical  literature,  edited
the  "  American  Medical  Biography  "  (1861) ;  and
published  "  Diseases  and  Injuries  of  the  Bones  and
Joints  "  (Philadelphia,  1830) ;  "  Elements  of  Patho-
logical Anatomy"  (2  vols.,  1839;  3d  ed.,  1857);
"  Wounds  of  the  Intestines  "  (1843);  "  Diseases,  In-
juries, and  Malformations  of  the  Urinary  Organs  "
(1851 ;  enlarged  eds.,  1855  and  1876) ;  "  Results  of
Surgical  Operations  in  Malignant  Diseases"  (1853);
"  Foreign  Bodies  in  the  Air  -  Passages  "  (1854) ;
"  Report  on  the  Causes  which  Retard  the  Progress
of  American  Medical  Literature  "  (1856) ;  "  System
of  Surgerv  "  (2  vols.,  1859 ;  6th  ed.,  with  alterations,
1882) ;  "  Manual  of  Military  Surgery  "  (1861 ;  Japa-
nese translation,  Tokio,  1874);  "John  Hunter  and
his  Pupils"  (1861);  "  History  of  American  Medical
Literature,"  two  lectures  (1875) ;  and  with  others
"Century  of  American  Medicine"  (1876).  —  His
son,  Samuel  Weissell,  surgeon,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  4  Feb.,  1837;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  16
April,  1889.  He  studied  medicine  in  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Louisville,  and  at
Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadelphia,  where  he
graduated  in  1857.  He  settled  in  Philadelphia,
and  soon  delivered  lectures  on  surgical  anatomy
and  operative  surgery,  and  subsequently  on  dis-
eases of  the  genito-urinary  organs,  in  the  Jefferson
medical  college,  and  on  surgical  pathology  in  the
College  of  physicians,  Philadelphia.  He  was  bri-
gade-surgeon and  major  of  volunteers  during  the
entire  civil  war,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-col-
onel at  its  termination.  He  was  surgeon  to  the
Howard  hospital,  the  Philadelphia  hospital,  and
the  hospital  of  the  Jefferson  medical  college,  and
in  1882  was  appointed  professor  of  the  principles
of  surgery  and  clinical  surgery  in  the  latter  insti-
tution. He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  was
a  member  of  various  medical  associations,  and  is  the
author  of  a  "  Practical  Treatise  on  Tumors  of  the
Mammary  Gland  "  (New  York,  1880),  and  a  "  Prac-
tical Treatise  on  Impotence,  Sterility,  and  Allied
Disorders  of  the  Male  Sexual  Organs "  (Philadel-
phia, 1881 ;  3d  ed.,  1887).  He  rewrote  and  edit-
ed "Gross  on  the  Urinary  Organs"  (1876),  and
rendered  his  father  material  assistance  in  the  com-
position of  several  editions  of  his  "  System  of  Sur-
gery." He  contributed  many  papers  on  surgical
subjects  to  periodical  medical  literature,  includ-
ing several  on  "  Tumors  of  the  Breast." — Another
son,  Albert Haller, lawyer,  b.  in Louisville,


0


GROSS


GROW


Ky.,  18  March,  1844,  studied  at  the  University  of
Virginia,  and  in  1864  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  admitted  to  the
Philadelphia  bar  in  1867,  and  in  1868  appointed
U.  S.  attorney  for  New  Mexico,  which  office  he  re-
signed on  account  of  ill  health.  He  was  elected  in
1882  a  member  of  the  select  council  of  Philadelphia.
In  1885  he  declined  the  U.  S.  consulship  at  Athens,
Greece.  He  has  delivered  numerous  public  ad-
dresses, in  one  of  which,  in  1874,  he  was  among
the  first  in  the  country  to  advocate  cremation  as
the  proper  method  of  disposing  of  the  dead,  and
has  published  numerous  poems,  and  various  instru-
mental and  vocal  compositions,  some  of  the  latter
in  the  French  and  German  languages.  He  is,
with  his  brother,  Dr.  Samuel  W.  Gross,  editing
the  "  Autobiography  "  of  his  father,  and  preparing
a  work  on  "  Cremation."

GROSS,  William  Hicklcy,  archbishop,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  12  June,  1837.  After  studying  in
St.  Charles  college,  he  entered  the  novitiate  of  the
Redemptorist  order  in  1857,  and  was  ordained
priest  in  1863.  After  attending  wounded  soldiers
m  the  hospitals  about  Annapolis,  and  preaching  to
the  negroes,  he  was  assigned  to  missionary  duty
in  various  places,  but  was  attached  to  St.  Alphon-
sus's  church  in  New  York  city  for  five  years,  and
then  became  superior  at  the  church  of  his  order
in  Boston.  He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Savan-
nah on  27  April,  1873,  and  in  1884  he  became
archbishop  of  Oregon.  Bishop  Gross  has  done
much  for  the  education  of  the  freedmen.

GROVER,  Cuvier,  soldier,  b.  in  Bethel,  Me.,
24  July,  1829 ;  d.  in  Atlantic  City,  N.  J.,  6  June,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1850,  entered  the  1st  artillery,  and  served
on  frontier  duty  till  1853,  and  on  the  Northern
Pacific  railroad  exploration  from  14  April,  1853,  till
17  July,  1854.  He  was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,
3  March,  1855,  and  captain  of  the  10th  infantry,  17
Sept.,  1858,  and  served  at  various  western  stations.
He  became  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  14  April,
1862,  and  was  transferred  to  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, where  he  took  part  in  many  battles.  He  was
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  on  5  May  for  services
at  the  battle  of  Williamsburg,  Va.,  and  on  31  May,
colonel,  for  gallantry  at  Pair  Oaks.  At  the  second
battle  of  Bull  Run  his  brigade  fought  under  Gen.
Hooker,  and  distinguished  itself  by  a  bayonet
charge.  Being  transferred  to  the  Department  of
the  Gulf,  he  took  command  of  a  division  of  the  19th
corps  from  30  Dec,  1862,  till  July,  1864,  was  in
command  of  the  right  wing  of  the  army  besieging
Port  Hudson,  La.,  in  May,  1863,  was  promoted
major,  31  Aug.,  1863,  and  commanded  a  division  in
the  Shenandoah  campaign  from  August  to  Decem-
ber, 1864.  He  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Cedar
Creek  on  19  Oct.,  1864,  and  brevetted  major-general
of  volunteers  the  same  day  for  gallantry  at  Win-
chester and  Fisher's  Hill.  On  13  March  following
he  was  also  brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,
and  major-general,  U.  S.  army.  He  was  mustered
out  of  the  volunteer  service,  24  Aug.,  1865,  and
again  returned  to  frontier  duty  until  7  Nov.,  1866,
when  he  was  transferred  to  Jefferson  barracks,  Mo.,
until  6  Feb.,  1867.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  38th  infantry,  28  July,  1866,  assigned
to  the  3d  cavalry  in  1870,  and  made  colonel  of  the
1st  cavalry,  2  Dec,  1875,  which  rank  he  held  dur-
ing the  remainder  of  his  life.

GROVER,  Lafayette,  governor  of  Oregon,  b.
in  Bethel,  Oxford  co.,  Me.,  in  1823.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Bowdoin  college,  and  afterward  studied
law  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1850. He  soon  after  settled  in  Salem,  Ore-


gon. He  was  elected  prosecuting  attorney  of  the
territory  in  1851,  and  in  1853  auditor  of  public  ac-
counts. He  also  served  three  terms  in  the  terri-
torial legislature,  saw  some  service  in  the  Indian
wars  of  Oregon,  and  in  1854  was  appointed  a  com-
missioner to  adjust  the  claims  of  citizens  against
the  United  States.  Two  years  later  he  became  one
of  the  commissioners  to  investigate  claims  arising
out  of  the  Indian  war  of  1855-'6.  In  1857  he  was
an  active  member  of  the  convention  that  framed
the  constitution  of  the  state,  and  was  elected,  as  a
Democrat,  its  first  representative  in  congress,  tak-
ing his  seat  in  February,  1859.  He  subsequently
resumed  the  practice  of  law,  but  from  1867  till
1870  was  engaged  in  the  milling  business.  He
was  chairman  of  the  state  central  l3emocratic  com-
mittee, was  elected  governor  of  the  state  in  1870,
and  re-elected  in  1874  for  the  term  ending  Sep-
tember, 1878.  Gov.  Grover  resigned  his  office,  1
Feb.,  1877,  having  been  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
to  succeed  James  K.  Kelly,  and  took  his  seat,  8
March,  1877.  He  was  succeeded  in  1883  by  Joseph
N.  Dolph,  In  1876  Gov.  Grover  refused  to  issue  a
certificate  of  election  as  presidential  elector  to  Dr.
J.  W.  Watts,  Republican,  and  gave  it  instead  to  E.
A.  Cronin,  Democrat,  who  had  received  the  next
highest  number  of  votes,  on  the  ground  that  the
former  had  held  the  office  of  postmaster  when  he
was  chosen.  On  19  Dec.  the  governor  published
an  elaborate  argument  in  defence  of  his  action,  but
it  was  annulled  by  the  electoral  commission,  who
decided  that  Watts's  ineligibility  merely  created  a
vacancy  in  the  electoral  college,  which  the  other
members  from  Oregon  were  empowered  to  fill.

GROW,  Galusha  Aaron,  statesman,  b.  in  Ash-
ford  (now  Eastford),  Windham  co.,  Conn.,  31  Aug.,
1824.  When  ten  years  old  he  removed  to  Susque-
hanna county,  Pa.,  where  he  attended  a  district-
school  and  pursued  a  preparatory  course  in  Frank-
lin academy,  Harford.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1844,  studied  law  in  Montrose,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Susquehanna  county,
19  April,  1847.  He
soon  afterward  set-
tled in  Towanda,  and
became  a  partner  of
David  Wilmot.  He
practised  law  until
the  spring  of  1850,
when  feeble  health
compelled  him  to  seek
out  -  door  pursuits,
and  he  engaged  in
farming,  surveying,
and  gathering  hem-
lock bark  for  tanner-
ies. In  the  fall  of
1850  he  received  and
declined  a  unanimous
nomination  to  the
legishiture,  tendered
by  the  Democratic
party.  A  few  weeks
later,  David  Wilmot,  Free-soil,  and  James  Lowrey,
Pro-slavery,  candidates  of  the  Democratic  party  for
congress,  withdrew  from  the  contest  on  an  agree-
ment that  the  .two  branches  of  the  party  should
unite  upon  Mr.  Grow  as  a  candidate.  The  conven-
tions reassembled,  placed  Mr.  Grow  in  nomination,
and,  after  an  exciting  campaign  of  one  week,  he  was
elected  over  John  C.  Adams,  Whig.  He  took  his  seat
in  congress  in  December,  1851,  being  its  youngest
member,  and  continued  to  represent  the  "  Wilmot
district "  for  twelve  successsive  years,  although  he
had  severed  his  connection  with  the  Democratic


GROWDON


GRUNDY


party  on  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise.
His  period  of  service  was  distinguished  by  the  legis-
lation on  the  Missouri  compromise,  the  Kansas
troubles,  and  the  Homestead  and  Pacific  railroad
bills,  as  well  as  the  election  of  Speaker  Banks  and  the
presidential  campaigns  of  Fremontand  Lincoln.  He
rendered  important  services  on  the  committees  on
Indian  affairs,  agriculture,  and  territories,  being  a
member  of  the  latter  six  years  and  its  chairman
four.  His  first  speech  was  delivered  upon  the
homestead  bill,  a  measure  which  he  continued  to
urge  at  every  congress  for  ten  years,  when  he  had
at  last  the  satisfaction  of  signing  the  law  as  speaker.
At  the  convening  of  the  first  or  extra  session  of  the
37th  congress,  4  July,  1861,  he  was  elected  speaker,
and  held  the  position  until  4  March,  1863,  when,  on
retiring,  he  received  a  unanimous  vote  of  thanks,
the  first  vote  of  the  kind  given  to  any  speaker  in
many  years.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National
Republican  conventions  of  1864  and  1868,  and
chairman  of  the  Pennsylvania  state  committee
during  the  latter  campaign.  In  1857  he  was  a
victim  of  the  National  hotel  poisoning.  He  spent
the  summer  of  1870  in  California,  Oregon,  and
British  Columbia,  and  in  1871  he  settled  in  Hous-
ton, Tex.,  as  president  of  the  International  and
Great  Northern  railroad  of  Texas,  remaining  there
until  1875,  when  he  returned  to  Pennsylvania  and
took  an  active  part  in  the  state  election  of  that
year  and  the  presidential  campaign  of  1876.  In  the
autumn  of  1876  he  declined  the  mission  to  Russia.
GROWDON,  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  England ;  d.
in  Pennsylvania,  9  Dec,  1730.  He  was  the  son  of
Lawrence  Growdon,  of  Cornwall,  England,  who
was  largely  interested  in  the  tin-mines.  He  came
to  this  country  shortly  after  Penn's  arrival,  and
settled  in  Bucks  county,  Pa.,  where  he  took  up
10,000  acres.  In  1684  he  was  chosen  to  the  assem-
bly of  Pennsylvania,  was  thereafter  almost  continu-
ously chosen  to  this  body  until  1722,  and  for  eleven
years  was  speaker.  From  1687  till  1703  he  was  a
inember  of  the  provincial  council,  under  the  admin-
istration of  Gov.  Penn  and  Lieutenant-Governors
Evans  and  Gookin.  In  1690  he  was  commissioned
one  of  the  judges  of  the  supreme  court,  and  held
this  office  for  several  years. In  1707  he  was  ap-

Eointed  chief  justice  of  the  court,  which  place  he
eld  until  1716.  He  filled  the  many  offices  of  trust
committed  to  him  with  marked  ability,  and  but
few  men  in  the  province  in  his  day  attained  to  a
higher  degree  of  usefulness. — His  son,  Joseph,
lawyer,  b.  in  England  ;  d.  in  Pennsylvania  in  1738,
was  appointed  attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania,  7
March,  1726,  and  served  in  that  capacity  till  his
death.  In  1735  he  was  appointed  advocate  for  the
crown  in  the  vice-admiralty. — Another  son.  Law-
rence, jurist,  b.  in  Pennsylvania,  14  March  1694  ;
d.  there,  1  April,  1770,  was  a  merchant  at  Bristol,
England,  in  1730.  In  1734  he  was  chosen  to  the
assembly,  in  which  body  he  remained  until  1738,  in
1747  became  a  member  of  the  provincial  council,  and
was  for  twelve  years  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court
of  the  province.  In  conjunction  with  Rev.  Richard
Peters,  secretary  of  the  land-office,  he  was  appointed
commissioner  for  running  a  "temporary  boundary"
with  Maryland,  Col.  Gale  and  Mr.  Chamberlayne
being  the  Maryland  commissioners.  He  was  a  man
of  large  wealth. — His  daughter,  Grace,  was  the
wife  of  Joseph  Galloway,  the  distinguished  lawyer
and  Tory.— Grace,  daughter  of  Joseph  Growdon,
the  elder,  became  the  wife  of  David  Lloyd,  who  was
speaker  of  the  assembly,  councillor,  attorney-gen-
eral, and chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania.

GRUBE,  Bernhard  Adam, "missionary,  b.  in
Germany  in  1715;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  20"  March,


1808.  He  studied  at  Jena,  united  with  the  Mora-
vian church,  and  in  1746  was  sent  to  Pennsylvania,
where  he  was  employed  in  the  Indian  mission  and
ministry  of  his  church.  His  contributions  to  the
department  of  American  philology  were  a  "  Dela-
ware Indian  Hymn- Book"  and  a  "Harmony  of
the  Gospels  "  (Delaware)  (Friedensthal,  Pa.,  1767).

GRUND,  Francis  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  Bo-
hemia in  1805 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  Sept.,
1863.  He  was  educated  at  the  polytechnic  school
in  Vienna,  and  in  1825  became  professor  of  mathe-
matics in  the  militarv  school  at  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.
He  settled  in  Philadelphia  in  1826,  and  for  many
years  was  connected  with  the  press.  In  1854  he
was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Antwerp,  and  in
1860  was  transferred  to  Havre  and  made  diplo-
matic agent  to  the  south  German  states.  He  was
chosen  editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Age,"  a  Demo-
cratic newspaper,  in  April,  1863,  but  soon  became
a  Republican  and  resigned  the  post.  He  pub-
lished, besides  numerous  essays  and  addresses,
"  Exercises  in  Arithmetic  "  (Boston,  1833) ;  "  Ameri-
cans in  their  Moral,  Religious,  and  Social  Rela-
tions" (1837);  "Aristocracy  in  America"  (1839);
and  a  German  campaign  life  of  Gen.  William  Henry
Harrison  (Philadelphia.  1840) ;  and  translated  Her-
schel's  "  Astronomical  Problems."

GRUNDY,  Felix,  statesman,  b.  in  Berkeley
county,  Va.,  11  Sept.,  1777;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
19  Dec,  1840.  He  was  a  seventh  son.  His  father,
an  Englishman,  came  to  this  country  early  in  life.
In  1779  he  removed  to  Red  Stone  Old  Fort,  near
what  is  now  Brownsville,  Pa.,  and  in  1780  to  Ken-
tucky. In  both  places  the  family  were  much  ex-
posed to  Indian
depredations,  and
three  of  Grundy's
brothers  were  killed
by  the  Indians  dur-
ing his  infancy.  His
first  instruction  was
received  from  his
mother,  who  was  an
ambitious  woman
of  strong  character,
and  he  then  went  to
Dr.  James  Priestly's
Bardstown  acade-
my. His  mother
wished  him  to  enter
the  medical  profes-
sion, but  his  natu-
ral tastes  led  him
to  the  law,  which
he  studied  under
George  Nicholas.  He  was  elected  to  the  Kentucky
constitutional  convention  in  1799,  and  from  that
year  till  1806  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.
He  introduced  a  bill  to  establish  the  circuit  court
system,  which  was  passed  over  the  governor's  veto,
and  in  1802  had  a  debate  with  Henry  Clay,  then
as  little  known  as  himself,  on  banks  and  bank-
ing, in  which  was  foreshadowed  the  future  course
of  both  in  national  politics.  In  1806  Grundy  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  errors
and  appeals,  and  in  March,  1807,  he  became  chief
justice.  The  salary  being  too  small  to  enable  him
to  live  comfortablv,  he  resigned,  and  in  the  win-
ter of  1807-8  removed  to  Nashville,  Tenn.,  to
practise  law.  Here  he  achieved  a  great  reputa-
tion as  a  criminal  lawyer.  He  defended  105  crim-
inals on  capital  indictments,  of  whom  but  one
was  executed.  In  1811  he  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  war  Democrat,  and  was  re-elected  in  1813,
but  resigned  next  year  on  account  of  the  illness  of


^^ ^//"Sj^


8


GRYMES


GUAL


his  wife.  During  the  financial  depression  that
followed  the  war  of  1812,  he  was  in  1819  elected  to
the  Tennessee  legislature,  where  he  opposed  all
relief  laws,  but  successfully  advocated  the  estab-
lishment of  the  state  bank.  In  1820  he  was  ap-
Sointed  a  commissioner  to  settle  the  boundary-line
ispute  with  Kentucky.  In  1829  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  for  the  unexpired  term  of  John
H.  Eaton,  as  an  avowed  Jacksonian.  His  speech
in  1830  on  Foote's  resolution  was  regarded  by  many
in  Tennessee  as  leaning  toward  nullification,  but  in
the  Jackson-Calhoun  imbroglio  Grundy  criticised
both  participants.  In  1832  and  1833,  when  he  was
a  candidate  for  re-election,  in  spite  of  a  letter  from
Jackson  approving  his  course,  he  was  bitterly  op-
posed by  administration  organs,  but  was  finally
successful  after  a  long  contest.  In  the  senate  he
was  chairman  Of  the  committee  on  post-offices  and
of  the  judiciary  committee.  He  supported  and
defended  nearly  all  of  Jackson's  measures.  In
1838  he  entered  Van  Buren's  cabinet  a,s  attorney-

feneral,  but  only  served  from  September,  1838,  to
December,  1839,  when  he  resigned,  having  been
re-elected  to  the  senate  on  19  Nov.  in  place  of
Ephraim  H.  Foster.  On  14  Dec.  he  resigned  his
seat  on  the  ground  of  ineligibility,  as  he  had  been
still  attorney -general  when  chosen,  but  he  was  at
once  re-elected.  In  1838,  being  instructed  to  vote
against  the  sub-treasury  system,  he  did  so,  though
favoring  it.  He  opposed  all  protection  except  that
which  is  incidental  to  a  tariff  levied  for  revenue,
favored  the  compromise  bill  of  1833,  and  suggested
and  was  a  member  of  the  committee  that  revised
it.  He  lies  buried  in  the  Nashville  city  cemetery,
where  a  monument  has  been  erected  to  his  memory.
His  most  finished  oration  was  that  delivered  on
the  death  of  Jefferson  and  Adams.  He  was  a  man
of  commanding  presence,  gentle,  and  amiable.  The
legal  literature  of  the  southwest  is  filled  with
anecdotes  about  him.  His  last  political  act  was  to
speak  in  Tennessee  for  Van  Buren  against  Har-
rison. During  this  contest  Henry  Clay,  who  was
passing  through  Nashville,  visited  Mrs.  Grundy,
and,  on  being  told  where  her  husband  was,  said:
"  Ah,  I  see !  Still  pleading  the  cause  of  criminals."
GRYMES,  John  Randolph,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia about  1746;  died  there  in  1820.  In  1776  he
{'oined  the  royal  army  under  Lord  Dunmore  at  the
tead  of  a  troop  of  horse  that  he  had  himself  raised.
In  a  letter  to  Lord  George  Germain,  Lord  Dunmore
said  that  Mr.  Grymes  was,  "  from  his  fortune,  posi-
tion, and  strict  honor,  a  valuable  acquisition  to  the
royal  cause."  The  same  year  he  was  expelled  from
his  estate,  and  all  his  negroes,  cattle,  and  personal
property  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  patriots.  He
joined  "  the  rangers,"  a  battalion  of  horse,  in  1777,
and  at  the  close  of  1778  resigned  and  went  to
England,  where  he  was  agent  for  prosecuting  the
claims  of  the  loyalists  in  Virginia.  When  the  in-
vasion of  Napoleon  was  apprehended  the  loyalist
Americans  in  London  offered,  with  the  king's  ap-

Sroval,  to  form  themselves  into  a  company,  and
Er.  Grymes  was  appointed  ensign.  While  in  Lon-
don he  married  his  cousin,  the  daughter  of  John
Randolph,  last  royal  attorney-general  of  Virginia,
and  niece  of  Peyton  Randolph,  president  of  the
Continental  congress.  He  afterward  returned  to  the
United  States,  settled  in  Orange  county,  Va.,  and
became  a  wealthy  slave-holder  and  planter. — His
son,  John  Randolph,  Jr.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Orange
county,  Va.,  in  1786 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  4  Dec,
1854,  removed  to  Louisiana  in  1808.  At  the  battle
of  New  Orleans  he  volunteered  as  aide  to  Gen.
Jackson,  and  was  complimented  in  the  despatches
of  the  commander  to  the  war  department. Mr.


Grymes  was  engaged  during  his  practice  in  almost
every  case  of  importance  in  the  courts  of  New
Orleans  and  the  surrounding  counties.  He  was
one  of  Gen.  Jackson's  counsel  in  the  U.  S.  bank
case,  and  opposed  Daniel  Webster  in  the  city  of
New  Orleans  against  Mrs.  Myra  Clark  Gaines.  He
held  at  different  periods  the  offices  of  U.  S.  district
attorney  and  attorney-general  of  the  state,  served
in  the  legislature  several  terms,  and  was  a  member
of  the  State  constitutional  convention.  During
his  professional  career  he  fought  two  duels,  in  one
of  which  he  was  severely  wounded.

GrUACANA(xARI  (gwa-cah-nah-gar'-e),  Haytian
cacique.  He  was  one  of  the  five  native  kings  who
ruled  over  Hayti  at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of
the  island.  He  sent  a  message  to  Columbus  in  De-
cember, 1492,  begging  the  Tatter  to  come  to  his
residence.  He  received  the  Spaniards  with  great
courtesy,  and  when  he  heard  of  the  shipwreck  of
one. of  the  vessels  of  Columbus  he  invited  the  dis-
coverer to  stay  at  his  residence.  In  1493  the
neighboring  caciques  attacked  the  fortress  La  Na-
vidad,  which  had  been  built  by  Columbus,  and
massacred  the  Spanish  garrison.  Guacanagari  and
his  subjects  fought  in  the  defence  of  the  Spaniards,
but  were  routed,  their  leader  wounded,  and  his
village  burned  to  the  ground.  When  Columbus
returned  on  his  second  voyage,  Guacanagari  sent
his  brother  to  greet  the  admiral.  He  refused  to
take  part  in  the  plan  formed  by  Caonabo  in  1494
to  exterminate  the  foreign  invaders,  and  incurred
thereby  the  hostility  of  his  fellow-caciques.  He
informed  Columbus  of  this  secret  league,  and  as-
sisted him  in  his  expedition  against  the  Indians
that  were  assembled  at  the  Vega,  in  March,  1495,
under  Manicaotex.  This  conduct  excited  the  ha-
tred of  all  the  caciques  of  the  island,  and  he  fled
to  the  mountains,  where  he  died  in  obscurity.

GrUAL,  Pedro  (goo-ahl'),  South  American  pa-
triot, b.  in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  in  1784;  d.  in
Guayaquil,  Ecuador,  6  May,  1862.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Caracas  in  1809,  and
soon  afterward  emigrated  to  Trinidad,  to  escape
imprisonment  for  having  expressed  revolutionary
opinions.  He  returned  to  Caracas  on  hearing  of
the  revolution  of  1810,  was  elected  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1811,  and  also  acted  as  secretary
to  Gen.  Miranda.  After  the  surrender  of  the  Re-
publicans in  1812,  Gual  escaped  to  New  York,  but
afterward  returned  to  Cartagena.  He  was  obliged
to  flee  again  to  St.  Thomas,  but  subsequently  be-
came governor  of  Cartagena,  and  then  ambassador
to  the  United  States  from  Colombia.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  began
to  practise  law,  when  Bolivar  summoned  him  to
join  the  expedition  of  Montilla  and  Brion  in  1816,
which  resulted  in  regaining  the  provinces  of  Car-
tagena, Santa  Marta,  and  Rio  Hacha.  These
provinces  were  united  in  one  state,  of  which  Gual
became  governor.  While  member  of  the  congress
of  Cucuta  he  was  made  minister  of  finance  and
foreign  affairs,  and  afterward  held  the  same  office
in  Bogota  till  1826.  He  was  a  member  of  the
American  assembly  which  met  in  Mexico  in  1826.
From  1828  till  1837  he  lived  in  retirement,  when
he  was  sent  to  Europe  by  the  government  of
Ecuador,  and  caused  Spain  to  acknowledge  the
independence  of  that  country.  In  1848  he  removed
to  Caracas,  where  he  lived  in  retirement  during
the  administration  of  Monagas.  On  15  March,
1858,  there  was  a  revolt  against  Monagas,  and  the
National  convention  appointed  Gual  president  of
the  provisional  government.  He  restored  order,
and  was  appointed  president  of  the  council  of  state
by  Gen.  Castro,  but  resigned,  and  was  elected  dep-


GUANOALCA


GUBERT


9


uty  to  the  National  convention  of  Valencia.  In
1859  he  was  elected  vice-president  of  the  republic,
and  in  the  next  year  Gual  occupied  the  executive
chair,  acting  with  energy  raising  troops  against
the  insurgents  of  the  east.  He  resigned  his  office
in  1861,  and  retired  to  private  life  in  Guayaquil,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.

GUANOALCA  (goo-an-o-ahl'-ka),  Araucanian
cacique,  b.  in  the  valley  of  Puren  in  1530 ;  d.  in
Mariguenu  in  1591.  In  his  early  youth  he  offered
his  services  to  the  Araucanian  toqui,  or  general-in-
chief,  Caupolican,  and  participated  against  the
Spaniards  in  all  the  battles  of  the  war  for  inde-
pendence, which  lasted  from  1541  till  1600.  At
the  head  of  his  tribe,  he  was  at  the  capture  of  Fort
Tucapel  in  November,  1553,  and  the  subsequent
defeat  and  death  of  Valdivia  in  the  same  place  in
1554.  He  continued  to  lead  his  tribe  in  the  na-
tional strife  for  liberty,  and  used  to  penetrate  into
the  midst  of  the  Spanish  hosts,  to  avoid  the  effect
of  the  fire-arms,  and  engage  a  hand-to-hand  fight,
so  that  his  whole  body  was  soon  covered  by  wounds
and  scars.  In  1587,  at  the  head  of  1,000  Indians,
he  captured  the  fort  of  Puren,  which  was,  how-
ever, recovered  two  days  afterward  by  the  Span-
iards, on  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements.  In  1588,
at  the  death  of  the  toqui  Cadiguala,  Guanoalca  was
elected  by  the  united  tribes  as  commander-in-chief,
and  at  their  head  invested  again  the  fortress  of
Puren,  which  after  a  time  was  abandoned  by  its
defenders  for  want  of  provisions,  and  destroyed
by  the  Indians.  He  also  gained  in  that  year  two
important  victories  at  Trinidad  and  Espiritu  Santo,
and  made  an  unsuccessful  attack  on  the  fortress  of
Mariguefiu.  In  the  two  following  years  he  con-
tinued the  warfare  with  varying  fortunes,  captur-
ing some  forts  and  destroying  several  settlements,
and  when,  in  1591,  he  invested  Mariguenu  again
with  a  strong  force,  he  was,  notwithstanding  his
age  and  numerous  wounds,  the  first  in  the  assault,
but  was  killed  by  the  stroke  of  a  battle-axe.

GUARDIA,  Tonias,  president  of  Costa  Rica.  b.
in  Bagaces,  province  of  Guanacaste,  17  Dec,  1832 ;
d.  in  San  Jose,  Costa  Rica,  6  July,  1882.  He  en-
tered the  army  in  1850,  fought  against  William
Walker's  filibusters  in  1855,  and  was  promoted
captain.  He  afterward  became  colonel,  and  in
1866  military  commander  of  the  province  of  Ala-

i'uela,  but  being  persecuted  on  account  of  his  po-
itical  opinion  by  the  administration  of  Jesus
Jimenez,  he  resigned  in  1869,  and  soon  put  him-
self at  the  head  of  other  malcontents.  On  27
April,  1870,  he  took  the  government  palace  by
surprise,  and  made  the  president  prisoner.  Dr.
Bruno  Carranza  was  appointed  provisional  presi-
dent, with  Guardia  as  commander-in-chief  of  the
military.  Carranza  resigned  on  8  Aug.,  and  Guar-
dia was  chosen  provisional  president,  but,  as  the
national  assembly  continued  hostile,  he  abdicated
and  retired  to  Alajuela.  On  7  Oct.  the  garrison
of  that  city  pronounced  in  his  favor,  and  he  was
proclaimed  dictator,  and  subsequently  chosen  presi-
dent. In  1874  and  1878  he  was  re-elected,  and
was  in  fact  the  irresponsible  ruler  of  the  republic,
but  notwithstanding  this,  and  his  strenuous  oppo-
sition to  Central  American  union,  his  government
did  much  for  the  country,  fostering  public  schools,
and  protected  agriculture.  He  began  the  building
of  an  interoceanic  railway,  against  the  advice  of  en-
gineers, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  the  republic
was  about  $20,000,000  in  debt,  with  the  road  still
unfinished.  He  also  built  telegraph-lines  over  the
republic  and  left  over  400  miles  established.  He
was  defeated  in  the  elections  of  1882,  but  died  a
few  weeks  before  the  end  of  his  term.


GTJARDIOLA,  Santos  (war-de'-o-lah),  president
of  Honduras,  b.  in  Tegucigalpa  in  1812 ;  d.  there
in  1862.  He  entered  the  army  at  an  early  age,  and
his  daring  and  cruelty  in  the  civil  wars  of  Central
America  earned  for  him  the  name  of  the  "  Tiger  of
Honduras."  In  an  effort  to  overthrow  the  govern-
ment of  his  native  state  in  1850,  he  was  defeated
and  banished.  In  1856  he  joined  the  Nicaraguan
forces  as  general  of  division,  was  defeated  first  by
Walker,  then  by  Munoz,  and  returned  to  Honduras,
where,  by  a  revolutionary  movement,  aided  by
Guatemala,  he  was  elevated  to  the  presidency.  He
crushed  all  revolutionary  movements  with  an  iron
hand,  and  the  republic  enjoyed  comparative  peace
under  his  rule ;  but  he  made  some  liberal  laws,  and
thereby  became  obnoxious  to  his  former  supporters,
the  clergy.  They  openly  preached  dissension  from
the  pulpit,  and  in  1862  Guardiola  was  overthrown
by  a  new  insurrection  and  assassinated.

GUAR10NEX  (war-re-o-nex),  Haytian cacique,
d.  in  June,  1502.  He  was  one  of  the  five  native
kings  who  ruled  over  the  island  at  the  time  of  the
discovery  by  the  Spanish.  He  permitted  Colum-
bus in  1494  to  build  the  fortress  named  "  Concep-
tion," in  the  midst  of  his  territory,  and  submitted
without  resistance  to  the  Spanish  domination  and
the  payment  of  a  tribute.  In  1496  he  embraced
the  Christian  faith,  but  relapsed  into  his  old  re-
ligion. He  afterward  rose  in  arms  against  the
Spaniards,  and  entered  the  league  formed  against
them  by  the  other  caciques,  and  was  seized  and  im-
prisoned, but  after  some  time  set  at  liberty.  In
1498  he  entered  into  a  conspiracy  with  Francisco
Roldan,  the  chief  judge,  against  the  adelantado
Bartolome  Columbus.  The  conspiracy  was  discov-
ered, and  Guarionex  fled  with  his  family  and  a
small  band  of  retainers  to  the  mountain  fastnesses
of  Ciguay,  whence  he  made  several  descents  into
the  plains,  laying  waste  the  villages  of  the  natives
who  continued  faithful  to  the  Spaniards.  The
adelantado  marched  against  him  with  a  large  force,
and  compelled  him  to  retire  to  the  wildest  and
most  inaccessible  parts  of  the  mountains,  where  he
was  finally  surprised,  and  brought  in  chains  to
Fort  Concepcion  in  1500.  He  was  kept  a  prisoner,
and  finally  sent  to  Spain  by  the  new  governor,
Nicolas  de  Ovando,  together  with  the  ex-com-
missioner, Bobadilla,  and  Roldan,  and  they  all-
perished  in  the  hurricane  that  had  been  predicted
by  Christopher  Columbus,  in  June,  1502.
"GUBERT,  Louise,  singer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa. ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1882.  Her  paternal
grandfather  was  a  French  officer,  who  had  served
under  the  first  Napoleon,  and  her  father  was  a
Cuban.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  she  sang  the  "  In-
flammatus"  from  Rossini's  "  Stabat  Mater,"  at  a
concert  in  Philadelphia,  and  soon  afterward  took
part  in  numerous  concerts  for  charitable  purposes.
While  she  was  still  pursuing  her  education,  the
Sisters  of  the  Visitation  from  Georgetown.  D.  C,
established  a  branch  of  their  order  in  Philadelphia,
where  Miss  Gubert  became  one  of  their  pupils,  and
determined  to  embrace  a  religious  life.  A  few  years
after  her  father's  death  she  accompanied  Bishop
Whelan  to  Wheeling.  Va..  and  in  a  short  time  en-
tered the  community  of  Visitation  nuns  established
there,  where  the  spiritual  name  of  Sister  Mary
Agnes  was  conferred  on  her.  Through  her  skill
and  energy  the  school  acquired  a  wide  reputation.
Before  the  academy  was  removed  to  its  present  lo-
cality, at  Mount  de  Chantal,  she  was  visited  by  all
the  distinguished  musicians  who  passed  through
Wheeling.  Among  her  best  songs  were  "  The  Erl-
King,"  by  Schubert,  and  the  principal  arias  from
"Der  Freischiitz." The  last  time  that  she  sang


10


GUELL Y RENTE


GUERRERO


in  the  convent  was  on  the  occasion  of  a  first  com-
munion, when,  without  the  organ  accompaniment,
she  rendered  one  of  Father  Fabcr's  hvmns.

GUELL  Y  RENTE,  Juan  (goo-ell),  Cuban  au-
thor, b.  in  Havana  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Madrid,  Spain,  in
1875.  He  was  educated  in  Havana,  and  went  to
Spain  in  1835,  where  he  entered  the  army,  but  after
several  years  returned  to  his  native  city.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Spanish  cortes  several  times.  He
published  a  volume  of  poems  (1843) ;  "  Hojas  del
Alma,"  poems  (1844) ;  "  Ultimos  Cantos  "  (Madrid,
(1859) ;  and  "  Noches  de  Estio  "  (1861).— His  brother,
Jos§,  author,  b.  in  Havana  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Madrid,
Spain,  20  Dec,  1884,  went,  in  1835,  to  Barcelona,
Spain,  where  he  received,  in  1838,  the  diploma  of
LL.  D.  After  spending  several  years  in  his  native
city  he  returned  to  Spain,  and  in  1848,  notwithstand-
ing great  opposition  from  high  quarters,  married
Dofia  Josefa  Fernanda,  sister  to  the  king  consort.
Giiell  suffered  many  hardships  on  account  of  this
marriage ;  his  wife  was  deprived  of  all  the  rights
and  honors  belonging  to  her  royal  birth,  and  he
was  banished  from  Spain.  He  went  to  France,  and
remained  there  several  years,  taking  part  in  many
of  the  conspiracies  of  the  Liberals  against  the
Spanish  government.  In  1879  Giiell  was  elected
senator  for  Havana  to  the  Spanish  cortes.  He
published  "  Amarguras  del  Corazon,"  a  volume  of
poems  (Havana,  1843) ;  "  Lagrimas  del  Corazon,"
poems  (Madrid,  1846) ;  "  Leyendas  Americanas,"
which  have  been  translated  into  English,  French,
Italian,  and  German  (1856),  and  other  works  in
Spanish.  He  also  wrote  much  in  French,  including
the  novels  "  Neludia,"  "  Les  deux  folies,"  "  Cathe-
rine Ossuna,"  "  Les  amours  d'un  negre,"  and
"  Philippe  II.  et  Don  Carlos  devant  1'histoire,"  an
historical  work  which  shows  much  research  (1878).
GUEMES  Y  HORCASITAS,  Juan  Francisco
(guay'-meth),  Cuban  statesman,  b.  in  Oviedo,
Spain,  in  1682;  d.  in  1768.  He  took  part  in  the
wars  of  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  and
from  1734  to  1746  was  governor  of  Cuba.  He  or-
ganized the  judicial  system  of  the  island,  founded
hospitals,  established  a  general  post-office,  caused
the  construction  of  several  first-class  men-of-war,
fortified  Havana,  and  in  1739  sent  a  successful  ex-
pedition to  the  relief  of  St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  be-
sieged by  the  English.  In  1742  he  sent  another
expedition  to  South  Carolina.  In  1746  he  was  ap-
pointed viceroy  of  Mexico,  and  there  also  he  intro-
duced many  reforms.  In  1755  he  returned  to
Spain,  and  was  brevetted  captain-general,  and
created  count  of  Re-
villa  Gigedo. — His  son,
Juan  Vicente,  count
of  Revilla  Gigedo,  vice-
roy of  Mexico,  b.  in
Havana,  Cuba,  about
1734;  d.  in  Madrid,
Spain,  2  May,  1799,  was
educated  in  Spain,  en-
tered the  army,  took
part  in  the  siege  of
Gibraltar  from  1779  to
1 783,  was  promoted
lieutenant-general,  and
in  1789  appointed  vice-
roy of  Mexico.  He  im-
mediately began  one
of  the  most  beneficial
administrations  that
Mexico  ever  had  under
Spanish  rule.  He  re-
formed the  financial  management,  finished  the
paving  of  the  principal  streets  of  the  capital,  had


ffletsxzJtiti^&f  (


the  open  sewers  and  canals  filled  up  and  subter-
ranean sewers  provided,  cleaned  the  principal
square,  established  free  primary  schools,  and  be-

f^an  a  carriage-road  to  Vera  Cruz.  He  also  estab-
ished  the  botanical  garden  in  Mexico,  and  sent
scientific  expeditions  to  Bering  strait  and  the
strait  of  Juan  de  Fuca.  But  he  was  calumniated
at  court,  was  relieved  of  the  government,  12  July,
1794,  and  spent  his  Jast  days  in  Spain.

GUENUCALQUIN  (gwe'n-noo-kal-keen'),  Arau-
canian  cacique,  b.  in  the  valley  of  Ilicura,  Arauco,
in  1599 ;  d.  there  in  1634.  From-  his  early  youth
he  participated  in  the  struggle  against  the  Spanish
invaders  of  his  country,  and  was  elected  cacique  of
his  tribe  in  1626.  He  attacked  the  Spanish  army  in
the  defile  of  Robleria  in  1630,  and  after  a  protract-
ed fight  routed  them  with  heavy  loss.  His  gal-
lantry and  strategic  ability  caused  him  to  be  elected
toqui  by  the  united  tribes  of  Arauco  in  1631.  In
1632  Guenucalquin  was  advised  by  his  chiefs  to
surprise  the  Spanish  camp  in  the  night,  but  he  re-
fused, saying  that  he  did  not  wish  to  be  accused  by
the  enemy  of  having  taken  advantage  of  the  dark-
ness. In  the  battle  that  took  place  on  the  follow-
ing morning  the  Indians  were  gaining  the  advan-
tage, when  the  second  chief  of  the  Araucanian
army,  Putapichion,  was  killed,  and  in  their  desire
to  rescue  his  body  the  Indians  became  confused
and  put  to  flight.  Alter  this  defeat,  Guenucalquin
collected  the  scattered  forces  again,  and  continued
his  inroads  into  Spanish  territory  till  their  army
invaded  Arauco  once  more,  and  he  was  killed  in  a
bloody  battle  in  his  native  valley.

GUERNSEY,  Alfred  Hudson,  editor,  b.  in  Ver-
mont in  1825.  He  was  for  several  years  editor  of
"Harper's  Magazine,"  and  from  1872  till  1876
was  an  associate  editor  of  the  "  American  Cyclo-
paedia," to  which  he  contributed  numerous  articles.
He  has  also  written  largely  for  periodicals,  mainly
on  historical  subjects,  and  is  author,  jointly  with
Henry  M.  Alden,  of  "  Harper's  Pictorial  History
of  the  Great  Rebellion,"  Mr.  Guernsey  writing  the
eastern  campaigns  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1862-'5),  and
of  "  The  Spanish  Armada"  (1882).

GUERRERO,  Teodoro  (ga-rayr'-ro),  Cuban  au-
thor, b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1825.  He  went  to
Spain  to  be  educated,  returned  to  his  native  coun-
try in  1845,  and  began  his  literary  career  by  pub-
lishing "  Teodorelas,"  a  volume  of  poems.  In  1855
his  drama  "  La  Escala  del  Poder  was  performed
at  Madrid,  and  his  comedy  "  La  Cabeza  y  el  Cora-
zon" at  Havana  in  1861.  Guerrero  has  taken  a
great  interest  in  educational  matters.  He  has
published  "  Lecciones  de  Mundo,"  which  has  gone
through  many  editions,  "Anatomia  del  corazon,"
"  Cuentos  de  la  Salon,"  "  Historia  intima  de  Seis
Mirjeres."  and  novels  and  pieces  for  the  theatre.

GUERRERO,  Vicente  (ger-ray'-ro),  president
of  Mexico,  b.  in  Tixtla,  Mexico,  in  1783 ;  d.  in  Cui-
lapam,  Mexico,  14  Feb.,  1831.  He  distinguished
himself  in  the  battle  of  Izucar,  23  Feb.,  1812,  and
after  the  defeat  of  the  revolutionists  at  Puruaran
went  to  the  south  of  Mexico  and  gained  several
victories  over  the  Spaniards.  In  1816  he  was  de-
feated in  Canada  de  las  Naranjos,  but  soon  after-
ward he  defeated  Zavala  and  Reguera  in  Azoyu.
The  Spanish  general  Apodaca  then  offered  to  par-
don him  if  he  would  yield,  but  he  refused.  The
death  of  Morelos,  Matamoros,  and  Mina,  the  im-
prisonment of  Bravo  and  Rayon,  and  the  par-
don accepted  by  Teran,  almost  put  an  end  to  the
revolution,  and  Guerrero  was  the  only  general
that  continued  to  resist  the  Spaniards,  until  the
victory  of  Tamo,  15  Sept.,  1818,  revived  the  cause
and  enabled  him  to  gain  other  victories. When


GUESS


GUIGNAS


11


he  was  convinced  that  Iturbide  desired  the  inde-
pendence of  Mexico,  he  joined  him ;  but  when  Itur-
bide caused  himself  to  be  proclaimed  emperor,  he
opposed  him  and  was
defeated  and  wounded
in  the  battle  of  Almo-
longa,  23  Jan.,  1823.
Guerrero  was  appoint-
ed a  member  of  the  ex-
ecutive council  when
the  Republicans  were
victorious,  and  exiled
Iturbide.  Afterward
Bravo  was  elected  head
of  the  so-called  Esco-
ces  party,  and  Guer-
rero of  the  Yorkino.
The  rivals  met  in  bat-
tle, Bravo  was  defeat-
ed, and  Guerrero  be-
^4/*i7# /jS^'y  came  president  of  Mex-

ico. But  he  was  soon
deposed  in  favor  of
Santa -Anna,  fled  to
the  south,  and  made  war  upon  the  administration
until  January,  1831,  when  he  was  inveigled  on
board  an  Italian  ship,  and  delivered  to  his  enemies.
He  was  condemned  by  a  court-martial  and  shot.

GUESS,  George,  or  SEQUOYAH,  a  Cherokee
half-breed,  inventor  of  the  Cherokee  alphabet,  b.
about  1770;  d.  in  San  Fernando,  northern  Mexi-
co, in  August,  1843.  He  cultivated  a  small  farm
in  the  Cherokee  country  of  Georgia,  and  was  known
as  an  ingenious  silversmith,  when,  in  1826,  he  in-
vented a  syllabic  alphabet  of  the  language  of  his
nation  of  eighty-five  characters,  each  representing
a  single  sound.  This  is  probably  the  most  perfect
alphabet  ever  devised  for  any  language.  He  used  the
characters  that  he  found  in  an  English  spelling-book
as  far  as  they  went,  though  he  knew  no  language  but
his  own.  In  1828  a  newspaper  called  the  "  Phoe-
nix "  was  established,  part  of  which  was  printed  in
Guess's  alphabet,  and  it  was  also  used  in  printing
a  part  of  the  New  Testament.  Guess  was  not  a
Christian,  and  is  said  to  have  regretted  his  inven-
tion when  he  heard  that  it  had  been  used  for  the
latter  purpose.  He  accompanied  his  tribe  in  their
emigration  beyond  the  Mississippi,  and  in  1842
went  with  other  Indians  to  Mexico.

GUEST,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  England;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8  Sept.,  1707.  He  received  a
university  education  in  England,  and  probably  en-
gaged in  the  practice  of  the  law  before  coming  to
this  country.  In  1701,  shortly  after  his  arrival  in
Philadelphia,  he  was  commissioned  by  William
Penn  to  be  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of
Pennsylvania,  and  presiding  judge  of  the  courts  of
common  pleas,  quarter  sessions,  and  the  orphans'
court  of  the  city  and  county  of  Philadelphia.  He
served  as  chief  justice  in  1701,  1702,  and  1705,  as
an  associate  justice  in  the  same  court  in  1704,  and
as  presiding  judge  of  the  other  courts  from  1701
till  1706.  He  was  invited  by  Penn  to  a  seat  in  his
council  in  July,  1701,  and  continued  a  member  of
this  body  until  his  death.

GUEST,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Missouri  in
1821 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  12  Jan.,  1879.  He
entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1837,  and  in
1843  became  passed  midshipman,  and  was  attached
to  the  steamer  "  Poinsett "  in  the  survey  of  Tampa
bay  in  1844-'5.  In  1850  he  was  made  lieutenant,
and  in  1866  captain.  He  served  in  1845-'8  on  the
frigate  "Congress"  in  the  Pacific,  on  the  coast  of
Mexico  during  the  Mexican  war,  and  took  part  on
shore  in  several  sharp  engagements. In  1854  he


was  second  in  command  of  the  seamen  and  ma-
rines of  the  U.  S.  steamer  "  Plymouth,"  boarded  at
Shanghai  a  Chinese  man-of-war  and  liberated  a
pilot-boat  crew,  and  was  also  in  a  severe  and  vic-
torious fight  with  the  Chinese  rebels,  who  endeav-
ored to  plunder  the  foreign  residents  of  the  city  In
April  of  the  same  year.  He  was  in  command  of
the  boats  of  the  "  Niagara,"  and  cut  out  the  Con-
federate steamer  "  Aid,"  under  the  guns  of  Fort
Morgan,  in  August,  1861.  Capt.  Guest  commanded
the  "Owasco,"  of  Admiral  Porter's  mortar  flotilla,
in  the  bombardment  and  passage  of  Fort  Jackson
and  Fort  St.  Philip,  and  commanded  the  same  ves-
sel at  the  bombardment  of  Vicksburg  in  the  sum-
mer of  the  same  year,  receiving  the  highest  praise
from  his  superiors.  He  commanded  the  iron-clad
"  Lehigh  "  and  the  steamer  "  Itasca  "  at  both  of  the
Fort  Fisher  engagements.  He  was  promoted  to
commodore  in  1873.  and  at  the  time  of  his  death
was  commandant  of  the  Portsmouth  navy-vard.

GUIDO  Y  SPANO,  Carlos,  Argentine  poet,
b.  in  Salta,  8  March,  1832.  He  was  graduated
in  law  at  the  University  of  San  Carlos,  Buenos
Ayres,  in  1853,  practised  in  Buenos  Ayres,  and
in  1862  was  elect-
ed deputy  to  the
Federal  congress,
where  he  became
one  of  the  leaders
of  the  National
party.  In  1865
he  was  elected
president  of  the
national  congress,
but  when  the  war
with  Paraguay  be-
gan he  resigned,
and  served  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel. In
1872  he  was  elect-
ed to  the  national
senate,  and  was
its  president  for
four  years.  Dur-
ing the  yellow-fe-
ver epidemic  of  1871  he  was  one  of  the  members
of  the  popular  commission  for  the  relief  of  the
sufferers.  He  is  now  (1887)  keeper  of  the  national
records  in  Buenos  Ayres.  He  began  to  write
verses  while  still  in  college,  and  has  gained  reputa-
tion as  a  poet.  The  greater  part  of  his  poems
have  been  collected  in  his  book  "  Hojas  al  Viento  "
(Buenos  Ayres,  1871).  Guido  is  one  of  the  most
popular  poets  of  the  Argentine.

GUIGNAS,  Ignatius,  clergyman,  b.  in  France
about  the  end  of  the  17th  century.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  founded  the  mis-
sion of  St.  Michael  the  Archangel  among  the  Sioux,
in  what  is  now  Minnesota,  in  1727.  After  beginning
his  mission  labors,  he  was  forced  to  abandon  the
work,  owing  to  a  victory  of  the  Foxes  over  the
French.  Fie  attempted  to  reach  the  Illinois  coun-
try in  1728,  but  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Kicka-
poos  and  Mascoutens,  allies  of  the  Foxes,  by  whom
he  was  detained  prisoner  five  months,  and  was  con-
stantly in  danger  of  death.  After  a  time  he  was
condemned  to  be  burned  alive,  but  was  saved  by  an
old  man  who  adopted  him.  He  afterward  received
supplies  from  the  Illinois  missionaries,  and  used
these  to  gain  over  the  Indians,  whom  he  induced
to  make  peace.  He  was  taken  to  the  Illinois  coun-
try, and  left  on  parole  until  November.  1729.  when
the  Indians  took  him  back  to  their  canton.  On
being  liberated  he  seems  to  have  returned  to  the
Dakota  mission,  where  he  was  laboring  in  1736.


biuM;  ^MjfUh


12


GUIGUES


GUMILLA


GUIGUES,  Joseph  Eugene  Bruno,  Canadian
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Gap,  France,  28  Aug.,  1805 ;  d.
in  Ottawa,  Canada,  9  Feb.,  1874.  He  decided
early  in  life  to  devote  himself  to  the  church,  and
entered  the  congregation  of  the  Oblate  Fathers.
He  soon  gained  the  highest  rank  in  the  order,  was
sent  to  Canada  on  a  special  mission  in  1844,  and
shortly  afterward  appointed  superior  and  perpetual
visitor  of  the  Oblates  of  Canada.  In  1847  the  see
of  Ottawa  was  created,  and,  at  the  request  of  the
bishop  of  Montreal,  Father  Guigues  was  nominated
its  first  bishop,  and  was  consecrated  30  July,  1848.
The  country  under  his  jurisdiction  was  at  this
time  sparsely  settled,  and  most  of  the  population
was  of  a  floating  character.  His  whole  diocese
contained  only  five  priests  and  between  four  and
five  thousand  Roman  Catholics.  He  set  to  work  to
obtain  priests  from  France  and  Ireland,  and  his
success  increased  the  tide  of  emigration,  which
was  beginning  to  flow  into  the  valley  of  the  Otta-
wa. He  established  a  house  of  the  Oblate  Fathers
at  Notre  Dame  du  Desert,  a  hundred  miles  from
the  city  of  Ottawa,  which  supplied  him  abundantly
with  missionaries.  Another  mission  was  founded
at  Temiscaming.  He  was  instrumental  in  found-
ing the  College  of  Ottawa,  opened  institutions  that
were  conducted  by  the  Sisters  of  Charity  and  the
Sisters  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  established  a
large  number  of  schools  under  the  care  of  the
Christian  Brothers.  An  orphanage  at  Ottawa,  and
houses  of  refuge  for  the  infirm  and  old,  owed  their
existence  to  him.  He  was  particularly  anxious  to
strengthen  the  French  element  in  Upper  Canada,
and  contributed  much  to  arrest  the  emigration
which  had  been  setting  eastward,  while  his  aid  and
advice  drew  many  French  Canadians  to  settle  in
the  valley  of  the  Ottawa.  At  his  death  the  num-
ber of  priests  had  increased  from  five  to  seventy-
five.  There  were  a  hundred  and  fifteen  churches
in  the  diocese,  and  the  number  of  Roman  Catho-
lics was  considerably  over  seventy-five  thousand.

GUILD,  Curtis,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
13  Jan.,  1827.  He  Was  educated  in  the  Boston
public  schools,  and  at  sixteen  years  of  age  entered
a  merchant's  office,  but  in  1847  became  connected
with  the  Boston  "Daily  Journal,"  and  has  since
devoted  himself  to  journalism.  He  founded  in
1859  the  Boston  "  Commercial  Bulletin,"  and  since
that  date  has  been  its  editor-in-chief.  Mr.  Guild
was  president  of  the  Boston  commercial  club  in
1882-'3,  and  has  been  president  of  the  Bostonian
society  since  1882.  For  more  than  forty  years  he
has  contributed  to  almost  every  department  of
current  literature.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Over  the
Ocean,"  a  series  of  sketches  of  European  travel,
first  published  in  the  "  Commercial  Bulletin  "  (Bos-
ton, 1871) ;  and  "  Abroad  Again  "  (1876).

GUILD,  Reuben  Aldridge,  author,  b.  in  West
Dedham,  Mass.,  4  May,  1822.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1847,  and  in  1848  was  appointed  libra-
rian of  the  university,  which  place  he  has  held  to  the
E resent  time  (1887).  Under  his  charge  the  library
as  increased  from  17,000  to  66,000  volumes.  In
1878  a  fire-proof  library  building  was  completed,
in  accordance  with  his  own  wishes  and  sugges-
tions. The  classification  of  the  library,  the  ar-
rangement of  the  books,  and  the  card  catalogue,
have  been  highly  approved.  In  1874  he  received
the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Shurtleff  col-
lege. In  1877  he  travelled  in  England  and  Scot-
land, visiting  the  great  libraries  of  Oxford,  Cam-
bridge, London,  Edinburgh,  and  Glasgow.  Be-
sides current  articles,  including  many  on  Free-
masonry, he  is  the  author  of  "  Librarian's  Manual,
a  Treatise  on  Bibliography,  with  Sketches  of  Pub-


he  Libraries"  (New  York,  1858);  "Life,  Times,
and  Correspondence  of  James  Manning,  and  the
Early  History  of  Brown  University  (Boston,
1864) ;  "  History  of  Brown  University,  with  Illus-
trative Documents "  (Providence,  1867) ;  "  Bio-
graphical Introduction  to  the  Writings  of  Roger
Williams"  (1866);  "  Chaplain  Smith  and  the  Bap-
tists "  (Philadelphia,  1885) ;  and  has  edited  "  Rhode
Island  in  the  Continental  Congress,  1765-1790,"
by  William  R.  Staples  (Providence,  1870) ;  "  Lit-
erary and  Theological  Addresses  of  Alva  Woods,"
with  a  life  (1868);  "Letter  of  John  Cotton,  and
Roger  Williams's  Reply  "  (1866) ;  and  "  Queries  of
Highest  Consideration,"  by  Roger  Williams  (1867).

GUINZBERG,  Aaron,  rabbi,  b.  in  Prague,
Bohemia,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  July,
1873.  After  a  thorough  rabbinical  and  general
education  in  his  native  city,  he  was  appointed  rabbi
of  Libochowitz,  Bohemia.  In  1846  he  wrote  a
spirited  defence  of  Judaism,  and  demanded  political
emancipation  for  the  Jews  of  Austria.  His  work,
•'  Dogniatisch-historisch  Beleuchtung  des  alten
Judenthums,"  was  dedicated  to  Sir  Moses  Monte-
fiore,  but  its  tone  was  too  liberal  for  the  government,
and  soon  after  its  publication  he  emigrated  to  the
United  States,  where  he  officiated  as  rabbi  in  Balti-
more, Rochester,  and  Boston.  Dr.  Guinzberg  was
a  man  of  considerable  erudition,  which  he  strove
to  utilize  for  the  moral  advancement  of  his  brethren
and  the  vindication  of  his  religion.  He  was  favor-
ably known  as  a  teacher  of  distinction  at  various
institutes  of  learning.  He  was  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  Jewish  and  general  press,  and  his
writings  were  usually  of  a  polemic  character.  He
belonged  to  the  conservative  school.

GULDIN,  John  C,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bucks
county,  Pa.,  in  1799  ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1863.
He  studied  theology  under  Herman,  and  it  is  sup-
posed that  he  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1820.  Mr.
Guldin  was  known  as  the  "Apostle  to  the  Germans."
From  1820  till  1842  he  preached  in  the  counties
of  Chester,  Montgomery,  and  Franklin,  Pa.,  re-
moved to  New  York  in  1842,  and  was  pastor  of  a
congregation,  and  general  missionary  to  the  Ger-
mans. He  superintended  the  German  publications
of  the  American  tract  society,  and  was  the  chief
editor  of  the  hymn-book  that  has  since  been
adopted  by  the  Presbyterian  church  for  the  use  of
its  German  congregations.

GULICK,  Peter  Johnson,  missionary,  b.  in
Freehold,  N.  J.,  12  March,  1797;  d.  in  Kobe,  Ja-
pan, 8  Dec,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1825,  and  studied  for  two  years  at  the  theo-
logical seminary  there.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
by  the  presbytery  of  New  Brunswick  in  1827,  and
was  ordained  by  the  same  presbytery  in  October
of  that  year.  In  November  he  left  Boston  for  the
Hawaiian  islands  under  commission  of  the  Ameri-
can board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions,
and  was  stationed  on  various  islands  of  the  Ha-
waiian kingdom.  In  1874  he  went  to  Japan,  and
there  passed  the  last  days  of  his  life  with  a  son
who  was  also  a  missionary.

GUMILLA,  Jos6,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Barcelona,  Spain,  in  1690 :  d.  in  Madrid  in  1758.
He  entered  the  Jesuit  order  in  1708,  and  in  1714
was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  South  America.  He
was  sent  into  different  provinces  successively,  and
while  performing  the  duties  of  his  ministry  was  a
close  observer  of  the  manners  of  the  inhabitants.
He  gave  all  the  time  his  missionary  labors  allowed
him  to  the  study  of  natural  history,  and  during
his  journeys  collected  plants  unknown  in  Europe,
formed  collections  of  insects,  and  dissected  the
animals  that  the  Indians  brought  him  after  hunt-


GUMMERE


GURLEY


13


ing  or  fishing.  Having  been  appointed  superior  of
the  missions  on  the  Orinoco  in  1728,  he  sailed  up
this  river  and  visited  all  the  settlements,  Indian  as
well  as  Spanish,  that  were  situated  in  this  prov-
ince. He  was  appointed  rector  of  the  College  of
Carthagena  in  1734,  and  of  that  in  Madrid  in
1738.  He  published  "  El  Orinoco  ilustrado  y  de-
fendido :  historia  natural,  civil  y  geografica  de  las
naciones  situadas  en  las  riberas  de  esto  gran  rio  "
(enlarged  ed.,  2  vols.,  with  plates,  Madrid,  1745).
The  history  of  the  Orinoco  has  been  often  reprinted.
The  best  edition  is  probably  the  one  published  at
Barcelona  (2  vols.,  1791).  It  was  translated  into
French  by  Eidous  (3  vols.,  Paris,  1758).  Unlike
that  of  most  Spanish  writers,  Gumilla's  style  is  re-
markable for  its  simplicity.  The  Abbe  Raynal,  in
his  "  Histoire  du  commerce  des  Europeens  dans  les
deux  Indies  "  has  borrowed  some  of  his  most  effec-
tive passages  from  the  work  of  Gumilla.

GUMMERE,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Willow
Grove,  Pa.,  in  1784;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  31
May,  1845.  For  more  than  forty  years  he  was  a
successful  teacher  in  the  towns  of  Burlington,  N.  J.,
Horsham,  Pa.,  Rancocus,  N.  J.,  and  Westtown,
Pa.,  and  conducted  with  his  son,  Samuel  J.,  a
boarding-school  in  Burlington.  In  1833-'43  he
was  professor  of  mathematics,  and  part  of  the  time

Erincipal,  of  the  Friends'  college  at  Haverford.
[e  then  returned  to  the  Burlington  academy,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  He  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  philosophical  society  in  1814,
and  in  1825  was  given  the  degree  of  M.  A.  by
Princeton. A  memorial  of  his  life  was  printed  for

Srivate  circulation  by  W.  J.  Allinson  (Burlington,
f.  J.,  1845).  He  published  "  A  Treatise  on  Sur-
veying "  (New  York,  1814),  and  "  An  Elementary
Treatise  on  Theoretical  and  Practical  Astronomy  "
(1822). — His  brother,  Samuel  R.,  educator,  b.  in
Horsham,  Pa.,  3  March,  1789 ;  d.  in  Burlington,
N.  J.,  13  Sept.,  1866,  was  the  principal  of  a  board-
ing-school for  girls  at  Burlington  from  1821  till
1837,  and  was  known  as  a  successful  teacher.  In
1840-'50  he  was  clerk  of  the  chancery  court  of
New  Jersev.  He  published  "Treatise  on  Geog-
raphy "  (Philadelphia,  1817);  "A  Revision  of  the
Progressive  Spelling-Book  "  (1831) ;  and  a  "  Com-
pendium of  Elocution  "  (1857).

GUNDLACH,  Juan,  Cuban  naturalist,  b.  in
Marburg,  Hesse-Cassel,  in  1810.  His  father  was
professor  of  physics  and  mathematics  of  the  uni-
versity of  his  native  city.  Young  Gundlach  was
graduated  there  as  doctor  of  philosophy  in  1837
and  in  1839  went  to  Cuba,  where  he  began  to  make
collections  in  natural  history.  He  has  continued
this  work  to  the  present  time  (1887),  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  few  years  before  1875,  when  the  in-
surrection in  the  island  compelled  him  to  reside  in
Porto  Rico.  In  1867  he  arranged  the  Cuban  col-
lections at  the  Paris  exposition,  receiving  a  silver
medal  for  his  services.  His  name  is  associated
with  over  sixty  species,  including  one  of  land  mol-
lusks  called  "  Gundlachia  Hjalmarsoni,"  and  two
called  "  Unio  Gundlachi."  At  his  death  his  large
and  valuable  collections  will  become  the  property
of  the  island  of  Cuba.  Gundlach  is  a  member  of
scientific  societies  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and
has  published  numerous  papers  on  natural  history,
which  have  been  reprinted  in  the  annals  of  the
"  Academia  de  Ciencias  de  la  Habana."

GUNN,  Donald,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Falkirk,
Caithness-shire,  Scotland,  in  September,  1797 ;  d.  in
St.  Andrew's,  Manitoba,  30  Nov..  1878.  In  1813  he
went  to  the  northwest,  and  entered  the  service  of
the  Hudson  bay  company,  in  which  he  remained
ten  years. In  1823  he  settled  at  Red  river,  and


was  for  about  twenty  years  one  of  the  judges  of
the  court  of  session,  being  president  of  the  court
for  a  part  of  that  time.  When  the  legislative
council  was  instituted  in  Manitoba  he  became  a
member,  and  retained  his  seat  until  that  body  was
abolished  in  1876.  He  was  thoroughly  versed  in
the  natural  history  of  the  northwest,  and  contrib-
uted many  papers  on  this  subject  to  the  "  Miscel-
laneous Collections  of  the  Smithsonian  Institu-
tion," and  other  publications.  He  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  management  of  Manitoba  college.

GUNN,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1739;
d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  30  July,  1801.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  removed  to  Savannah,  Ga.,
where  he  practised  his  profession.  He  was  elected
as  U.  S.  senator  to  the  1st  congress,  and  was  re-elect-
ed in  1789.  Mr.  Gunn  was  one  of  the  members  of
congress  who  voted  for  establishing  the  seat  of
government  at  Washington.

GUNNISON,  John  W.,  engineer,  b.  in  New
Hampshire  in  1812  :  d.  near  Sevier  Lake.  Utah,  26
Oct.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy,  became  2d  lieutenant  of  topographi-
cal engineers,  7  July,  1838  ;  1st  lieutenant,  9  May,
1846 ;  and  captain,  3  March,  1853.  He  served  in
the  Florida  war  of  1837-'9,  was  engaged  for  near-
ly ten  years  in  the  survey  of  the  northwestern
lakes  and  in  the  improvement  of  the  harl>ors,  and  in
1849-'51  was  associated  with  Capt.  Howard  Stans-
bury  in  making  maps  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake  re-
gion, drawing  up  an  able  report  on  his  work.  In
1853  he  had  charge  of  the  expeditions  and  survey
of  a  central  route  for  a  railway  from  the  Missis-
sippi river  to  the  Pacific  ocean.  While  thus  en-
gaged he  was  murdered,  with  seven  of  his  explor-
ing-party,  by  a  band  of  Mormons  and  Parvante  In-
dians, his  body  being  pierced  by  seventeen  arrows
and  otherwise  mutilated.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"  History  of  the  Mormons  of  Utah:  Their  Domes-
tic Polity  and  Theology"  (Philadelphia,  1852).

GURLEY,  Phineas  Densmore,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hamilton,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  12  Nov.,"l816;  d.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  Sept.,  1868.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1837,  with  the  highest  hon-
ors of  his  class,  and  at  Princeton  theological  semi-
nary in  1840.  After  holding  pastorates  in  Indian-
apolis, Ind.,  and  Dayton,  Ohio,  he  accepted  in  1854
a  call  from  the  F  street  church  in  Washington,
D.  C,  which  in  1859  was  united  with  the  2d  Pres-
byterian church  of  the  same  city,  and  continued  to
be  the  pastor  of  both  congregations  until  his  death.
In  1859  he  was  chosen  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate. Dr.  Gurley  numbered  among  his  regular
hearers  several  presidents  of  the  United  States,
among  them  Mr.  Lincoln,  at  whose  death-bed  he
was  present,  and  whose  funeral  sermon  he  deliv-
ered. He  took  an  active  part  in  the  negotiations
that  resulted  in  the  union  of  the  old-school  and
new-school  branches  of  the  Presbyterian  church.

GURLEY,  Ralph  Randolph,'  clergyman,  b.  in
Lebanon,  Conn.,  26  May,  1797;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  30  July.  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1818,  removed  to  Washington,  D.  C.  and  was
licensed  to  preach  as  a  Presbvterian,  but  was  never
ordained.  From  1822  till  1872  he  acted  as  the
agent  and  secretary  of  the  American  colonization
society,  visited  Africa  three  times  in  its  interests,
and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Liberia.  He  also
went  to  England  to  solicit  aid  in  the  work  of  colo-
nization. During  the  first  ten  years  of  his  agency
the  annual  income  of  the  society  increased  from
$778  to  $40,000.  He  delivered  addresses  in  its  be-
half in  all  parts  of  the  country,  edited  "  The  Afri-
can Repository,"  and,  besides  many  reports,  wrote


14


GURNEY


GUSTAFSON


the  "Life  of  Jehudi  Ashmun"  (New  York,  1839);
"  Mission  to  England  for  the  American  Coloniza-
tion Society"  (1841);  and  "Life  and  Eloquence  of
Rev.  Sylvester  Lamed  "  (New  York,  1844).

GURNEY,  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Bucks  county,
Pa.,  in  1738 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  May,  1815.
He  volunteered  in  the  provincial  army  in  1756,
served  under  Gen.  Israel  Putnam,  and  came  to  be
regarded  by  that  officer  in  the  light  of  an  adopted
son.  Gurney  was  present  at  the  capture  of  Louis-
bourg,  Cape  Breton,  25  July,  1758,  and  at  the  close
of  the  war  joined  the  expedition  against  the  French
West  India  islands,  and  assisted  in  the  taking  of
Guadeloupe,  27  April,  1759.  On  his  return  he  en-
gaged in  commerce  in  Philadelphia,  and  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolutionary  war  assisted  in  the
organization  and  drilling  of  troops.  Although  at
first  he  refused  to  accept  a  commission,  Mr.  Gurney
was  made  captain  in  a  regiment  of  infantry  raised
by  authority  of  the  province.  The  following  year
he  entered  the  regular  army,  was  appointed  lieuten-
ant-colonel, and  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Iron
Hill,  Brandywine,  and  Germantown,  in  the  first  of
which  he  was  wounded.  After  the  war  he  returned
to  mercantile  pursuits  in  Philadelphia,  where  he
resided  until  his  death.  He  was  for  several  years
warden  of  the  port,  during  which  period  he  origi-
nated and  carried  out  an  important  improvement
in  the  buoys  and  beacons  in  Delaware  bay.  He  was
repeatedly  elected  to  the  lower  branch  of  the  legis-
lature, and  subsequently  sent  to  the  senate.  He
was  also  a  trustee  of  Dickinson  college,  county
commissioner,  and  director  of  various  institutions.
In  the  whiskey  rebellion  of  1794,  Col.  Gurney  com-
manded the  1st  regiment  of  the  Philadelphia  bri-
gade, which  was  composed  of  young  men  of  good
family  and  education.  At  a  critical  period  of  the
Revolutionary  war,  when  there  was  great  difficulty
in  procuring  supplies  for  the  American  army,  Mr.
Gurney  was  one  of  several  residents  of  Philadel-
phia who  gave  their  bonds  to  the  amount  of  about
£260,000  for  procuring  them.  The  amount  of  his
personal  subscription  was  £2,000.

GURNEY,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Flushing,
N.  Y.,  21  Aug.,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3  Feb.,
1879.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
engaged  in  business  in  New  York  city.  In  April,
1861,  he  entered  the  National  service  with  the  7th
regiment,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  for  the  three
months'  term.  At  its  conclusion  he  accepted  a
commission  as  captain  in  the  65th  New  York,
known  as  the  "  Fighting  Chasseurs,"  and  served  in
that  capacity  through  the  early  campaigns  of  the
war.  In  1862  he  was  appointed  assistant  inspect-
or-general and  examining  officer  on  Gov.  Morgan's
staff.  In  July  of  that  year  he  received  authority
to  raise  a  regiment,  and  in  thirty  days  he  had  re-
cruited the  127th  New  York,  at  the  head  of  which
he  returned  to  the  field,  joining  the  23d  army
corps.  In  the  following  October  he  was  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  2d  brigade  of  Gen.  Aber-
crombie's  division.  In  1864  he  was  ordered  with
his  brigade  to  join  Gen.  Gilmore's  command  on
the  South  Carolina  coast,  and  in  December,  having
been  severely  wounded  in  the  arm  in  an  engage-
ment at  Devoe's  Neck,  was  sent  north  for  treat-
ment. Before  he  had  been  completely  restored  to
health  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
Charleston  post,  and  while  there  was  promoted  brig-
adier-general of  volunteers  for  gallantry  in  action.
After  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  service  in  July,
1865,  he  returned  to  Charleston  and  established
himself  in  business.  In  October,  1870,  he  became
treasurer  of  Charleston  county,  and  held  the  office
until  1876. He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1873,


and  in  1874  was  appointed  a  centennial  commis-
sioner by  President  Grant,  and  elected  a  vice-presi-
dent of  the  commission.

GUROWSKI,  Adam,  Count,  author,  b.  in  the
palatinate  of  Kalisz,  Poland,  10  Sept.,  1805  ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  4  May,  1866.  He  was  a  son  of
the  Count  Ladislas  Gurowski,  who  was  an  ardent
admirer  of  Kosciusko,  and  who  lost  the  greater
part  of  his  estates  through  having  participated  in
the  insurrection  of  1794.  Having  been  expelled  in
1818,  and  again  in  1819,  from  the  gymnasia  of  War-
saw and  Kalisz  for  revolutionary  demonstrations,
young  Gurowski  continued  his  studies  at  various
German  universities.  Returning  to  Warsaw  in
1825,  he  became  identified  with  those  opposed  to
Russian  influence,  and  was  in  consequence  several
times  imprisoned.  He  was  active  in  organizing  the
revolution  of  1830,  in  which  he  afterward  took  part.
On  its  suppression  he  escaped  to  France,  where  he
lived  for  several  years  and  adopted  many  of  the
views  of  Fourier.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  na-
tional Polish  committee  in  Paris,  and  became  con-
spicuous in  political  and  literary  circles.  His  estates
had  meantime  been  confiscated  and  he  himself  con-
demned to  death  ;  but  in  1835  he  published  a  work
entitled  "  La  verite  sur  la  Russie,"  in  which  he
advocated  a  union  of  the  different  branches  of  the
Slavic  race.  The  book  being  favorably  regarded
by  the  Russian  government,  Gurowski  was  recalled,
and,  although  his  estates  were  not  restored,  he  was
employed  in  the  civil  service.  In  1844,  finding
that  he  had  many  powerful  enemies  at  court,  he
left  secretly  for  Berlin  and  went  thence  to  Heidel-
berg. Here  he  gave  himself  to  study,  and  for  two
years  lectured  on  political  economy  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Berne,  Switzerland.  He  then  went  to
Italy,  and  in  1849  came  to  the  United  States,  where
he  engaged  in  literary  pursuits  and  became  deeply
interested  in  American  politics.  From  1861  till
1863  he  was  translator  in  the  state  department  at
Washington,  being  acquainted  with  eight  languages.
Before  coming  to  this  country  he  had  published
"  La  civilisation  et  la  Russie "  (St.  Petersburg,
1840);  "Pensees  sur  l'avenir  des  Polonais"  (Ber-
lin, 1841) ;  "  Aus  meinem  Gedankenbuche  "  (Bres-
lau,  1843);  "Eine  Tour  durch  Belgien"  (Heidel-
berg, 1845);  "  Impressions  et  souvenirs  "  (Lausanne,
1846) ;  "  Die  letzten  Ereignisse  in  den  drei  Theilen
desalten  Polen"  (Munich,  1846) ;  and  "  Le  Pansla-
visme"  (Florence,  1848).  During  his  residence  in
the  United  States  he  published  "  Russia  as  it  Is"
(New  York,  1854) ;  "  The  Turkish  Question  "  (1854) ;
"A  Year  of  the  War"  (1855) :  "  America  and  Eu-
rope "  (1857);  "  Slavery  in  History  "  (1860) :  and  "  My
Diary,"  notes  on  the  civil  war  (3  vols.,  1862-'6).

GUSTAFSON,  Axel  Carl  Jolian,  author,  b.
in  Lund,  Sweden,  about  1847.  His  father  is  a
clergyman,  and  Axel  was  educated  in  his  native
town.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one  he  came  to  the
United  States,  was  naturalized,  and  began  to  write
for  the  press.  Becoming  interested  in  the  temper-
ance movement,  he  contributed  to  a  Boston  jour-
nal an  article  on  the  Gottenburg  system  of  grant-
ing licenses,  which  led  to  an  investigation  of  the
different  licensing  systems' of  the  world.  He  also
became  a  contributor  to  several  of  the  leading  pe-
riodicals. Soon  after  coming  to  this  country  he
married  Mrs.  Zadel  Barnes  Buddington,  who  has
since  greatly  assisted  him  in  his  literary  work.
Going  to  England,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gustafson  met
Samuel  Morley,  the  philanthropist,  who  induced
the  former  to  change  his  intention  of  writing  a
work  on  the  abuse  of  tobacco,  and  discuss  the
liquor  question  instead.  "  The  Foundation  of
Death  "  (London,  1884)  was  the  outcome  of  this


GUTHEIM


GUTHRIE


15


change  of  plan.  This  work  discusses  the  use  of
liquor  among  the  ancients,  the  history  of  the  dis-
covery of  distillation,  liquor  adulterations,  the
effects  of  alcohol  on  the  physical  organs  and  func-
tions, the  social  and  moral  results  arising  from
the  drinking  habit,  heredity,  the  use  of  alcohol  as
a  medicine,  and  includes  an  inquiry  into  the  meth-
ods of  reformation.  It  has  passed  through  three
editions,  and  been  translated  into  Swedish,  German,
French,  Spanish,  Malagasy,  Burmese,  and  Mah-
ratta.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gustafson  are  now  (1887)  pre-
paring a  series  of  school-books,  intended  to  incul-
cate their  views  on  the  temperance  question. — His
wife,  Zadel  Barnes  Buddington,  author,  b.  in
Middletown,  Conn.,  about  1840,  early  began  writ-
ing verses,  stories,  and  sketches.  Subsequently  a
paper  by  her  in  favor  of  the  abolition  of  capital
punishment  attracted  general  attention.  For  two
years  she  was  political  editor  of  a  Massachusetts
journal.  Of  her  tribute  to  the  poet  Bryant,  John
Greenleaf  Whittier  wrote :  "  I  can  only  compai'e  it
with  Milton's  '  Lycidas  ' ;  it  is  worthy  of  any  living
poet  at  least."  Her  poem  of  "  Little  Martin  Crag-
nan,"  based  on  the  true  story  of  a  boy  lost  in  Pitt-
ston  mines  through  an  act  of  heroism,  became  very
popular.  Mrs.  Gustafson  (who  by  her  first  mar-
riage was  Mrs.  Buddington)  has  published  "  Can
the  Old  Love?"  (Boston,  1871) ;  "  Meg,  A  Pastoral,
and  other  Poems  "  (Boston,  1879) ;  and  a  new  edi-
tion of  "  Zophiel,"  by  Maria  Gowen  Brooks,  with  a
sketch  of  the  author  (Boston,  1879).

GUTHEIM,  James  Koppel,  clergyman,  b.  in
•Menne,  Westphalia,  15  Nov.,  1817;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  11  May,  1886.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1843,  and  was  called  as  minister  of  a  Cin-
cinnati synagogue  in  1846.  In  1850  he  assumed
charge  of  a  synagogue  in  New  Orleans  ;  but  in  1863,
refusing  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Union,
he  left  New  Orleans,  and  preached  in  Montgomery,
Ala.,  and  Columbus,  Ga.  At  the  close  of  the  civil
war  he  returned  to  New  Orleans  and  was  called  to
the  New  York  Temple  Emanuel  in  1868.  In  1872
he  became  minister  of  the  New  Orleans  Temple
Sinai,  where  he  preached  until  his  death.  He  took
much  interest  in  educational  and  charitable  work,
and  was  at  one  time  president  of  the  New  Orleans
board  of  education.  The  state  senate  adjourned
on  the  day  of  his  funeral.

GUTHERS,  Karl,  artist,  b.  in  Switzerland  in
1844.  He  was  brought  to  the  United  States  by  his
parents  in  1851.  His  father  settled  in  Cincinnati
and  was  the  first  to  introduce  terra-cotta  objects
of  art  into  this  country.  The  son  began  his  pro-
fessional career  by  modelling  clay  in  his  father's
studio.  He  afterward  studied  under  a  portrait-
painter  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  in  1868  went  to
Paris,  where  he  studied  with  Cabasson  and  Pils,
and  was  a  pupil  at  the  Academie  des  beaux  arts.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  he
went  to  Belgium,  studying  in  Brussels  and  Ant-
werp under  Stalleart  and  Robert.  He  took  up  his
residence  in  Rome  in  1871,  where  he  executed  his
first  important  work.  He  returned  to  Memphis  in
1873,  painting  portraits  and  figure-pieces  in  oil
and  water-colors.  In  1874  he  removed  to  St.  Louis,
where  he  was  connected  with  the  art  department
of  Washington  university,  and  was  instrumental
in  the  organization  of  the  school  and  museum  of
fine  arts  in  the  life  class  in  which  he  taught  from
1876  till  1883-4.  In  the  latter  year  he  wont  to
Paris,  where  he  has  since  remained,  studying  in
the  Julian  school.  To  the  Centennial  exhibition
at  Philadelphia  he  sent  his  "Ecce  Homo"  and  his
"Awakening  of  Spring,"  receiving  for  the  latter
work  a  medal  and  diploma.


GUTHRIE,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Nelson
county,  Ky.,  5  Dec,  1792;  d.  in  Louisville,  13
March,  1869.  He  was  educated  at  Bardstown,  Ky.,
and  studied  law  under  John  Rowan.  In  1820  he
began  practice  in  Louisville,  and  at  once  entered
on  a  successful  career  at  the  bar.  He  was  elected
to  the  lower  house  of  the  Kentucky  legislature  in
1827,  and  was  a  member  of  the  upper  house  from
1831  till  1840.  In  1840  he  was  president  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  present  constitution
of  the  state.  He  was  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  treas-
ury, under  the  administration  of  Franklin  Pierce
from  1853  till  1857.  In  1865  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator,  but  resigned  in  1868  on  account  of  declin-
ing health.  He  was  president  of  the  Louisville
and  Nashville  railroad  from  1860  till  1868.

GUTHRIE,  John  Julius,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Washington,  N.  C,  in  1814 ;  d.  at  sea,  near  Cape
Hatteras,  in  November,  1877.  He  became  a  mid-
shipman in  1834,  passed  midshipman  in  1838,  and
lieutenant  in  1842.  He  served  in  the  Mexican  war
and  in  the  attack  on  the  barrier  forts  in  Canton
river,  China,  in  November,  1856,  where  he  displayed
gallantry.  He  pulled  down  the  Chinese  flag,
which  he  presented  to  North  Carolina  as  a  trophy,
and  received  the  thanks  of  the  legislature.  In
1861,  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  he  resigned
his  commission  and  entered  the  Confederate  ser-
vice. He  was  on  active  duty  in  New  Orleans,  and
also  commanded  the  "  Advance,"  running  the
blockade  between  Wilmington  and  the  Bermudas.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  removed  to  Portsmouth,
Va.,  and  in  1865  was  the  first  officer  of  the  regular
service  who  had  joined  the  Confederates  to  be
pardoned  by  the  president.  His  disabilities  were
removed  by  a  unanimous  vote  of  congress.  He
was  appointed  in  1870  superintendent  of  the  life-
saving  stations  from  Cape  Henry  to  Cape  Hatteras,
and  was  drowned  while  endeavoring  to  succor  the
passengers  and  crew  of  the  U.  S.  steamship  "  Hu-
ron "  in  a  storm  off  Cape  Hatteras.

GUTHRIE,  Samuel,  chemist,  b.  in  Brimfield,
Mass.,  in  1782;  d.  in  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  19
Oct.,  1848.  He  studied  medicine,  and  was  among
the  earliest  laborers  in  practical  chemistry  in  the
United  States.  He  invented  and  first  manufac-
tured percussion  pills,  also  inventing  the  punch-
lock  for  exploding  them.  This  lock  took  the  place
of  the  old  flint-lock  in  fire-arms,  and  was  in  turn
superseded,  after  Dr.  Guthrie's  death,  by  the  per-
cussion-cap. In  the  course  of  his  experiments  he
sustained  lasting  injuries  and  nearly  lost  his  life
from  an  accidental  explosion.  He  also  invented
in  1830  a  process  for  the  rapid  conversion  of  po-
tato starch  into  molasses,  which  he  published  in
Silliman's  ''American  Journal  of  Science,"  to
which  he  contributed  occasional  papers  on  sci-
entific subjects.  Dr.  Guthrie  was  an  original  dis-
coverer of  chloroform,  independently  of  the  con-
temporaneous researches  of  Soubeiran,  Liebig,  and
Dumas — made  at  the  same  time,  but  unknown  to
Guthrie.  His  chloroform  was  distributed  and  his
process  repeated  and  verified  by  the  elder  Silli-
man  at  Yale  college  in  1831,  while  the  publication
of  Soubeiran  and  Liebig's  discoveries  were  made
in  January  and  March,  1832,  respectively.  Dr.
Guthrie's  process  was  by  distilling  together  alco-
hol and  bleaching-powder  and  afterward  purify-
ing the  distillate,  thus  obtaining  pure  chloroform.
The  exact  composition  of  this  substance,  termed  by
Guthrie  a  "spirituous  solution  of  chloric  ether,'
remained  unknown  till  1834,  when  Dumas  pub-
lished the  results  of  his  investigation,  and  named  it
chloroform.  A  committee  of  the  Medieo-chirurgi-
cal  society  of  Edinburgh  awarded  to  Dr.  Guthrie


16


GUTIERREZ


GUY


the  merit  of  having  first  published  an  account  of
its  therapeutic  effects  as  a  diffusible  stimulant  in
1832. — His  son,  Alfred,  mechanical  engineer,  b.  in
Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  1  April,  1805 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
17  Aug.,  1882,  removed  with  his  parents  to  Sack-
ett's  Harbor  in  1817,  where  he  studied  medicine
and  chemistry  with  his  father,  being  his  assistant
at  the  time  of  his  discovery  of  chloroform.  For
ten  years  he  practised  medicine,  but  an  aversion
to  that  profession  led  to  his  engaging  in  other
occupations.  In  1846  he  settled  in  Chicago,  where
he  advanced  the  idea  of  supplying  the  summit
level  of  the  Illinois  and  Michigan  canal  with  water
by  raising  it  from  Lake  Michigan  with  steam
power.  The  hydraulic  works  of  this  canal  in  Chi-
cago were  designed  by  him  and  constructed  under
his  supervision,  and  when  completed  they  were
capable  of  handling  a  larger  volume  of  water  than
any  other  similar  works  then  in  existence.  In
consequence  of  having  a  capacity  greater  than
was  required  by  the  canal,  they  were  operated  for
several  years  in  lifting  the  sewage  of  Chicago  to
the  canal,  which  then  passed  on  to  its  ultimate
dissipation  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Dr.  Guthrie's
great  work  was  his  conception  of  the  U.  S.  steam-
boat inspection  laws.  The  terrible  steamboat  dis-
asters of  1851  led  him,  at  his  own  expense,  to
visit  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  rivers,  where  he
studied  the  defective  building  and  the  reckless
management  that  resulted  in  serious  loss  of  life
and  property.  He  made  numerous  drawings  with
explanations,  which  were  presented  to  congress,
and  finally  drafted  the  bill  that  was  enacted  in
1852.  It  is  estimated  that  prior  to  1849,  45  per
cent,  of  these  river  steamboats  were  lost  by  dis-
aster, while  in  1882,  on  5,117  vessels,  the  loss  of
life  was  only  one  to  each  1,726,827  persons. — An-
other son,  Edwin,  physician,  b.  in  Sherburne,
N.  Y.,  11  Dec,  1806 ;  d.  at  the  Castle  of  Perote,
Mexico,  20  July,  1847,  studied  medicine  with  his
father,  but  subsequently  abandoned  that  profes-
sion and  settled  in  Iowa,  where  he  held  public
office.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  war  with
Mexico,  he  raised  a  company  of  Iowa  volunteers,
of  which  he  became  captain,  and  went  to  the
seat  of  war.  He  was  wounded  in  the  knee  dur-
ing the  engagement  at  Pass  La  Hoya,  and,  after
suffering  two  amputations,  died.  Guthrie  county,
Iowa,  is  named  in  his  honor.

GUTIERREZ,  Jos6  Nicolas  (goo-te-er'-reth),
Cuban  physician,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1800.  He
was  graduated  in  medicine  in  his  native  city  in
1826,  soon  attained  eminence  in  his  profession,  and
filled  the  chairs  of  anatomy,  pathology,  and  clinics
in  the  University  of  Havana.  He  founded  in  1840
the  "  Repertorio  Medico  Habanero,"  the  first  medi-
cal review  published  in  Cuba,  now  called  "  Cronica
Medico-Quirurgica  de  la  Habana."  Since  1853  it
has  borne  on  its  title-page  his  likeness  with  the
inscription,  "  Founder  of  the  medical  press  in
Cuba."  With  Dr.  Zambrana  he  founded,  in  1861,
the  Academy  of  sciences  of  Havana,  and  in  1874  a
museum  of  natural  history,  annexed  to  the  acade-
my. Dr.  Gutierrez  is  a  correspondent  and  member
of  the  Phrenological  society  of  Paris,  of  the  medi-
cal academies  of  Madrid,  Cadiz,  and  New  Orleans,
of  the  Lyceum  of  Rome,  and  other  scientific  socie-
ties. He  is  now  (1887)  engaged  in  a  project  to
erect  a  suitable  building  for  the  Academy  of  sci-
ences. His  published  works  include  "  Importancia
de  la  Quimica  en  la  Medicina  "  (1821) ;  "  Catecis-
mo  de  5ledicina  physiologica  "  (1826) ;  and  "  Lec-
ciones  de  Anatomia  "  (1854).

GUTIERREZ,  Santos,  South  American  soldier,
b.  in  Cocui,  Colombia,  24  Oct.,  1820  ;  d.  in  Bogota,


6  Feb.,  1872.  He  began  his  military  career  in  1840.
In  1851  he  fought  against  the  Conservatives,  and
became  an  active  member  of  the  Liberal  party.  In
1854  he  overthrew  the  dictatorship  of  Melo  by  gain-
ing the  battles  of  Pamplona,  Tierra-Azul,  and  Bo-
gota. From  1859  till  1863  he  was  the  recognized
leader  of  the  Liberals,  and  gained  the  battles  of
La  Concepcion,  Hormezaque,  Tunja,  Usaquen,  Bo-
gota, and  Santa  Barbara.  In  1839  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  From  1840  he  occupied  many  offices,
serving  the  state  as  judge,  representative,  senator,
governor  of  Boyaca,  secretary  of  state,  and  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  army.  He  was  president  of
the  republic  from  1868  till  1870,  and  then  retired
to  private  life,  although  his  successor  offered  him
the  place  of  minister  to  Europe.

GUTIERREZ  DE  ESTRADA,  Jos6  Maria,
Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  Campeche  in  1800;  d.
in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1867.  He  inherited  a
fortune,  held  office  under  Iturbide,  and  was  for
a  short  time  secretary  of  foreign  relations.  Dis-
heartened by  the  rapid  changes  of  government,
he  resolved  in  1835  to  abandon  his  country,
settled  first  in  Paris,  afterward  lived  at  several
courts,  and  sent  to  the  National  congress  a  pro-
posal for  the  establishment  of  a  monarchy  in
Mexico,  which  was  read  in  the  session  of  20  Aug.,
1840.  Through  his  second  wife,  the  Countess  von
Liitzow,  daughter  of  the  Austrian  minister  in
Rome,  he  gained  access  to  the  Austrian  court,  and
in  1864  the  Mexican  commission  arrived  in  Mira-
mare  to  offer  the  imperial  crown  to  Maximilian.
In  the  suite  of  that  prince  he  returned  to  his  native
land,  but  died  soon  afterward.

GUTIERREZ  DE  LARA,  Bernardo,  Mexican
patriot,  b.  in  Guanajuato  in  1778 ;  d.  in  San  An-
tonio Bejar,  15  March,  1814.  When  Hidalgo  and
Allende,  after  the  defeat  of  Calderon  in  1811,  were
on  their  way  to  the  United  States  to  reorganize
their  forces,  Gutierrez  met  them,  early  in  March,
to  offer  his  services.  He  was  appointed  colonel,
and  sent  as  commissioner  to  Washington,  where  he
arrived  in  August.  His  mission  was  not  recog-
nized, and  he  came  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  or-
ganized a  force  of  450  men.  He  marched  to  Texas
in  February,  1812,  captured  the  town  of  Nacog-
doches and  the  presidio  of  Trinidad,  and  a  few  days
afterward  the  bay  of  Espiritu  Santo,  where  he
found  important  stores  of  ammunition  and  pro-
visions. The  Spanish  governor  of  New  Leon
and  Texas  besieged  Gutierrez  in  Trinidad,  but  after
four  months  the  latter  made  a  sally  and  broke
through  the  enemy's  lines.  In  August  of  the  same
year  he  defeated  the  royalists  at  Rosillo,  capturing
all  their  artillery,  and  shortly  afterward  gained
other  victories,  making  him  the  master  of  New
Leon  and  Texas.  But  Alvarez  de  Toledo,  who  had
been  appointed  commissioner  to  Washington,  en-
tered there  into  secret  transactions  with  the  Span-
ish minister,  and  also  instigated  Gutierrez's  forces
to  demand  the  execution  of  the  governor  of  Leon
and  Texas.  When  their  commander,  in  a  moment
of  weakness,  submitted,  Alvarez  appeared  in  his
camp  with  accusations,  and  brought  about  a  mu-
tiny which  deposed .  Gutierrez  and  appointed
Alvarez  general-in-chief.  Gutierrez  was  patriot
enough  not  to  abandon  the  army  in  the  hour  of
need,  as  Arredondo  was  approaching  with  an  over-
whelming force  to  crush  the  patriots.  The  revolu-
tionary army,  disconcerted  by  the  change  of  lead-
ers, was  defeated,  and  Gutierrez  died  in  the  battle.

GUY,  Peter,  Canadian  publicist,  b.  in  Ville-
Marie,  Canada,  11  Dec,  1738;  d.  in  Montreal  in
January,  1812.  He  lost  his  father  at  the  age  of
eleven,  and  was  educated  in  the  College  of  Quebec


GUY


GUYOT


17


and  in  France.  On  his  return  to  Canada  in  1758
he  commanded  a  troop  at  the  battle  of  Carillon,
and  in  1759  at  that  of  Montmorency^  distinguish-
ing himself  in  both  engagements.  After  the  capitu-
lation of  Montreal  in  1760  he  went  to  France,  but
returned  to  Canada  in  1764.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  defence  of  Montreal  against  Gen.  Rich-
ard Montgomery,  and  signed  the  capitulation  of
that  city.  While  remaining  faithful  to  Great  Brit-
ain, he  became  dissatisfied  with  her  treatment  of
Canada,  and  in  1784  was  elected  president  of  the
committee  that  was  organized  in  Montreal  to  draw
up  and  present  to  the  government  a  list  of  griev-
ances. He  was  active  in  the  agitation  for  an  elect-
ive chamber,  and  continued  it  until  the  constitu-
tion of  1791  was  granted.  He  also  labored  for
higher  education,  and  succeeded  in  having  the  Col-
lege of  Saint  Raphael  established  at  Montreal.  He
also  endeavored  to  prevent  the  alienation  of  the

Eroperty  of  the  Jesuits,  but  without  effect.  He
ad  been  previously  made  a  judge,  and  held  this
office  till  his  death. — His  sOn,  Louis,  b.  in  Mon-
treal, 28  June,  1768 ;  d.  there  in  February,  1840,
studied  law,  and  received  his  commission  as  notary
in  1801.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  rose  to
the  grade  of  major  of  the  5th  battalion  of  Cana-
dian militia.  On  the  conclusion  of  the  war  he  was
appointed  colonel  and  requested  by  the  governor,
Sir  James  Kempt,  to  adopt  measures  for  reorganiz-
ing the  militia  of  Montreal.  To  this  task  he  de-
voted himself  so  energetically  up  to  1830  that  his
health  was  seriously  impaired.  In  1831,  he  was
named  a  member  of  the  council  by  William  IV.
This  nomination  was  received  with  great  favor  by
the  French  Canadians,  who  considered  Mr.  Guy  as
their  representative.  He  was  elected  to  nearly
every  public  office  within  their  gift.

GUY,  Seymour  Joseph,  artist,  b.  in  Green-
wich, England,  16  Jan.,  1824.  He  studied  under
Ambrosini  Jerome  in  London,  and  came  to  New
York  in  1854,  where  he  still  (1887)  resides.  He  be-
gan to  paint  portraits,  and  met  with  success,  but
afterward  turned  his  attention  to  genre  pictures.
He  was  elected  associate  of  the  National  academy
in  1861,  academician  in  1865,  and  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  American  society  of
painters  in  water-colors  in  1866.  His  subjects  are
chiefly  scenes  and  incidents  drawn  from  child-life.
He  exhibited  at  the  academy  "  The  Good  Sister "
(1868);  "After  the  Shower,"  "More  Free  than
Welcome,"  and  a  portrait  of  Charles  L.  Elliott
(1869);  "The  Little  Stranger"  and  "Plaving  on-
the  Jew's  Harp  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Street  Fire  "  (1871) ;
"Fixing  for  School"  (1874);  " The  Little  Orange-
Girl  "(1875);  "Cash  on  Hand"  (1877);  and  "See
Saw,  Margery  Daw  "  (1884).

GUY,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in
1689;  d.  near  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1751.  He  was*
appointed  in  1712,  by  the  Society  for  the  propaga-
tion of  the  gospel,  assistant  minister  in  St.  Philip's
church,  Charleston,  and  the  same  year  was  elected
minister  of  St.  Helena  parish,  Port  Royal  island.
Having  received  only  deacon's  orders,  he  went,  in
1713,  to  England,  where  he  was  advanced  to  the
priesthood,  and  was  sent  back  by  the  society  as
missionary  in  the  same  parish.  His  field  of  labor
was  very  large,  and  included  the  lands  occupied
by  the  Yamassee  Indians.  Mr.  Guy  was  unwearied
in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  but  when  the  Yamas-
see war  began,  in  1715,  he  narrowly  escaped  with
his  life  by  taking  refuge  on  board  an  English  ship
that  was  lying  in  the  river,  bound  to  Charleston.
He  was  next  sent  as  missionary  to  Narragansett,
R.  I.,  where  his  labors  were  very  effective.  After
the  lapse  of  two  years— from  17*17  till  1719— find-

VOL.  III. — 2


ing  that  his  health  was  seriously  affected  by  a
northern  climate,  he  was  transferred,  at  his  own
request,  to  South  Carolina.  He  became  rector  of
St.  Andrew's  church,  about  thirteen  miles  from
Charleston,  and  continued  there  until  his  death.
Mr.  Guy  was  highly  esteemed  by  the  society  under
whose  auspices  he  labored,  as  was  shown  by  their
appointing  him  in  1725  their  attorney  in  the  prov-
ince, to  receive  and  recover  all  bequests  and  dona-
tions made  to  them,  and  to  give  acquittances.

GUYOT,  Arnold,  geographer,  b.  in  Boudevil-
liers,  Neuchatel,  Switzerland,  28  Sept.,  1807;  d.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  8  Feb.,  1884.  He  was  educated  at
Chaux-de-Fonds,  and  then  at  the  college  of  Neu-
chatel, where  he  was  the  classmate  of  Leo  Lesque-
reux.  In  1825  he
went  to  Germany,
and  resided  in
Carlsruhe  with  the
parents  of  Alex-
ander Braun,  the
botanist,  where  he
met  Louis  Agas-
siz.  From  Carls-
ruhe he  went  to
Stuttgart,  and
there  studied  at
the  gymnasium,
returning  to  Neu-
chatel in  1827.  He
then  determined
to  become  a  min-
ister, and  in  1829
started  for  Berlin
to  attend  lectures
in  the  university.
While  pursuing  his  studies  he  also  attended  lec-
tures on  philosophy  and  natural  science.  His  lei-
sure was  spent  in  collecting  the  shells  and  plants
of  the  country,  and  he  was  introduced  by  Hum-
boldt to  the  Berlin  botanical  garden,  where  op-
portunities for  examining  the  flora  of  the  tropics
was  afforded  him.  In  1835  he  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of  Berlin,  and  pub-
lished a  thesis  on  "  The  Natural  Classification  of
Lakes."  He  was  then  a  private  tutor  in  Paris  for
four  years,  and  in  the  summer  of  1838,  at  Agassiz's
request,  visited  the  Swiss  glaciers,  and  communir
cated  the  results  of  his  six  weeks'  investigation  to
the  Geological  society  of  France.  The  laminated
structure  of  ice  in  the  glaciers  was  originally
pointed  out  by  him  in  this  paper,  and  his  discovery
was  subsequently  confirmed  by  Agassiz,  Forbes,
and  others.  In  1839  he  returned  to  Neuchatel,  and
became  the  colleague  of  Agassiz,  as  professor  of
history  and  physical  geography  in  the  college  there.
The  academy  in  Neuchatel  was  suspended  by  the
grand  revolutionary  council  of  Geneva  in  1848,  and,
being  urged  by  Agassiz,  Guyot  came  to  this  coun-
try' in  that  year,  and  settled  in  Cambridge,  where
he  was  soon  afterward  invited  to  deliver  a  course
of  lectures  at  the  Lowell  institute.  These,  trans-
lated by  Prof.  Cornelius  C.  Felton.  were  published
under  the  title  of  "  Earth  and  Man  "  (Boston,  1853),
and  gained  for  him  a  wide  reputation.  The  Massa-
chusetts board  of  education  retained  his  services  as
lecturer  on  geography  and  methods  of  instruction
to  the  normal  schools  and  teachers'  institutes.  He
was  occupied  with  this  work  until  his  appointment,
in  1854,  to  the  chair  of  physical  geography  and
geology  at  Princeton,  which  he  retained  until  his
death,  being  for  some  time  senior  professor.  He
was  also  for  several  years  lecturer  on  physical
geography  in  the  State  normal  school  in  Trenton,
and  from  1861  till  1866  lecturer  in  the  Prince-


geogr
N.J.,


18


GUZMAN


guzmAn


ton  theological  seminary  on  the  connection  of  re-
vealed religion  and  physical  and  ethnological  sci-
ence, also  giving  courses  in  the  Union  theological
seminary  in  New  York  and  in  Columbia  college.
At  the  Smithsonian  institution  he  delivered  five
lectures  in  1853  on  the  "  Harmonies  of  Nature  and
History,"  and  in  1862  six  lectures  on  "  The  Unity
of  Plan  in  the  System  of  Life."  He  founded  the
museum  in  Princeton,  which  has  since  become  one
of  the  best  of  its  kind  in  the  United  States.  Many
of  its  specimens  are  from  his  own  collections,  or  were
gathered  by  his  students  on  the  exploring  expedi-
tions sent  out  to  the  Rocky  mountains  from  Prince-
ton. His  scientific  work  in  the  United  States  in-
cluded the  perfection  of  plans  for  a  national  system
of  meteorological  observations.  Most  of  these  were
conducted  under  the  auspices  of  the  Smithsonian
institution,  where  Joseph  Henry  early  gained  for
him  the  virtual  management  of  the  meteorologi-
cal department.  In  connection  with  this  work  he
published  "  Meteorological  and  Physical  Tables "
(Washington,  1852 ;  revised  ed.,  1884).  The  selec-
tion and  establishment  of  numerous  meteorological
stations  in  New  York  and  Massachusetts  were  con-
fided to  him,  and  he  also  made  a  study  of  the  alti-
tudes of  the  Appalachian  chain.  This  vacation
work  extended  over  thirty-two  years,  and  was
completed  in  1881.  Prof.  Guyot  was  a  member  of
many  scientific  societies,  at  home  and  abroad.  He
was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Union  in  1873.  Prof.  Guyot
was  a  delegate,  in  1861,  from  the  Presbyterian
church  in  the  United  States  to  the  convention  of
the  Evangelical  alliance  held  in  Geneva,  and  in
1873  he  contributed  a  valuable  paper  on  "  Cosmog-
ony and  the  Bible "  to  the  meeting  held  in  New
York.  Between  1866  and  1875  he  prepared  a  series
of  geographies  and  a  series  of  wall-maps,  for  which
he  received  a  medal  of  progress  at  the  Vienna  ex-
hibition in  1873.  He  was  associated  with  Fred-
erick A.  P.  Barnard  in  the  editorship  of  "John-
son's New  Universal  Cyclopaedia"  from  1874  till
1877,  and  wrote  many  of  the  articles  on  physical
geography  and  similar  topics.  His  papers  were
usually  read  at  the  meetings  of  the  American  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science  or  the  Na-
tional academy  of  sciences,  and  then  published  in
the  "American  Journal  of  Science."  He  was  the
author  of  valuable  biographical  memoirs  of  Carl
Ritter  (1860) ;  James  H.  Coffin  (1875) ;  and  Louis
Agassiz  (1883) ;  also  "  A  Treatise  on  Phvsical  Ge-
ography "  (New  York,  1873) ;  and  "  Creation,  or  the
Biblical  Cosmogony  in  the  Light  of  Modern  Sci-
ence "  (1884).  See  the  memoir  by  James  A.  Dana
in  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of  the  National  Acad-
emy of  Sciences"  (Washington,  1886).

GUZMAN,  A  1,-u stin,  Guatemalan  soldier,  b.
in  Quezaltenango  in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th
century;  d.  in  Guatemala,  12  Oct.,  1849.  After
the  independence  of  Central  America  was  estab-
lished, Guzman  joined  the  Federalists,  and  for  his
capture  of  the  fortress  of  Omoa  was  promoted  gen-
eral in  1829.  In  February.  1840.  he  was  taken
prisoner,  carried  to  Guatemala,  and  thrown  into  a
dungeon.  On  18  March,  Gen.  Morazan  captured
the  city  and  liberated  him.  but  the  next  day  was
driven  out.  Guzman  remained  in  hiding  in  Gua-
temala, emigrating  afterward  to  Salvador.  In
August,  1848,  Carrera's  government  fell,  and  Guz-
man returned ;  but  when  Carrera  regained  power,
9  Aug.,  1849,  Guzman  was  again  persecuted.  The
Liberal  party  chose  him  for  their  military  leader,
and  he  made  a  daring  attempt  on  the  city  of  Gua-
temala in  the  night  of  12  Oct.,  and  had  captured


the  main  square,  when  a  cannon-ball  killed  him,
and  his  followers  fled.

GUZMAN,  Joaquin  Eufrasio,  Central  Ameri-
can statesman,  b.  in  Cartago,  Costa  Rica,  in  1801 ;
d.  in  San  Miguel,  Salvador,  about  1875.  In  the
dissensions  between  the  Federal  and  Centralist  par-
ties, Guzman  joined  the  former,  and  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel. He  was  elected  vice-president  of
Salvador  in  1844.  with  Gen.  Malespin  as  president,
and  when,  in  the  same  year,  war  was  declared  with
Guatemala,  Guzman  became  acting  president,  while
Malespin  commanded  the  army  in  person.  After-
ward, while  Malespin  was  making  war  on  Nicara-
gua, Guzman  pronounced  against  him,  2  Feb.,
1845,  and  was  joined  by  the  greater  part  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  capital,  and  a  portion  of  Males-
pin's  little  army.  Malespin  was  deposed,  and  Guz-
man assumed  the  executive  office  till  the  end  of
the  presidential  term.  Malespin,  with  a  force  from
Honduras,  invaded  the  state,  but  was  defeated  and
assassinated.  Guzman  was  rewarded  by  the  assem-
bly with  the  rank  of  general  of  division,  but  fa-
vored a  free  election,  and  in  1848  delivered  the
office  to  his  successor,  Aguilar.  He  was  several
times  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly,  the  coun-
cil of  state,  and  the  prefecture  of  the  department
where  he  ^resided.

GUZMAN,  Nufio  Beltran  de,  Spanish  con-
queror, b.  in  Guadalajara,  New  Castile,  in  the
latter  part  of  the  15th  century  ;  d.  in  Torrejon  de
Velasco,  Spain,  in  1544.  He  was  one  of  the  first
judges  of  the  island  of  Hispaniola,  when  he  was
suddenly  appointed  governor  of  the  province  of
Panuco,  Mexico.  He  took  charge  of  his  govern-
ment on  20  May,  1528,  and,  not  finding  there  the
riches  that  he  expected,  he  began  to  barter  his  In-
dian subjects  for  horses  and  cattle  from  Hispani-
ola. When  Cortes  retired  to  Texcoco,  Guzman
was  nominated  president  of  the  audiencia,  and
took  charge  of  the  government  of  Mexico  in  De-
cember, 1528.  When  Bishop  Zumarraga  opposed
his  cruelties,  he  resolved  to  set  out.  on  a  conquer-
ing expedition  to  the  west.  Earlv  in  November,
1529,  he  left  Mexico  with  500  Spaniards  and  10,000
Indian  auxiliaries.  He  conquered  the  state  of
Jalisco,  which  he  called  Nueva  Galicia,  founded
the  city  of  Guadalajara  on  3  Dec,  1530,  and  after-
ward the  towns  of  Lagos  and  Tepic,  and  sent  an
expedition  under  Cristobal  de  Onate  to  explore  the
northwestern  coast,  which  penetrated  to  Culiacan
and  Magdalena  in  Sonora.  When  the  new  audien-
cia under  Fuenleal  arrived  in  1531,  Guzman  was
indicted  and  ordered  to  appear  in  Mexico,  but  dis-
obeyed, and  captured  Luis  de  Castilla,  who  had
been  sent  with  a  force  to  subdue  him.  By  royal
decree  of  May,  1533,  he  was  ordered  to  submit  to
the  captain-general  of  Mexico,  and,  seeing  him-
self abandoned  by  the  greater  part  of  his  follow-
ers, he  resolved  to  go  to  Spain.  On  his  arrival  in
Mexico,  he  was  well  received  by  the  new  viceroy,
Mendoza ;  but  a  few  days  afterward  Perez  de  la
Torre,  who  had  been  commissioned  by  a  royal  de-
cree to  judge  Guzman's  administration,  arrived
and  immediately  imprisoned  the  latter.  Guzman
was  kept  in  a  dungeon  over  a  year,  sent  to  Spain
in  1538,  and  confined  in  Torrejon  de  la  Vega,  where
he  died  in  poverty.  He  is  said  to  have  written  a
description  of  his  conquest,  under  the  title  of  "  No-
ticia  y  Relacion  de  la  Conquista  de  Michoaean  y
Jalisco,"  the  manuscript  of  which  is  mentioned  by
Lopez  de  Haro  and  Leon  Pinelo,  and  was  probably
used  by  Mota  Padilla  in  his  "  Historia  de  la  Con-
quista de  rla  Nueva  Galicia."

GUZMAN,  Rui Diaz de,  Spanish-American
historian,  b.  in Paraguay  in  1544. The  date  and


guzmAn-blanco


GWIN


19


place  of  his  death  are  unknown.  His  father  em-
barked for  America  in  1540  in  the  suite  of  Cabeza
de  Vaca.  The  son  served  at  an  early  age  against
the  Indians,  under  the  command  of  his  father ;
and,  although  in  his  writings  he  deplores  the  ex-
termination of  the  natives  and  denounces  the  san-
guinary policy  of  the  conquerors,  he  showed  little
mercy  toward  them  in  the  numerous  conflicts  in
which  he  was  engaged.  The  greater  part  of  his
life  was  passed  in  the  province  of  Guayra,  of
which  he  became  commander:  but  in  this  office
he  refused  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  the
governor  of  Paraguay,  and  was  obliged  to  justify
himself  before  the  audience  of  Charcas.  Aided
by  his  notes  and  information  gained  from  the
conquerors,  he  undertook  to  relate  the  discovery
and  colonization  of  the  Argentine  provinces,  un-
der the  title  "  Historia  Argentina  del  descubri-
miento  poblacion  y  conquista  de  las  provincias  del
Rio  de  la  Plata."  The  dedication  to  the  Duke  of
Medina  bears  date  25  July,  1612.  In  spite  of  its
great  merit,  Guzman's  work  was  not  issued  until
De  Angelis  undertook  the  publication  of  the  "  Co-
leccion  de  obras  y  documentos  relativos  a  la  histo-
ria antigua  y  moderna  de  las  provincias  del  Rio  de
la  Plata,  etc."  (6  vols.,  Buenos  Ayres,  1836).  It
appears  in  the  beginning  of  the  first  volume,  ac-
companied by  biographical  researches  of  great  in-
terest. The  work  of  Guzman  has  been  copied  by
most  historians  that  have  written  on  the  Argentine
provinces.^  The  narrative  closes  with  1575.

GUZMAN-BLANCO,  Antonio,  president  of
Venezuela,  b.  in  Caracas  in  1830.  His  father.  An-
tonio, was  a  Venezuelan  journalist  and  politician.
The  son  was  banished  by  the  government  of  Gen.
Castro,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Juan  C.  Falcon  in
his  invasion  of  Venezuela,  becoming  his  general
secretary.  After  the  final  defeat  of  Falcon  at  Co-
ple  in  September,  1860,  Guzman  accompanied  his
chief  in  his  flight,  and  was  sent  to  the  West  Indies
to  solicit  assistance.  Toward  the  end  of  1861  he
landed  again  with  Falcon  on  the  coast  of  Coro,  and
after  numerous  engagements  signed  on  22  May,
1863,  the  treaty  of  Coche,  by  which  arms  were  laid
down,  and  a  general  assembly  called  at  Victoria.
which  elected  Falcon  president  and  Guzraan-Blanco
vice-president.  The  latter  was  at  the  same  time
secretary  of  the  treasury,  and  went  to  London  to

negotiate  a  loan.
On  his  return  he
was  for  a  short
time  in  charge
of  the  executive,
and  afterward
was  elected  presi-
dent of  congress.
After  the  over-
throw of  Falcon
in  1868,  Guzman
left  the  country,
but  headed  a  rev-
olution in  1869,
and  in  1870  be-
came provisional
president  with  ex-
traordinary pow-
ers, ruling  the
country  for  years
as  a  dictator.  His
successor,  Gen.  Alcantara,  died  in  December,  1878,
and  there  were  several  revolutionary  uprisings,
till  Guzman  assumed  the  government  again.  In
the  elections  of  1883  Gen.  Joaquin  Crespo,  one  of
his  friends,  was  declared  president,  and  Guzman-
Bianco  became  ambassador  to  France,  living  with


^*zUdyr->-*  corL^S~&e****i>0


great  ostentation  in  Paris.  In  1886  he  again  as-
sumed the  presidency.

GWIN,  William,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Columbus,
Bartholomew  co.,  Ind.,  5  Dec,  1832;  i.  on  the
Yazoo  river.  Miss.,  3  Jan.,  1863.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  7  April,  1847,  and  was  pro-
moted until  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  16
Sept.,  1855,  and  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,
1862.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
assigned  to  the  "Cambridge,"  doing  blockading
duty  on  the  Atlantic  coast.  He  was  ordered  in
October,  1861,  to  the  brig  "Commodore  Perry."
and  in  January,  1862,  to  the  command  of  the  gun-
boat "  Tyler,"  of  the  western  flotilla,  in  which  he
participated  in  the  attacks  on  Fort  Henry  and
Fort  Donelson.  He  also  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Shiloh,  and  distinguished  himself  in  the  expedi-
tion up  the  Yazoo  river  in  company  with  the
"  Carondelet,"  to  meet  the  Confederate  ram  "  Ar-
kansas." After  the  accidental  explosion  on  the
"  Mound  City "  at  St.  Charles,  on  White  river,  by
which  her  commander,  Capt.  Kelly,  was  badly
scalded,  Lieut.-Com.  Gwin  took  charge  of  the
vessel,  which  he  retained  until  he  was  transferred
to  the  "  Benton,"  the  largest  and  most  powerful  of
the  river  fleet.  While  in  command  of  the  latter
vessel,  and  during  the  attack  on  Haines's  Bluff,  on
the  Yazoo  river,  he  was  mortally  wounded.

GWIN,  William  McKendree,  senator,  b.  in
Sumner  countv,  Tenn.,  9  Oct.,  1805;  d.  in  New
York  city,  3  Sept.,  1885.  His  father,  the  Rev.
James  Gwin,  was  a  pioneer  Methodist  minister,
and  also  served
as  a  soldier
on  the  frontier
under  Gen.  An-
drew Jackson.
After  receiving
a  classical  edu-
cation, the  son
studied  law  in
Gallatin,  Tenn.,
but  abandoned  it
for  medicine.and
took  his  medical
degree  in  1828
at  Transylvania
university.  He
then  removed  to
Clinton,  Miss.,
and  obtained  an  •/->_  >£/ ^

extensive  prac-  t^f/^7"  ^S7£  -ecX-^^zW
tice,  but  in  1833

left  the  profession,  and  was  appointed  by  President
Jackson  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  district  of  Missis-
sippi. In  1840  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  and  became  an  adherent  of  John  C.
Calhoun.  Declining  a  renomination  for  congress
on  account  of  financial  embarrassment,  he  was  ap-
pointed, on  the  accession  of  James  K.  Polk  to  the
presidency,  to  superintend  the  building  of  the  new
custom-house  at  New  Orleans.  On  the  election
of  Gen.  Taylor  he  resigned  and  set  out  for  Cali-
fornia, where  he  arrived  4  June,  1849.  His  atten-
tion had  first  been  called  to  that  country  by  Mr.
Calhoun,  who,  when  secretary  of  state,  had  laid  his
finger  on  the  map  where  San  Francisco  now  stands,
saying,  "  There,  when  this  bay  comes  into  our  pos-
session, will  spring  up  the  great  rival  of  New  York."
Dr.  Gwin  took  an  active  part  in  favor  of  the  for-
mation of  a  state  government,  and  was  elected  to
the  convention  that  was  held  in  Monterey  in  Sep-
tember to  frame  a  constitution.  In  the  ensuing
December  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  the  long
term,  with  Gen.  Fremont  as  his  colleague. His


20


GWINNETT


GZOWSKIE


labors  in  the  senate  were  incessant,  and  his  success
was  remarkable.  He  maintained  amicable  relations
with  all  parties,  and  his  hospitable  mansion  became
a  neutral  ground,  where  the  leaders  of  rival  factions
met  on  social  terms.  On  his  return  to  California,
in  1851,  the  legislature  tendered  him  the  thanks  of
the  state  for  his  services.  In  the  following  session
he  was  a  member  of  the  finance  committee  and
chairman  of  that  on  naval  affairs.  He  secured  the
establishment  of  a  mint  in  California,  the  survey
of  the  Pacific  coast,  a  navy-yard  and  station,  with
large  appropriations,  and  carried  through  the  sen-
ate a  bill  providing  for  a  line  of  steamers  between
San  Francisco,  China,  and  Japan,  by  way  of  the
Sandwich  islands.  He  was  re-elected,  and  served
till  3  March,  1861.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  arrested  on  accusation  of  disloyalty  and
imprisoned  till  1863,  when  he  went  to  Paris,  where
he  became  interested  in  a  scheme  to  colonize  So-
nora  with  southerners.  Dr.  Gwin  was  invited  to
meet  the  emperor  in  private  audiences,  and  in-
terested him  in  the  project.  It  is  said  that,  on  the
invitation  of  the  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  he
drew  up  a  plan  for  the  colony,  which  was  approved
by  Napoleon,  and  then  submitted  to  Maximilian.
The  latter,  who  was  at  that  time  in  Paris,  requested
Dr.  Gwin's  attendance  at  the  Tuileries,  and,  after
full  inquiry,  signified  his  approbation.  Within  two
weeks  after  the  departure  of  Maximilian  for  Mexi-
co, Dr.  Gwin  also  left,  for  that  country,  bearing  an
autograph  letter  from  the  emperor  to  Marshal  Ba-
zaine.  The  latter  gave  no  encouragement  to  the
colonization  plan,  nor  did  Dr.  Gwin  succeed  in  se-
curing from  Maximilian  any  satisfactory  assurances
of  support.  He  returned  to  France  in  January,
1865,  and  in  an  audience  with  the  emperor  frankly
exposed  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Mexico.  Napo-
leon urged  his  immediate  return  to  Mexico,  with  a
peremptory  order  to  Marshal  Bazaine  to  supply  the
troops  necessary  to  the  full  accomplishment  of  his
scheme.  This  advice  was  taken,  but  Dr.  Gwin  still
met  with  no  success,  and,  demanding  an  escort  to
take  him  out  of  the  country,  which  was  promptly
furnished,  returned  to  his  home  in  California.  He
continued  to  take  an  active  part  in  politics,  and
engaged  with  energy  in  the  canvass  for  the  presi-
dency in  1876  in  the  interest  of  Samuel  J.  Tilden.
Dr.  Gwin's  personal  appearance  was  impressive;
he  was  tall,  finely  proportioned,  with  a  massive
head,  and  a  face  full  of  animation.

GWINNETT,  Button,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in  England  about  1732 ;
d.  in  Georgia,  27  May,  1777.  He  received  a  good
education,  and  after  engaging  in  mercantile  pur-
suits for  a  time  in  Bristol,  he  emigrated  to  Charles-
ton, S.  C.  and  then  removed  to  Savannah,  Ga.,  where
in  1765  he  was  established  as  a  general  trader.  In
1770  he  purchased  a  plantation  on  St.  Catherine's
island,  Ga.,  and  gave  his  attention  to  agriculture.
Previous  to  1775  Mr.  Gwinnett  had  not  taken  an
active  part  in  politics,  but  the  subsequent  enthusi-
asm with  which  he  maintained  the  colonial  rights
early  attracted  the  attention  of  his  fellow-citizens.
At  the  meeting  of  the  provincial  assembly,  held  fn
Savannah,  20  Jan.,  1776,  he  was  appointed  a  repre-
sentative in  congress,  signed  the  Declaration  of
Independence  on  4  July,  and  in  October,  1776,  was
re-elected  for  the  ensuing  year.  In  February,
1777,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  state  gov-
ernment, and  is  said  to  have  furnished  the  basis  of
the  constitution  that  was  afterward  adopted.  Af-
ter the  death  of  Mr.  Bullock,  president  of  the  pro-
vincial council,  Mr.  Gwinnett  was  appointed  to
the  vacant  office,  4  March,  1777,  and  in  May.  1777,
was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  governor  of  the


7bufurrL~ Ktvcrisii


*>


state.  During  the  Revolution,  Mr.  Gwinnett's
property  was  totally  destroyed  by  the  British.
At  the  time  that  he
represented  Geor-
gia in  congress  he
became  a  candi-
date for  the  com-
mission of  briga-
dier-general of  the
continental  bri-
gade to  be  levied  in
Georgia,  in  opposi-
tion to  Gen.  Lach-
lan  Mcintosh,  but
was  unsuccessful.
This  so  embittered
his  feelings  against
his  successful  op-
ponent that  he
seems  to  have  re-
garded him  as  an
enemy  ever  afterward.  Various  circumstances  in-
tensified his  feeling  of  animosity,  until  finally  Mr.
Gwinnett  challenged  Gen.  Mcintosh  to  a  duel,
which  was  fought  on  15  May,  1777.  Both  contest-
ants were  wounded,  the  former  so  seriously  as  to
result  in  his  death.  In  1886  a  granite  monument
in  commemoration  of  the  memory  of  Gwinnett,
Lyman  Hall,  and  George  Walton,  the  Georgia
signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  was
placed  in  front  of  the  city  hall,  Augusta,  Ga.

GW  YNNE,  John  Wellington,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Castle  Knock,  County  Dublin,  Ireland,  30
March,  1814.  He  was  educated  at  Trinity  college,
Dublin,  and  came  to  Canada  in  1832.  He  studied
law  in  Kingston,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Upper  Canada  in  1837.  From  1845  till  1852  he
devoted  himself  to  the  formation  and  maintenance
of  a  company  for  the  construction,  as  part  of  a
scheme  of  colonization,  of  a  railway  from  Toronto
to  Lake  Huron.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  can-
didate for  the  legislative  assembly  of  Canada  in
1847,  and  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  of  Ontario  in  November,  1868.  He
declined  appointment  as  one  of  the  permanent
judges  of  the  court  of  appeal  of  Ontario  in  May,
1874,  and  was  appointed  a  justice  of  the  supreme
court  in  January,  1879.  He  was  a  member  of  the
law-reform  commission  in  1871,  and  of  the  senate
of  the  University  of  Toronto  in  1873.

GZOWSKIE,  Casiinir  Stanislaus  (jov-ske),
Canadian  engineer,  b.  in  St.  Petersburg,  Russia,  in
March,  1813.  He  is  a  son  of  a  Polish  noble,  an  officer
of  the  Imperial  guard.  The  son  entered  the  military
college  in  Kremenetz,  in  the  province  of  Volhynia,
when  nine  years  of  age,  and  was  graduated  there
in  1830.  In  consequence  of  his  connection  with
the  Polish  insurrection  of  1830-2  he  was  exiled  to
the  United  States,  arriving  there  in  the  latter  year.
He  supported  himself  as  a  teacher  of  French  and
German  in  New  York  for  a  time,  and  subsequently
removed  to  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  where  he  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  afterward  to  the  bar  of  Pennsyl-
vania. In  1841  he  arrived  in  Toronto  and  became
connected  with  the  department  of  public  works  of
Upper  Canada.  He  has  been  identified  with  all
the  important  engineering  projects  of  Canada  in
railway  construction,  in  river  and  railway  bridge
building,  and  in  similar  enterprises.  The  Inter-
national bridge  spanning  the  Niagara  river,  which
is  regarded  as  a  fine  specimen  of  engineering  skill,
was  constructed  by  Col.  Gzowskie  and  Sir  David
L.  Macpherson.  He  has  been  president  of  the  Do-
minion rifle  association,  and  in  1879  was  appointed
aide-de-camp  to  the  queen.


HABBERTON


HABERSHAM


21


H


HABBERTON,  John,  author,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  24  Feb.,  1842.  He  lived  in  Illinois  from  his
eighth  till  his  seventeenth  year,  and  was  educated
in  the  common  school.  He  then  went  to  New
York,  learned  to  set  type  in  the  establishment  of
Harper  and  Brothers,  and  subsequently  entered
their  counting-room.  He  enlisted  in  the  army  as
a  private  in  1862,  rose  to  the  rank  of  1st  lieutenant,
and  served  through  the  war.  He  re-entered  the
employ  of  the  Harpers  in  1865,  and  remained  there
till  1872,  when  he  went  into  business  for  himself,
and  in  six  months  was  bankrupt.  He  now  became
a  contributor  to  periodicals,  and  was  literarv  editor
of  the  "Christian  Union"  from  1874  till  1877,
since  which  time  he  has  been  on  the  editorial  staff
of  the  New  York  "  Herald."  His  first  literary
work  was  a  series  of  sketches  of  western  life.  His
"Helen's  Babies"  (which  one  publishing- house  re-
jected because  it  was  too  small  for  a  book,  another
because  it  was  too  childish  for  adults  to  read,  and
a  third  on  the  ground  that  its  moral  tendency
would  be  bad)  was  published  in  Boston  in  1876,
and  has  sold  to  the  extent  of  more  than  250,000
copies  in  the  United  States.  Eleven  different
English  editions  of  it  have  appeared,  besides  sev-
eral in  the  British  colonies,  and  it  has  been  trans-
lated into  French,  German,  and  Italian.  "This
book."  says  the  author,  "  grew  out  of  an  attempt
to  keep  for  a  single  day  a  record  of  the  doings  of
a  brace  of  boys  of  whom  the  author  is  half  owner."
Mr.  Habberton's  other  publications  are  "  The  Bar-
ton Experiment "  (New  York,  1877) ;  "  The  Jericho
Road"  (Chicago,  1877);  "The  Scripture  Club  of
Valley  Rest "  (New  York,  1877) ;  "  Other  People's
Children"  (1877);  "Some  Folks,"  a  collection  of
short  stories  (1877) ;  "  The  Crew  of  the  Sam  Wel-
ler"  (1878);  "Canoeing  in  Kanuckia,"  in  connec-
tion with  Charles  L.  Norton  (1878) ;  "  The  Worst
Bov  in  Town"  (1880);  "Just  One  Dav"  (1880);
"Who  was  Paul  Grayson?"  (1881);  "The  Bow-
sham  Puzzle  "  (1883) :  a  humorous  "  Life  of  Wash-
ington "  (1883) :  "  One  Tramp  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Brue-
ton's  Bayou  "  (1886).  He  has  edited  selected  essays
from  the  "  Spectator,"  "  Tatler,"  "  Guardian,"  and
"  Freeholder^'  (3  vols.,  1876-'8).  His  first  drama,
"  Deacon  Crankett,"  was  produced  in  1880.

HABERSHAM,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Bev-
erly, Yorkshire,  England,  in  1712  ;  d.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  28  Aug.,  1775.  Little  is  known
of  his  parentage,  except  that  it  was  noble.  When
he  was  asked  by  his  sons  the  meaning  of  the  title
"  Honorable  "  prefixed  to  his  name  on  old  letters,
he  replied  that  such  things  were  worse  than  useless
in  a  colony,  as  they  tended  to  promote  pride  and
unchristian  feeling.  In  company  with  his  friend,
George  Whitefield,  the  evangelist,  he  arrived  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  on  7  May,  1738,  and  opened  a  school
for  orphans  and  destitute  children  at  Bethesda,
nine  miles  from  that  town,  but  in  1744  became  a
merchant.  In  1750  he  was  appointed  with  Picker-
ing Robinson  a  commissioner  to  advance  the  cul-
ture of  silk  in  the  colony,  and  in  1754  became  sec-
retary of  the  province  and  one  of  the  councillors.
In  1767  he  was  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  upper
house  of  assembly,  and  in  1769-'72  he  officiated  as

fovernor  during  the  absence  of  Sir  James  Wright,
[e  raised  at  Bethesda  the  first  cotton  in  the  state,
and  sent  the  first  few  bales  that  were  exported
thence  to  England. — His  son,  Joseph,  statesman,
b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  28  July,  1751 ;  d.  there,  17
Nov.,  1815,  was  one  of  the  members  of  the  first


commission  appointed  by  the  friends  of  liberty
in  Georgia  in  July,  1774,  and  one  of  those  who
on  11  June,  1775,  on  receiving  intelligence  of
the  skirmish  at  Lexington,  seized  the  powder  in
the  royal  magazine  in  Savannah  for  the  use  of
the  patriots.  In  June  of  that  year  he  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  council  of  safety,  and  in
July  commanded  a  party  that  captured  a  govern-
ment ship  with  munitions  of  war,  including  15,000
pounds  of  powder.  On  18  Jan.,  1776,  while  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly,  he  raised  a  body  of  volun-
teers, who  took  Gov.
Wright  prisoner,  and
confined  him  to  his
house  under  a  guard.
Hewasappointed  ma-
jor of  the  1st  Georgia
battalion,  4  Feb.,
1776,  and  defended
Savannah  from  a
British  naval  attack
early  in  March.  Af-
ter Savannah  was
taken  in  the  winter
of  1778,  he  removed
his  family  to  Vir-
ginia, but  on  the
landing  of  D'Estaing
participated  in  the
disastrous  attack  on
Savannah  in  1779.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  held  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel. He  was  a  member  of  the  state  as-
sembly and  its  speaker  in  1785  and  1790,  and  was
postmaster-general  of  the  United  States  from  25
Feb.,  1795,  to  28  Nov.,  1801.  He  was  president  of
the  branch  of  the  U.  S.  bank  at  Savannah  from
1802  until  the  expiration  of  its  charter. — Another
son,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1754:
d.  near  Savannah,  19  Nov.,  1799,  received  a  good
English  education  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pur-
suits. He  took  an  active  part  in  the  pre-Revolu-
tionary  movements,  and  was  afterward  major  of
the  1st  Georgia  Continental  regiment.  He  was
greatly  trusted  by  the  Indians,  and  after  the  Revo-
lution Washington  appointed  him  Indian  agent.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Continental  congress
from  Georgia  in  1785-'6,  and  was  collector  of  cus-
toms at  Savannah  in  1789-'99. — John's  son,  Joseph
Clay,  physician,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  18  Nov.,
1790 ;  d.  there,  2  Nov.,  1855.  was  educated  at  Prince-
ton and  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where
he  was  graduated  in  medicine  in  1814.  He  began
practice  in  Savannah  in  1815,  continuing  there  till
his  death.  He  was  health  officer  of  Savannah,
president  of  the  medical  society  of  Georgia,  and
was  noted  for  his  benevolence  and  for  his  love  of
science. — James's  grandson,  Richard  Wylly,con-
gressman,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1786 ;  d.  in  Clarkes-
ville,  Ga.,  2  Dec,  1842,  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1805,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  Savannah,  where  he  attained  note
in  his  profession.  In  1835,  becoming  interested  in
the  gold-mines  of  that  region,  he  removed  to
Clarkesville,  Habersham  co.  He  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative from  Georgia  in  congress  and  served
from  1839  till  his  death.  He  was  much  praised  for
his  resignation  of  the  office  of  U.  S.  district  attor-
ney in  1825,  when  a  collision  between  the  adminis-
tration of  John  Quincy  Adams  and  Gov.  George  M.
Troup  was  imminent. Mr.  Habersham  induced  the


22


HACKETT


HACKETT


Georgia  delegation  to  vote  for  the  appropriation
which,  carried  by  a  majority  of  three,  enabled
Morse  to  construct  his  first  telegraph-line,  from
Washington  to  Baltimore.  He  was  the  author  of
the  minority  report  on  the  tariff  in  1842. — His  son,
Alexander  Wylly,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  24  March,  1826;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  26
March,  1883,  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in
1841,  became  passed  midshipman  in  1847,  master,
14  Sept.,  1855,  and  lieutenant  on  the  following  day.
On  30  May,  1860,  he  resigned  from  the  service  and
became  a  merchant  in  Japan,  being  the  first  to  in-
troduce Japanese  tea  into  this  country.  He  re-
turned at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  was
for  six  months  a  prisoner  in  Fort  McHenry.  After
the  war  he  engaged  in  business  in  Baltimore,  which
he  pursued  until  his  death.  Besides  numerous  arti-
cles in  periodicals  he  published  "  My  Last  Cruise,"
an  account  of  the  U.  S.  North  Pacific  exploring
expedition  (2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1857).

HACKETT,  Horatio  Balch,  biblical  scholar,
b.  in  Salisbury,  Mass.,  27  Dec,  1808 ;  d.  in  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  2  Nov.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst in  1830,  studied  theology  at  Andover  seminary
until  1834,  and  afterward  at  Halle  and  Berlin,  in
Germany.  He  became  a  tiitor  in  Amherst,  in  1835
professor  of  ancient  languages  in  Brown  univer-
sity, and  in  1839  of  biblical  literature  in  Newton
theological  institution.  In  1851-2  he  travelled  in
Italy,  Egypt,  Palestine,  and  other  countries.  In
1858-'9  he  resided  several  months  in  Athens,  for
the  purpose  of  studying  modern  Greek,  as  auxiliary
to  the  interpretation  of  the  New  Testament,  and
visited  places  in  and  near  Greece  possessing  a  bib-
lical interest.  In  1869  he  resigned  his  professor-
ship at  Newton,  and  in  1870  became  professor
of  New  Testament  Greek  in  Rochester  theologi-
cal seminary.  In  1862  Amherst  conferred  on  him
the  degrees  of  D.  D.  and  LL.  D.  He  published
Plutarch's  "  De  Sera  Numinis  Vindicta,"  with  notes
(Andover,  1844) ;  translated  and  enlarged  Winer's
"  Chaldee  Grammar  "  (1845) ;  and  issued  a  "  Hebrew
Grammar  "  and  "  Hebrew  Reader  "  (1847) ;  a  "  Com-
mentary on  the  Acts "  (Boston,  1851 ;  new  ed.,
greatly  extended,  1858) ;  "  Illustrations  of  Scrip-
ture suggested  by  a  Tour  through  the  Holy  Land  "
(1855);  translation  of  the  "Epistle  to  Philemon,
with  Notes  "  (1860) ;  "  Memorials  of  Christian  Men
in  the  War"  (1864);  translation  of  Van  Ooster-
zee's  "  Commentary  on  Philemon,"  for  Schaff 's  edi-
tion of  Lange's  "  Commentary  "  (1868) ;  and  trans-
lation of  Braune's  "  Commentary  on  Philippians,"
with  additions,  for  Lange's  "  Commentary  "  (1870).
He  contributed  to  the  English  edition  of  Smith's
"  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,"  and  with  Dr.  Ezra  Ab-
bott edited  the  American  edition.  He  also  edited
the  American  edition  of  Rawlinson's  "  Historical
Illustrations  of  the  Old  Testament,"  with  notes
and  appendix  (1873).  He  was  one  of  the  Ameri-
can revisers  of  the  English  Bible,  and  contributed
much  to  religious  periodicals.

HACKETT,  James  Henry,  actor,  b.  in  New
York  city,  15  March,  1800  ;  d.  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  28
Dec,  1871.  He  was  educated  at  Union  Hill  acad-
emy, Flushing,  L.  I.,  in  1815  studied  a  year  in
Columbia,  and  for  a  short  time  read  law.  In  1817
he  entered  a  counting-room,  and  two  years  after-
ward married  Katherine  Lee-Sugg,  an  actress.  He
then  removed  to  Utica,  N.  Y.,  to  begin  business
for  himself.  In  1819  Hackett  returned  to  his  na-
tive place,  and  engaged  in  commercial  ventures
that  led  to  his  financial  ruin.  He  had  always  a
predilection  for  the  stage,  as  a  boy  had  joined
an  amateur  association,  and  in  1816  went  so  far
as  to appear  several  times, under  an assumed


name,  with  a  strolling  company  in  Newark,  N.  J.
After  his  business  failure,  inclination  and  the  en-
couragement of  his  wife  induced  him  to  venture
before  the  New  York  public.  He  began  his  ca-
reer in  the  part  of  Justice  Woodcock  in  "Love
in  a  Village,"  and  on  succeeding  nights  per-
formed as  Sylvester  Doggerwood,  a  part  wherein
he  gave  striking  imitations  of  noted  actors,  sketches
of  Yankee  charac-
ters, and  a  capital
representation  of  one
of  the  Dromios  in
Shakespeare's  "  Com-
edy of  Errors."  In
the  latter  he  close-
ly copied  the  Jewish
visage  and  peculiar
farcical  drawl  of
John  Barnes,  a  noted
comedian.  His  rep-
resentations of  Yan-
kees, western  pio-
neers, and  French-
men assured  his  suc-
cess, and  on  6  April,
1827,  he  sought  to
extend  his  reputation
by  appearing  at  the
Covent  Garden  and  Surrey  theatres  in  London.  He
repeated  the  experiment  of  appearing  before  a  Lon-
don public  in  1832, 1840, 1845,  and  1851,  but  failed
to  win  success.  Returning  in  1828,  he  played  Rich-
ard III.,  Monsieur  Morbleau,  in  imitation  of  Charles
Matthews,  Rip  Van  Winkle,  Solomon  Swop,  and
Col.  Nimrod  Wildfire — a  wide  range  of  charac-
ters. Hackett's  "  Monsieur  Tonson,  come  again,"
spoken  in  the  French  farce,  was  for  many  years  a
common  quotation,  and  more  than  once  repeated
in  speeches  delivered  in  congress.  His  characteri-
zation of  Rip  Van  Winkle  was  that  of  a  genuine
Hollander  of  the  heavy  Knickerbocker  style,  en-
tirely unlike  Jefferson's  Germanized  representation.
Solomon  Swop  was  the  first  well-drawn  character
of  the  conventional  stage  Yankee.  "Col.  Wild-
fire "  was  an  extravaganza  founded  on  the  com-
bined characters  of  Col.  Bowie  and  Daniel  Boone.
Such  were  the  beginnings  of  American  comedy,  all
of  which  must  be  placed  to  the  credit  of  James
Henry  Hackett.  In  1829,  for  a  brief  period,  he  be-
came co-manager  of  the  New  York  Bowery  theatre,
and  for  a  season  manager  of  the  Chatham.  Aban-
doning management,  he  again  made  tours  through-
out the  Union,  winning  a  fair  degree  of  success.
He  became  lessee  of  the  New  York  National  theatre
in  1837,  and  was  eventually  interested  in  the  Astor
Place  opera-house.  In  1840  Hackett  added  to  his
repertory  O'Callaghan,  an  Irish  character :  Sir  Perti-
nax  MacSycophant,  a  Scottish  part ;  and  the  Shake-
spearian roles  of  Falstaff,  Hamlet,  and  King  Lear.
Hackett's  Hamlet  was  a  pronounced  failure  ;  Lear
possessed  many  points  of  interest  that  caused  much
critical  comment ;  but  his  Falstaff,  for  many  years,
remained  the  best  on  the  English  stage.  In  1854
Hackett  brought  to  this  country  the  famous  Italian
singers  Grisi  and  Mario  for  a  tour  of  eight  months.
This  venture  yielded  him  a  handsome  return,  and
for  years  thereafter  he  led  a  retired  life.  His  last
public  engagement  was  in  1871,  as  manager  of  the
Howard  athenaeum  in  Boston.  Hackett  was  a  pol-
ished gentleman,  and  the  intimate  companion  of
Irving,  Paulding,  Cooper,  Halleck,  John  Quincy
Adams,  and  other  notabilities  of  his  day.  He
published  "  Notes  and  Comments  on  Shakspeare  "
(New  York,  1863). — His  wife,  Katherine,  actress,
b.  in  England  about 1797 ;  d.  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,


HACKLEY


HADLEY


23


9  Dec,  1845,  was  the  daughter  of  the  English
ventriloquist,  Lee-Sugg,  and  began  her  theatrical
career  at  the  age  of  seven,  on  the  London  stage.
She  came  to  the  United  States  from  the  Bir-
mingham theatre,  and  in  1819  appeared  at  the
New  York  Park,  as  Miss  Lee-Sugg,  in  the  part  of
Jessie  Oatland,  in  which  she  displayed  a  well-trained
contralto  voice.  In  the  same  year  she  was  married,
and  retired  from  the  stage.  After  an  intermission  of
seven  years,  when  her  husband  had  failed  in  business,
Mrs.  Hackett  appeared  at  the  Park  theatre,  mostly
in  operettas,  and  continued  to  play  until  1832.  Her
last  appearance  was  in  1838,  at  the  National  theatre,
for  her  husband's  benefit,  as  Susan  in  "  Perfection."
Mrs.  Hackett's  forte  was  comedy  and  operetta,
although  she  sometimes  performed  tragic  parts.
In  "The  Croakers"  Halleck  thus  mentions  her:
"  There's  sweet  Miss  Lee-Sugg — by  the  way,  she's

not  pretty —
She's  a  little  too  large,  and  has  not  too  much

grace,
Yet  there's  something  about  her  so  witching

and  witty,
'Tis  pleasure  to  gaze  on  her  good-humored

face."
— Their  son,  John  Keteltas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  13  Feb.,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  26  Dec,
1879,  was  educated  at  Columbia,  and  at  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1837.  He  then  studied  law  in  Utica,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Albany,  N.  Y.  In
1850-'7  he  resided  in  California,  where  he  was  for
some  time  corporation-counsel  for  San  Francisco.
He  was  made  assistant  corporation-counsel  of  New
York  city  in  1863,  and  in  1866  became  recorder  of
the  city,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death.  He
was  noted  for  his  independence  on  the  bench.

HACKLEY,  Charles  Elihu,  physician,  b.  in
Unadilla,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1836.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1856,
and  at  the  medical  school  in  1860.  He  was  sur-
geon in  the  2d  U.  S.  cavalry  in  1861-'4,  and  was
surgeon-in-chief  of  the  3d  cavalry  division.  Army
of  the  Potomac  He  was  appointed  physician  to
the  New  York  hospital  in  1867,  was  surgeon  to  the
New  York  eye  and  ear  infirmary  in  1865-'75,  and
clinical  professor  of  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  in
the  Women's  medical  college,  New  York,  in  1870-'6.
He  has  translated  Stell wag's  "  Diseases  of  the  Eve"
(1867);  Niemeyer's  "Practical  Medicine"  (1869);
Billroth's  "Surgical  Pathology"  (1871);  and  has
written  articles  in  Wood's  "  Reference  Handbook
of  the  Medical  Sciences,"  and  other  contributions
to  medical  literature.

HACKLEY,  Charles  William,  educator,  b.  in
Herkimer  county,  N.  Y.,  9  March,  1809 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  10  Jan.,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1829,  and  was  assist-
ant professor  there  till  1832.  He  then  studied  law,
and  subsequently  theology,  and  was  ordained  as
a  clergyman  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  1835.  He  was  professor  of  mathematics  in  the
University  of  New  York  till  1838,  and  afterward
president  of  Jefferson  college,  Mississippi,  and
rector  of  St.  Peter's  church  in  Auburn.  N.  Y.  In
1843  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics
and  astronomy  in  Columbia  college,  and  in  1857
was  transferred  to  that  of  astronomy  alone,  which
he  held  till  his  death.  He  exerted  himself  particu-
larly to  establish  an  astronomical  observatory  in
New  York  city.  Prof.  Hackley  contributed  to  daily
and  weekly  journals  and  to  scientific  periodicals,
and  published  a  "  Treatise  on  Algebra  "  (New  York,
1846) ;  "  Elementary  Course  in  Geometry  "  (1847) ;
and  "  Elements  of  Trigonometry  "  (1850).


HACKLEMAN,  Pleasant  Adam,  soldier,  b.
in  Franklin  county,  Ind.,  15  Nov.,  1814;  d.  near
Corinth,  Miss.,  4  Oct.,  1862.  His  father.  Major
John  Hackleman,  fought  in  the  war  of  1812.  After
engaging  for  a  number  of  years  in  farming,  the  son
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  May,
1837.  He  began  practice  in  Rushville.  rose  rap-
idly to  distinction  in  his  profession,  and  in  August,
1837,  was  elected  judge  of  the  probate  court  of
Rush  county,  which  office  he  held  till  1841,  when
he  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives. After  serving  for  several  years  as  clerk  of
Rush  county,  he  was,  in  1847  and  1858,  a  candi-
date for  congress,  but  was  defeated.  In  1860  he
was  a  member  of  the  Republican  national  con-
vention at  Chicago,  and  in  1861  of  the  peace  con-
ference at  Washington.  He  entered  the  national
service  in  May,  1861,  as  colonel  of  the  16th  In-
diana regiment,  and,  after  the  first  battle  of  Bull
Run,  served  under  Gen.  Banks  in  Virginia.  He
was  made  a  brigadier-general,  28  April,"  1862,  and
in  June  was  ordered  to  report  to  Gen.  Grant  in  the
southwest.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  battle
of  Corinth,  where  he  was  killed  on  the  second  day.

HADDEN,  James  Murray,  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land ;  d.  in  Harpenden.  England.  28  Oct.,  1817.  He
was  educated  at  Woolwich,  and  served  under  Bur-
goyne  and  Cornwallis,  was  appointed  lieutenant  of
artillery,  7  July,  1779,  promoted  to  a  captaincy  in
March,  1784,  became  colonel  in  1804,  and  major-
general  in  1811.  After  the  Revolution  he  went  to
England,  and  was  adjutant-general  under  Sir
Charles  Stuart  during  the  stay  of  the  latter  in
Portugal.  His  journal  in  this  country  has  been
edited  bv  Gen.  Horatio  Rogers  (Albany,  1884).

HADDOCK,  Charles  Brickett,  author,  b.  in
Franklin.  N.  H.,  20  June,  1796 ;  d.  in  West  Leba-
non, N.  H.,  15  Jan.,  1861.  His  mother  was  a  sis-
ter of  Daniel  Webster.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1816  and  at  Andover  seminary  in
1819,  when  he  returned  to  Dartmouth.  He  occu-
pied the  chair  of  rhetoric  and  belles-lettres  there
from  1819  till  1838,  and  that  of  intellectual  phi-
losophy and  political  economy  from  1838  till  1854.
He  was  U.  S.  charge  d'affaires  in  Portugal  from
1850  till  1854.  He  was  four  years  in  the  New
Hampshire  legislature,  where  he  introduced  and
carried  the  present  common-school  system  of  the
state,  and  was  the  first  school  commissioner  under
that  system.  He  was  the  originator  of  the  rail-
road system  in  New  Hampshire,  wrote  with  ability
on  many  subjects,  and  was  thoroughly  versed  in
public  law.  His  anniversary  orations,  lectures,
reports  for  fifteen  years  on  education,  sermons,
writings  on  agriculture,  and  rhetoric  are  numer-
ous. He  published  a  volume  of  addresses  and
other  writings,  including  occasional  sermons  (1846),
and  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"
"  Biblical  Repertory,"  and  other  periodicals.

HADDOCK,  John  A.,  aeronaut,  b.  17  Oct.,  1823.
In  companionship  with  John  La  Mountain  he  made
the  second  of  two  memorable  balloon  journeys,  for
the  purpose  of  testing  the  upper  currents  of  the  at-
mosphere as  a  means  of  travelling.  The  two  voy-
agers left  Watertown,  N.  Y..  on  22  Sept.,  1859.  late
in  the  afternoon,  and  sailed  almost  due  north  to
a  point  150  miles  north  of  Ottawa  city.  Canada,
making  the  journey  of  300  miles,  the  greater  part
of  it  after  dark,  in  about  four  hours.

HADLEY,  James,  philologist,  b.  in  Fairfield,
N.  Y.,  30  March,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..  14
Nov.,  1872.  He  received  his  early  instruction  at
the  Fairfield  academy,  and  also  acquired  some  scien-
tific knowledge  from  his  father,  who  was  professor
of  chemistry  in  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-


24


HADLEY


HAGARTY


geons  of  the  western  district  of  New  York  in  Fair-
field. Subsequently  the  son  became  an  assistant  in
the  academy,  but  afterward  entered  Yale  as  a  jun-
ior, and  was  graduated  in  1842.  After  a  year  spent
as  a  resident  graduate,  he  entered  the  theological
seminary,  where  he  remained  for  two  years,  ex-
cept from  September,  1844,  till  April,  1845,  when
he  was  tutor  in  mathematics  at  Middlebury  col-
lege. In  September,  1845,  he  became  tutor  of
classical  history  in  Yale,  which  office  he  held  for
three  years,  when  he  was  appointed  assistant  pro-
fessor of  Greek.  He  continued  as  such  until
July,  1851,  when  he  succeeded  President  Theodore
D.  Woolsey  as  full  professor,  and  continued  to
hold  the  chair  until  his  death.  Prof.  Hadley's
philological  studies  made  him  known  throughout
the  world.  He  was  also  well  versed  in  civil  law.
His  course  of  lectures  on  that  subject  was  included
in  the  curriculum  of  the  Yale  law-school,  and  was
likewise  delivered  at  Harvard.  He  was  also  one
of  the  American  committee  for  the  revision  of
the  New  Testament.  Prof.  Hadley  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  American  Oriental  soci-
ety, and  its  president  in  1870-2,  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  American  philological  association  and
of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He  was  a
frequent  contributor  to  reviews,  and  his  larger
works  were  "  A  Greek  Grammar  for  Schools  and
Colleges  "  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  A  Brief  History  of
the  English  Language,"  contributed  as  an  intro-
duction to  Webster's  "  American  Dictionary  of  the
English  Language  "  (Springfield,  1864) ;  and  "  Ele-
ments of  the  Greek  Language  "  (New  York,  1869).
After  his  death  there  appeared,  edited  by  Presi-
dent Woolsey,  twelve  lectures  on  "Roman  Law"
(New  York,  1873),  and  a  series  of  twenty  "  Philo-
logical and  Critical  Essays  "  (1873),  edited  by  Prof.
William  D.  Whitney. — His  brother,  Henry  Ham-
ilton, educator,  b.  in  Fairfield,  N.  Y.,  19  July,
1826 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  1  Aug.,  1864,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1845,  with  the  highest  honors
of  his  class.  Subsequently  he  held  the  office  of
tutor  for  two  years,  meanwhile  pursuing  theologi-
cal studies,  and  finally  completed  his  course  at  An-
dover  in  1853.  He  then  spent  some  time  in  New
York  studying  law,  but  returned  to  New  Haven,
and  there  spent  more  than  three  years  in  theologi-
cal pursuits,  especially  in  a  systematic  study  of  the
Hebrew  language  and  the  Old  Testament  scriptures.
In  1858  he  became  instructor  of  sacred  literature
in  Union  theological  seminary,  New  York,  and  ac-
cepted the  chair  of  Hebrew  there  in  1862.  During
1861  he  held  the  professorship  of  Hebrew  in  the
theological  department  of  Yale.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  was  prevented  by  his  friends
from  enlisting  in  the  army,  but  paid  for  two  sub-
stitutes from  his  own  purse.  During  the  summer
vacation  of  1864  he  offered  his  time  for  the  work
of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission,  and  was  sent
to  City  Point,  Va.,  where  his  excessive  labors  and
the  hot  weather  induced  fever,  from  the  "effects
of  which  he  died.  His  publications  were  confined
to  articles  that  he  contributed  to  the  "  American
Theological  Review." — Arthur  Twining,  son  of
James,  political  economist,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
23  April,  1856,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1876,  and
then  studied  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  In  1879
he  became  a  tutor  at  Yale,  and  in  1883  was  ap-
pointed lecturer  on  political  science,  becoming
professor  of  that  subject  in  1886.  He  was  ap-
pointed commissioner  of  labor  statistics  of  Con-
necticut in  1885,  and  in  that  capacity  published
reports  in  1885  and  1886.  Prof.  Hadley  has  made
a  special  study  of  railroads,  and  contributed  much
to  periodicals  on  that  subject. He  has  written  an


article  on  "  Railway  Legislation  "  for  the  "  Ency-
clopaedia Britannica  "  (1885),  a  series  for  Lalor's
14  Cyclopaedia  of  Political  Science "  (1884),  and
"  Railroad  Transportation ;  its  History  and  its
Laws  "  (New  York,  1885),  which  has  been  trans-
lated into  French  and  Russian.

HAENKE,  Thaddeus,  South  American  natural-
ist, b.  in  Kreibitz,  Bohemia,  5  Oct.,  1761 ;  d.  in
Cochabamba,  Peru,  in  1817.  He  studied  in  the
universities  of  Prague  and  Vienna,  and  devoted
himself  to  botany,  especially  under  the  guidance  of
Jacquin,  to  whose  "Collectanea"  he  contributed
an  account  of  the  "  Flora  of  the  Austrian  Alps."
In  1789  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Spanish  gov-
ernment as  botanist,  in  order  to  accompany  Malas-
pina  in  his  tour  round  the  world.  Having  reached
Spain  too  late,  he  embarked  at  Cadiz  for  Monte-
video, and,  after  suffering  shipwreck,  finally  joined
Malaspina,  in  Chili,  accompanying  him  in  his  voy-
age to  the  north,  along  the  American  coast  as  far
as  Nootka  sound  in  Vancouver  island.  He  re-
turned by  sea  to  the  port  of  Acapulco  and  trav-
elled through  every  part  of  Mexico.  He  then  em-
barked again,  and,  after  visiting  several  groups  of
islands  in  the  South  sea,  landed  at  Concepcion,
Chili,  in  1794.  He  purchased  land  thirty  miles
from  Cochabamba,  Peru,  and  passed  the  rest  of
his  life  alternately  in  Cochabamba  or  on  his  estate,
on  which  he  opened  and  worked  a  silver-mine.  He
ascended  the  volcano  of  Arequipa,  and  published
notes  of  his  geological  observations,  founded  a  bo-
tanic garden  at  Cochabamba,  and  enriched  it
with  exotic  plants  collected  in  his  travels.  He
took  poison  by  mistake  in  1817,  and  died  from  its
effects.  He  bequeathed  his  botanic  collections  to
his  native  country,  but  only  a  part  of  them  reached
their  destination.  They  were  placed  in  the  Na-
tional museum  of  Prague.  Haenke  did  not  pub-
lish any  narrative  of  his  explorations,  but  left
numerous  notes  on  his  collections  and  some  manu-
scripts, which  other  botanists  have  utilized.  The
"  Reliquiae  Haenkianae "  was  published  after  his
death  (Prague,  1825).  In  the  beginning  of  this
work  there  is  a  life  of  the  naturalist  by  Count  von
Sternberg.  A  copy  of  Haenke's  "  Introduccion  6
la  historia  natural  de  Cochabamba,"  printed  in
Lima  and  dated  15  Feb.,  1799,  fell  into  the  hands
of  Azara,  who  published  it  in  his  "  Travels  in
South  America."  A  memoir  addressed  by  Haenke
to  the  governor  of  the  province  of  Cochabamba,
and  dated  20  April,  1799,  entitled  "  Memoria  sobre
los  rios  navegables  que  fluyen  al  Maranon,  proce-
dentes  de  las  Cordilleras  del  Peru,"  was  published
by  Jose  Arenales  (Buenos  Ayres,  1833).

HA(xA,  Godfrey,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Isingen,
Wurtemberg,  30  Nov.,  1745;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  5  Feb.,  1825.  After  emigrating  to  this  coun-
try, he  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  became  a
merchant,  and  was  connected  with  the  principal
charitable  and  mercantile  institutions  of  the  city.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  city  council
in  1797-1800,  and  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature
in  1800-'l.  He  bequeathed  an  estate  valued  at
$350,000  to  charitable  purposes.

HAGARTY,  John  Hawkins,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  17  Dec,  1816.  He  entered
Trinity  college,  Dublin,  in  1832,  but  two  years
afterward  emigrated  to  Canada,  and  settled  in
Toronto.  There  he  studied  law,  and  in  1840  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Upper  Canada.  In  1850
he  was  made  queen's  counsel,  in  1856  was  ap-
pointed a  judge,  and  in  1868  chief  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas.  He  was  subsequently
transferred  to  the  court  of  queen's  bench,  and  in
1878  became  chief  justice  of  Ontario.


HAGEN


HAGNER


25


HAGEN,  Hermann  August,  entomologist,  b.  in
KOnigsberg,  Prussia,  30  May,  1817.  For  the  last  two
htmdred  and  fifty  years  some  ancestor  of  his  has
been  connected  with  the  University  of  Konigsberg.
Young  Hagen  was  graduated  at  the  gymnasium
in  1836,  and  received  his  medical  degree  from  the
university  in  his  native  city  in  1840,  also  studying
later  in  Berlin,  Vienna,  Paris,  and  elsewhere.
Meanwhile  he  devoted  considerable  attention  to
entomology,  and  in  1834  published  his  first  paper
on  "  Prussian  Odontata."  In  1843  he  returned  to
Konigsberg,  entered  on  the  general  practice  of
medicine,  and  for  three  years  was  first  assistant  at
the  surgical  hospital.  From  1863  till  1867  he  was
vice-president  of  the  city  council  and  member  of
the  school-board.  While  holding  these  offices  he
was  invited  by  Louis  Agassiz  to  come  to  Cambridge
as  assistant  in  entomology  at  the  Museum  of  com-
parative zoology,  and  in  1870  was  made  professor
of  that  science  at  Harvard.  In  1863  he  received
the  honorary  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University
of  Konigsberg,  and  he  is  a  fellow  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  besides
being  a  member  of  other  scientific  societies.  His
publications  include  upward  of  four  hundred  arti-
cles, of  which  the  most  important  is  his  "  Biblio-
theca  Entomologica  "  (Leipsic,  1862).

HAGEN,  Theodore,  musician,  b.  in  Hamburg,
Germany,  15  April,  1823 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  27
Dec.,  1871.  He  studied  music  in  his  native  city  and
in  Paris ;  in  the  latter  city  from  1841  till  1843.  Soon
after  his  return  to  Germany  he  became  known  as
a  writer  on  musical  topics,  especially  as  a  contribu-
tor to  Schumann's  "  Neue  Zeitschrift  filr  Musik  "
and  as  the  author  of  a  book  entitled,  in  its  English
translation,  "  Civilization  and  Music."  He  came
to  New  York  in  1854,  and  assumed  the  editorship
of  the  "  Musical  Gazette,"  which  was  at  the  end  of
about  six  months  consolidated  with  another  jour-
nal under  the  title  of  the  "  New  York  Musical  Re-
view and  Gazette,"  of  which  in  1862  he  became
both  editor  and  proprietor.  Besides  the  work  men-
tioned above  he  wrote  "Musical  Novels"  (1848).

HAGER,  Albert  David,  geologist,  b.  in  Ches-
ter, Vt.,  1  Nov.,  1817;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  29  July,
1888.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  place,  and  in
1856  was  assistant  naturalist  of  Vermont.  He  was
assistant  state  geologist  under  Prof.  Edward  Hitch-
cock in  1857-61.  and  state  geologist  and  curator  of
the  state  cabinet  of  natural  history  in  1862-'70.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  state  geologist  of
Missouri,  and  in  1877  he  became  librarian  of  the
Chicago  historical  society.  Mr.  Hager  was  com-
missioner from  Vermont  to  the  Paris  exposition  of
1867.  He  published  "  Geology  of  Vermont,"  with
Prof.  Hitchcock  (2  vols.,  Claremont,  N.  H.,  1861);
the  annual  reports  of  the  Vermont  fish  commission
(Montpelier,  Vt.,  1866-'9) ;  "  Economic  Geology  of
Vermont " ;  and  a  report  on  the  geological  survey
of  Missouri  (1871).

HAGER,  John  Sharpenstien,  senator,  b.  in
Morris  county,  N.  J..  12  March,  1818.  He  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1836,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.  He  settled  in
Morristown,  N.  J.,  practising  his  profession  until
1849,  when  he  went  to  California.  He  served  in
the  state  senate  in  1852- '4,  and  again  in  1867-73.
In  1855  he  was  elected  state  district  judge  for  the
district  of  San  Francisco,  and  served  six  years.  In
1871  he  became  a  regent  of  the  University  of  Cali-
fornia, which  he  had  been  active  in  establishing.
He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  an  anti-
monopoly  Democrat,  and  served  from  9  Feb.,  1874,
till  3  March,  1875,  filling  the  unexpired  term  of
Eugene  Casserly,  resigned. He  has  since  been  a


member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the  present
constitution  of  California,  and  was  president  of  the
convention  that  adopted  a  new  charter  for  San
Francisco  under  that  constitution.  He  was  ap-
pointed in  1885  collector  of  the  port  of  San  Fran-
cisco, which  office  he  still  (1887)  holds.

HAGERT,  Henry  Schell.  lawver.  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  2  May,  1826 ;  d.  there,  18  Dec,  1885.
He  was  graduated  at  the  Central  high-school,  Phil-
adelphia, in  1842,  admitted  to  the  bar,  8  May,
1847.  and  soon  afterward  became  solicitor  for  the
board  of  guardians  of  the  poor.  After  the  con-
solidation of  the  city  in  1854  he  was  appointed  as-
sistant city  solicitor,  and  as  such  drafted  many  of
the  most  important  city  ordinances.  He  served  as
assistant  district  attorney  in  1856-'7.  1868-'71,  and
1875-'8,  and  as  district  attorney  in  1878-'81.  He
was  especially  distinguished  as  a  nisi  prius  law-
yer. In  early  life  he  contributed  prose  and  poetry
to  periodicals;  and  after  his  death  a  volume  of
his  poems,  with  a  memoir  by  Charles  A.  Lagen,
was  printed  privately  (Philadelphia,  1886).

HAGNER,  Peter,  financier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  1  Oct.,  1772  ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  16  July,
1850.  He  was  appointed  a  clerk  in  the  treasury
department  by  Gen.  Washington  in  1793,  assistant
accountant  of  the  war  department  in  1797,  and
third  auditor  by  Mr.  Monroe  when  that  office  was
created  in  1817.  He  served  under  every  admin-
istration for  fifty-six  consecutive  years,  resigning
his  office  in  1849.  Twice  by  direct  votes  congress
expressed  its  appreciation  of  his  services  in  the
settlement  of  large  and  important  claims.  This
office  became  at  one  time  so  prominent,  from  the
calls  made  upon  its  chief  by  congress,  before  the
institution  of  the  court  of  claims,  that  John  Ran-
dolph, of  Roanoke,  pausing  in  debate  for  a  phrase
to  express  his  sense  of  the  influence  of  the  Emperor
Nicholas  in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  styled  him  "  the
great  third  auditor  of  nations." — His  son,  Peter
Valentine,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  28
Aug.,  1815,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1836,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.
He  served  on  topographical  duty,  took  part  in  the
Florida  campaign  of  1836-'7  with  a  field  battery,
was  assigned  to  frontier  duty  during  the  Canada
border  disturbances  until  July,  1838,  and  then
transferred  to  the  ordnance  corps.  On  22  May,
1840,  he  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  of  ordnance.
In  the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  attached  to  the
siege-train  company  of  ordnance  of  Gen.  Scott's
army,  brevetted  captain  for  "  gallant  and  merito-
rious conduct "  at  Cerro  Gordo,  18  April,  1847,  and
major  for  Chapultepec,  13  Sept.,  1847.  He  was
wounded  at  the  San  Cosme  gate  in  the  assault  and
capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico  the  day  following.
Maj.  Hagner  made  a  visit  to  Europe  under  orders
from  the  secretary  of  war  in  1848-'9,  inspecting
laboratories  and  manufactories  of  percussion-caps,
and  procuring  information  upon  the  systems  of
artillery  and  the  armament  and  equipment  of
troops.  He  was  promoted  to  captain  of  ordnance,
10  July,  1851,  and  major  of  ordnance,  3  Aug.,
and  was  in  command  of  various  arsenals  and  in-
spector of  powder  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war.  On  25  April,  1861,  he  was  assigned  to  the
duty  of  ordering,  inspecting,  and  purchasing  arms
and  ordnance  stores,  and  in  March,  1862,  appointed
assistant  to  the  commission  on  ordnance  contracts
and  claims.  He  was  inspector  of  the  factories  mak-
ing small  arms  for  the  government  till  25  Dec,
1863,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
Watervliet  arsenal ;  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of
ordnance,  1  June,  1863,  brevetted  colonel  and
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  for


26


HAGOOD


HAGUE


his  services  in  the  ordnance  department,  and  ad-
vanced to  the  rank  of  colonel  of  ordnance,  7  March,
1867.  Pie  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  1  June,
1881,  at  his  own  request,  having  been  in  the  service
for  more  than  fortv  years.

HAGOOD,  Johnson,  lawyer,  b.  in  West  Vir-
ginia in  1771;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1816.
When  he  was  four  years  old  his  father's  family  re-
moved to  Ninety-Six,  S.  C.  He  was  on  one  occa-
sion sent  out  in  the  night,  when  about  seven  years
of  age,  to  procure  medical  assistance  for  his  father's
family,  and  passed  through  the  scene  of  one  of  the
guerilla  skirmishes  so  frequent  at  that  time.  Sev-
eral corpses  were,  lying  unburied  on  the  field,  and
wolves  were  feeding  on  them.  His  nerves  were
severely  tried,  but  he  performed  his  errand.  At
the  age  of  fourteen  the  lad  determined  to  take
care  of  himself,  and  walked  sixty  miles  to  Granby,
where  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  employment  in  a
country  store.  At  the  end  of  a  year  he  went  to
Charleston  and  entered  a  lawyer's  office,  having
access  to  books,  and  attending  a  night-school.  He
soon  began  the  study  of  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1793  at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  and  imme-
diately became  a  partner  with  his  patron,  who  was
elected  to  congress,  and  left  to  young  Hagood  the
entire  management  of  his  practice.  He  practised
law  until  1813,  and  attained  note  in  his  profession.
Mr.  Hagood  also  devoted  much  attention  to  natu-
ral sciences,  was  interested  in  the  study  of  elec-
tricity and  galvanism,  and  procured  from  Europe
extensive  apparatus  for  his  experiments.  He  edu-
cated his  younger  brothers  and  sisters  and  several
children  of  his  poorer  neighbors.  In  1806  he  pur-
chased lands,  and,  gradually  withdrawing  from
practice,  devoted  himself  to  their  improvement.

HAGUE,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pelham,
N.  Y„  4  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,
1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in  1826,  and
at  the  Newton  theological  institution  in  1829.  On
20  Oct.  of  the  latter  year  he  became  pastor  of  the
2d  Baptist  church  at  Utica,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained until  1831.  He  held  pastorates  in  Boston,
Providence,  and  New  York  city.  He  was  elected
professor  of  homiletics  in  the  Baptist  theological
seminary  at  Chicago  in  1869,  and  later  accepted  a
pastoral  charge  at  Orange,  N.  J.  Dr.  Hague  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  in  1849,
and  from  Harvard  in  1863.  He  was  also  chosen  a
trustee  of  the  former  university  in  1837  and  of
Vassar  college  in  1861.  He  was  the  author  of  nu-
merous occasional  addresses  and  orations,  includ-
ing discourses  on  the  life  and  character  of  John
Quincy  Adams  and  Adoniram  Judson.  He  also
published  "  The  Baptist  Church  Transplanted
from  the  Old  World  to  the  New"  (New  York,
1846) ;  "  Guide  to  Conversation  on  the  Gospel  of
John"  (Boston);  "Review  of  Drs.  Puller  and
Wayland  on  Slavery  "  (Boston) ;  "  Christianity  and
Statesmanship"  (New  York,  1855;  enlarged  ed.,
Boston,  1865);  "Home  Life"  (New  York.  1855);
"  The  Authority  and  Perpetuity  of  the  Christian
Sabbath"  (1863);  "The  Self-witnessing  Character
of  the  New  Testament  Christianity"  (Philadel-
phia, 1871);  "Christian  Greatness  in  the  Minis-
ter" (Boston,  1880);  and  "Life  Notes,"  an  auto-
biography (1887).— His  son,  James  Duncan,  min-
ing engineer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  Feb.,  1836,
was  educated  at  Harvard,  at  the  Freiberg  min-
ing-school, and  at  the  University  of  Gottingen.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  followed
for  a  time  the  profession  of  mining  engineer,
and  in  1867  became  first  assistant  geologist  on
the  U.  S.  geological  survey  of  the  40th  parallel,
under  Clarence  King,  holding  that  place  for  three


years.  In  this  connection  he  prepared  the  volume
on  "Mining  Industries"  (Washington,  1870)  for
the  reports  of  the  survey.  He  then  returned  to
his  profession.  Mr.  Hague  was  sent  as  U.  S.
commissioner  to  the  World's  fair  in  Paris  in
1878,  and  with  the  assistance  of  George  F.  Becker
wrote  the  report  on  "  Mining  Industries  at  the
Paris  Exposition  of  1878"  (Washington,  1880).—
Another  son,  Arnold,  geologist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  3  Dec,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale  in  1863,  after
which  he  spent  three  years  in  Germany,  studying
at  the  universities  of  Gottingen  and  Heidelberg,
and  at  the  Freiberg  mining-school.  In  1867  he
returned  to  the  United  States,  and  was  appointed
assistant  geologist  on  the  U.  S.  geological  explora-
tion of  the  40th  parallel  under  Clarence  King.  He
then  went  to  California,  and  spent  the  winter  of
1867-'8  in  Virginia  City,  Nev.,  studying  the  sur-
face geology  of  the  Comstock  lode  and  the  chemis-
try of  the  amalgamation  process  as  practised  there,
and  known  as  the  "  Washoe  process."  The  re-
sults of  this  study  were  published  in  volume  iii.
of  the  report  of  the  exploration,  under  the  title
of  "Chemistry  of  the  Washoe  Process."  He  also
contributed  to  the  same  volume  a  chapter  on  the
geology  of  the  White  Pine  mining  district,  in
which  there  was  first  brought  to  notice  the  great
development  of  Devonian  rocks  in  the  Great  Basin
of  Utah  and  Nevada.  In  volume  ii. — "  Descriptive
Geology  "  —  of  the
report  of  the  explo-
ration, which  is  the
joint  work  of  Mr.
Hague  and  Samuel
F.  Emmons,  there  is
given  the  results  of
a  detailed  geologi-
cal survey  across  the
Cordilleras  of  North
America,  from  the
Great  Plains  to  the
Sierra  Nevada  range
in  California.  This
work  included  a  geo-
logical atlas  of  maps
and  sections,  which
was  completed  after
a  great  deal  of  hard-
ship, the  map  of  the
Great  Basin  being  accomplished  before  the  com-
pletion of  either  the  Union  or  Central  Pacific  rail-
way. On  the  termination  of  this  work  in  1877  he
received  the  appointment  of  government  geolo-
gist of  Guatemala,  and  travelled  extensively  over
the  republic,  visiting  the  principal  mining  regions
and  the  centres  of  volcanic  activity.  In  1878  he
was  engaged  by  the  Chinese  government  to  exam-
ine gold,  silver,  and  lead  mines  in  northern  China.
On  the  organization  of  the  U.  S.  geological  survey
in  1879  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  be-
came one  of  its  geologists.  He  was  sent  to  Ne-
vada, and  made  a  report  on  the  "  Geology  of  the
Eureka  District."  In  1883  he  was  made  geologist
of  the  Yellowstone  park  division,  and  assigned  to
the  study  of  the  geysers  of  that  district  in  connec-
tion with  the  extinct  volcanic  regions  of  the  Rocky
mountains.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  socie-
ties both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and
in  1885  was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  He  has  made  numerous  contributions  to
scientific  journals,  on  lithology  and  geology,  and
is  the  principal  author  of  the  followiug  memoirs  :
"  The  Volcanoes  of  California,  Oregon,  and  Wash-
ington Territory"  (1883); "The  Volcanic  Rocks


^fijZU?^^


HAHN


HAINES


27


of  the  Great  Basin"  (1884);  "On  the  Develop-
ment of  Crystallization  in  the  Igneous  Rocks  of
Washoe"  (i885);  "Nevada,  with  Notes  on  the
Geology  of  the  District "  (1885) ;  and  "  The  Vol-
canic Rocks  of  Salvador  "  (1886).

HAHN,  Michael,  politician,  b.  in  Bavaria,
24  Nov.,  1830 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  15  March,
1886.  While  he  was  an  infant  his  parents  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  a  few  years  later  to  New
Orleans.  He  was  graduated  at  the  high-school  of
that  city,  and  in  the  law  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Louisiana  in  1854.  When  twenty-two
years  of  age  he  was  elected  school-director,  served
for  several  years,  and  at  one  time  was  presi-
dent of  the  board.  He  was  antagonistic  to  the
Slidell  wing  of  the  Democratic  party,  opposed  Mr.
Buchanan  for  president  in  1856,  was  a  strong
Douglas  advocate,  and  a  vehement  anti-slavery
agitator.  In  1860-'l  he  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee that  canvassed  the  state  against  secession,
and  he  personally  exerted  all  his  influence  to  pre-
vent disunion.  Mr.  Hahn's  opponents  charged
that  in  1861,  with  all  public,  state,  and  parish  offi-
cers, he  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Confed-
erate government ;  but  the  official  records  show  that
he  renewed  his  oath  of  office  as  notary,  but  omit-
ted the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  no  public  notice  was
taken  of  the  omission.  On  the  arrival  of  Admi-
ral Farragut's  fleet  in  New  Orleans,  25  April,  1862,
Mr.  Hahn  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United
States,  and  represented  the  2d  congressional  dis-
trict of  Louisiana  in  congress  as  a  Republican,
from  17  Feb.  to  3  March,  1863.  At  the  end  of  his
term  he  returned  to  New  Orleans,  advocated  the
reopening  of  the  Federal  courts,  and  bought  and
edited  the  "  New  Orleans  True  Delta,"  in  which
he  advocated  emancipation.  In  March,  1864,  he
was  inaugurated  governor  of  Louisiana.  He  pos-
sessed the  full  confidence  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  who
wrote  him  a  letter  advising  that  the  elective  fran-
chise be  extended  to  the  negro  race,  and  granting
him  the  additional  powers  of  military  governor.
In  1865  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  but  did  not
press  his  claim  to  his  seat.  In  July,  1866,  while
present  at  the  Mechanics'  institute  in  New  Orleans
during  the  riot  of  that  month,  he  was  severely
wounded.  Mr.  Hahn  became  the  editor  of  the
"  New  Orleans  Republican "  in  1867,  and  four
years  later  removed  to  his  sugar-plantation  in  St.
Charles  parish,  where  he  built  the  village  of  Hahn-
ville.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  from
1872  till  1876,  and  in  1879  was  elected  district
judge,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1885,  on  his  elec-
tion to  congress,  where  he  was  the  only  Republi-
can member  from  his  state.

HAIDT,  John  Valentine,  artist  and  evan-
gelist, b.  in  Dantzic,  Germany,  4  Oct.,  1700:  d.
in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  18  Jan.,  1780.  He  was  educated
at  Berlin,  where  his  father  was  court-jeweller.  The
son  studied  painting  at  Venice,  Rome,  Paris,  and
London.  When  he  was  forty  years  of  age  he
united  with  the  Moravian  church  and  devoted
himself  to  painting  portraits  of  its  clergymen  and
other  pictures,  the  majority  of  which  represented
scriptural  incidents.  In  1754  he  emigrated  to
America,  was  ordained  a  deacon  of  the  church,  and
began  to  preach  through  the  middle  colonies  as  an
evangelist,  at  the  same  time  continuing  to  paint.
A  gallery  of  his  portraits  and  several  of  his  other
pictures  are  still  preserved  at  Bethlehem,  Pa.
Among  the  latter  the  most  remarkable  is  a  re-
duced copy  of  a  large  painting  which  he  produced
in  Germany,  representing  the  first  converts  of  the
various  nations  to  whicK  the  Moravians  brought
the  gospel,  coming  to  the  throne  of  Christ's  glory.


Twelve  of  Haidt's  paintings,  setting  forth  inci-
dents in  the  life  of  Jesus,  which  formerly  adorned
the  walls  of  the  first  church-edifice  at  Bethlehem,
were  many  years  ago  sold  to  a  dealer,  who  realized
enormous  profits  from  them.

HAIGHT,  Benjamin  I.,  clergvman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  16  Oct..  1809;  d.  there,  21  Feb.,  1879.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1828.  and  at
the  General  theological  seminary  of  the  Episcopal
church  in  1831.  He  was  ordained  deacon  the  same
year,  and  priest  in  1833.  While  in  deacon's  orders
he  was  elected  (1831)  rector  of  St.  Peter's  church,
New  York,  and  in  1834  was  called  to  St.  Paul's,
Cincinnati,  Ohio.  In  1837  he  was  elected  rector
of  All  Saints',  New  York,  and  remained  there  until
1846.  He  was  chosen  professor  of  pastoral  theology
in  the  General  theological  seminary  in  1837,  and
served  the  interests  of  the  church  in  that  chair
until  1855.  In  the  latter  year  Dr.  Haight  was
elected  an  assistant  minister  of  Trinity  church,
New  York,  and  during  the  absence  of  the  rector  in
1874  held  the  office  of  assistant  rector.  He  was  a
delegate  from  New  York  to  the  general  conventions
of  1868,  1871,  and  1874.  In  1873  Dr.  Haight  was
elected  bishop  of  Massachusetts,  but  declined  on
account  of  feeble  health.  He  served  as  secretary  of
the  Convention  of  New  York  for  twenty  years,  and
was  a  member  of  the  standing  committee  of  the
diocese  for  ten  years.  He  was  elected  a  trustee  of
Columbia  college  in  1843,  and  gave  much  time  and
attention  to  the  interests  of  that  institution.  Dr.
Haight  was  an  excellent  speaker  and  debater,  and
exercised  a  wide  influence  in  guiding  the  course  of
ecclesiastical  affairs  under  anomalous  and  trying
conditions.  During  the  last  two  or  three  years  of
his  life  he  suffered  from  impaired  health  caused  by
overtaxed  energies.  He  published  a  few  occasional
sermons  and  addresses. — His  son,  Charles  C,  is  an
architect,  and  designed  the  new  buildings  of  Colum-
bia college  and  the  General  theological  seminary.

HAIGHT,  Henry  Huntley,  lawyer,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  20  May,  1825';  d.  in  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  2  Sept.,  1878.  His  father,  Fletcher  M.
Haight,  was  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of  Califor-
nia. The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1844,  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  St.  Louis
in  October,  1846.  He  afterward  removed  to  Cali-
fornia, where  he  entered  on  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession in  1850.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  district
judge  by  President  Lincoln,  and  in  1867  was  elected
governor  by  the  Democratic  party,  remaining  in
office  until  1871,  when  he  was  renominated,  but
defeated  by  Newton  Booth.  He  then  returned  to
the  practice  of  law,  and  was  a  member-elect  of
the  State  constitutional  convention.

HAINES,  Daniel,  governor  of  New  Jersey,  b.
in  New  York  city,  6  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Hamburg,
Sussex  co.,  N.  J.,  26  Jan.,  1877.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1820,  studied  law.  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1823,  and  settled  at  Hamburg  in  1824.  In
1837  he  entered  public  life  as  a  member  of  the
council,  and  was  one  of  the  board  of  canvassers  who
resisted  the  governor  in  giving  certificates  of  elec-
tion to  the  Whig  candidates  in  the  famous  "  broad-
seal  "  election.  In  1843  he  was  elected  governor,
and  while  in  office  proclaimed  the  new  constitution.
His  efforts  during  his  one  year's  term  of  office  left
their  impress  on  the  common-schools  and  on  the
state  normal-school,  which  had  been  projected  by
him.  In  1847  he  was  again  elected  governor,  and
served  for  three  years.  He  was  afterward  chosen  a
judge  of  the  supreme  court,  where  he  served  until
1861,  and  was  during  his  tenure  of  office  a  member
ex-officio  of  the  court  of  error  and  appeals.  From
1870  till  1876  he  was  a  member  of  several  judicial


28


HAINES


HALDEMAN


commissions  relating  to  state  boundaries.  He  was
one  of  the  committee  on  the  reunion  of  the  two
branches  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  aided
materially  in  accomplishing  the  result.  He  was
influential  in  establishing  the  insane  asylum  in
Trenton,  the  soldiers'  home  in  Newark,  and  the  re-
form-school for  juveniles  in  Jamesburg.  He  went
to  Cincinnati  in  1870  as  a  commissioner  to  the
National  prison  reform  association,  and  was  one  of
the  committee  that  met  in  London  in  1872  to  or-
ganize an  international  congress  on  prison  disci-
gline.  He  was  also  president  of  the  Sussex  county
ible  society,  and  the  oldest  living  trustee  of
Princeton  college.  —  His  son,  Alanson  Austin,
clergyman,  b.  in  Hamburg,  N.  J.,  18  March,  1830,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1857,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  there  in  1858.  He  held  pas-
torates in  Berlin,  Md.,  and  Amgansett,  L.  I.,  till
1862,  when  he  was  appointed  chaplain  of  the  15th
New  Jersey  regiment.  He  served  till  the  close  of
the  war,  accompanying  his  regiment  in  the  thirty-
six  battles  in  which  it  was  engaged,  and  since  his
discharge  in  1865  has  held  a  pastorate  in  his  native
place.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  engineer  of  the
Palestine  exploration  society,  and  in  that  capacity
visited  the  Holy  Land,  Egypt,  and  Turkey,  making
maps,  sketches  of  Oriental  scenery,  and  transcripts
of  rock  inscriptions.  Mr.  Haines  is  the  author
of  a  "  History  of  the  Fifteenth  Regiment  of  New
Jersey  Volunteers "  (New  York,  1883),  and  is  a
contributor  to  various  periodicals. — Another  son,
Thomas  Ryerson,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hamburg,  N.  J.,
15  March,  1838  ;  d*  near  Harrisonburg,  Va.,  6
June,  1862,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1857,
and  in  1860,  having  been  admitted  to  the  bar,  en-
tered on  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Newark,
N.  J.  On  15  Aug.,  1861,  he  became  1st  lieutenant
in  the  1st  New  Jersey  cavalry  regiment,  and  in
March,  1862,  was  commissioned  captain  after  de-
clining an  appointment  on  a  general's  staff.  He
had  already  gained  credit  as  adjutant  and  regi-
mental judge-advocate.  He  became  the  victim  of
a  rash  movement  on  the  part  of  the  colonel  of  his
regiment.  Five  miles  in  advance  of  its  supports,
that  regiment  was  driven  into  the  woods  near
Harrisonburg,  and  was  surprised  and  cut  in  pieces
by  a  vastly  superior  force.  While  he  was  bravely
endeavoring  to  rally  his  troops,  Capt.  Haines  was
mortally  wounded.

HAINES,  Richard  Townley,  merchant,  b.  in
Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  21  May,  1795 ;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,
1870.  He  was  an  original  member  of  the  firm  of
Halsted,  Haines  and  Co.,  dry-goods  merchants  in
New  York  city.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  American  tract  society,  a  member  of  its  execu-
tive committee  from  the  beginning,  and  for  forty
years  the  chairman  of  its  finance  committee.  He
served  as  a  member  of  its  board  of  direction,  and
contributed  largely  to  its  funds.  He  was  a  director
and  liberal  supporter  of  the  American  Bible  so-
ciety, the  American  board  of  foreign  missions,  and
many  other  religious  and  benevolent  institutions,
and  the  first  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of
the  Union  theological  seminary  in  New  York  city.

HAINES,  Thomas  Jefferson,  soldier,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  26  Oct.,  1827;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  14  Aug.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849,  assigned  to  the
1st  artillery,  and  served  in  Fortress  Monroe,  Va..
after  which  he  became  assistant  professor  of  mathe-
matics at  West  Point.  He  took  part  in  the  Flori-
da hostilities  against  the  Seminole  Indians,  as  act-
ing assistant  adjutant-general,  and  in  the  early
part  of  the  civil  war  held  the  same  post  in  the
Department  of  Virginia. He  was  chief  commis-


sary of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri  in  1861-*2,
and  then  served  as  chief  purchasing  and  super-
vising commissary  in  the  Departments  of  the
Missouri,  Tennessee,  and  the  Northwest  from
1862  till  1865,  holding  the  rank  of  major.  He
also  held  this  office  for  the  territory  between  the
Mississippi  and  New  Mexico  and  Utah,  and  was  in
charge  of  affairs  of  the  subsistence  department  in
Illinois  and  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi  to
the  southern  boundary  of  Arkansas.  He  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  on  13  March,  1865,  for
faithful  and  meritorious  services.  He  had  general
charge  of  the  subsistence  department  throughout
the  western  states  and  territories  from  1865  till
1868,  and  served  as  chief  of  the  commissariat  de-
partment of  the  south  from  1868  till  1873.  He
was  then  purchasing  and  depot  commissary  at  Bos-
ton till  1875,  when  he  was  made  assistant  to  the
commissary-general  in  Washington,  D.  C.

HAKLUYT,  Richard,  English  author,  b.  about
1553  ;  d.  23  Oct.,  1616.  He  was  educated  at  West-
minster school  and  at  Oxford  university,  where  he
was  appointed  lecturer  on  cosmography,  and  was
the  first  to  teach  the  use  of  globes.  In  1584,  when
a  master  of  arts  and  a  professor  of  divinity,  he  ac-
companied the  English  ambassador,  Sir  Edward
Stafford,  to  Paris,  where  he  remained  five  years.
On  his  return  to  England  he  was  appointed  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  a  member  of  the  company  of  gen-
tlemen adventurers  and  merchants  formed  for  the
purpose  of  colonizing  Virginia.  In  1605  Hakluyt
was  appointed  prebendary  of  Westminster,  having
before  been  prebendary  of  Bristol,  and  he  received
afterward  the  rectory  of  Wetheringset  in  Suffolk.
He  was  buried  in  Westminster  abbey.  His  name
is  perpetuated  in  Hakluyt's  head,  a  promontory  on
the  northwest  end  of  Spitzbergen,  named  by  Henry
Hudson  in  1608 ;  in  Hakluyt's  island  in  Baffin's
bay,  named  by  Bylot,  and  in  the  Hakluyt  society,
founded  in  1846  for  the  republication  of  early  voy-
ages and  travels.  He  wrote  the  following  books :
"  Diuers  Voyages  touching  the  Discouerie  of  Amer-
ica and  Islands  adjacent  unto  the  Same"  (1582;
new  ed.,  1850) ;  "  Foure  Voyages  unto  Florida
(1587) ;  an  improved  edition  of  Peter  Martyr's
"  De  Orbe  Novo  "  (1587),  which  at  his  suggestion
was  translated  into  English  by  Michael  Lok,  the
London  agent  of  the  Muscovy  company,  under  the
title  "  The  Historie  of  the  West  Indies  "  :  "  The
Principal  Navigations,  Voyages,  and  Discoveries
made  by  the  English  Nation  "  (fol.,  London ;  en-
larged ed.,  3  vols,  in  2,  fol.,  1598-1600 ;  new  ed.
with  additions,  5  vols.,  4to,  London,  1809-'12).  Be-
sides the  different  voyages,  this  work  contains
many  curious  public  documents,  such  as  charters
granted  by  the  czar,  the  sultan,  and  other  mon-
archs  to  English  merchants.  In  many  copies  the
voyage  to  Cadiz  (pp.  607-'19,  vol.  i.,  2d  ed.)  is
omitted,  having  been  suppressed  by  order  of
Queen  Elizabeth  after  the  disgrace  of  the  Earl  of
Essex.  The  additions  to  the  last  edition  com-
prise all  the  voyages  and  travels  printed  by  Hak-
luyt, or  at  his  suggestion,  which  were  not  included
in  his  collection.  His  unpublished  manuscripts
were  used  by  Purchas  in  his  "  Pilgrims."  An
analysis  of  Hakluyt's  chief  works  is  contained  in
Oldys's  "  British  Librarian."  Hallam  says  that
"  the  best  map  of  the  sixteenth  century  is  one  of
uncommon  rarity,  which  is  found  in  a  very  few  cop-
ies of  the  first  edition  of  Hakluyt's  '  Voyages.' "

HALDEMAN,  Samuel  Stehman,  naturalist,
b.  in  Locust  Grove,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,
1812 ;  d.  in  Chickies,  Pa.,  10  Sept.,  1880.  He  was
educated  at  a  classical  school  in  Harrisburg,  and
then  spent  two  years  in  Dickinson  college,  but


HALDEMAN


HALDIMAND


29


was  not  graduated.  Scientific  pursuits  were  ap-
proved by  his  parents,  but  for  a  time  he  was
compelled  to  manage  a  saw-mill.  In  1836  Henry
D.  Rogers,  having  been  appointed  state  geologist
of  New  Jersey,  sent  for  Mr.  Haldeman,  who  had
been  his  pupil  at  Dickinson,  to  assist  him.  A  year
later,  on  the  reorgan-
ization of  the  Penn-
sylvania geological
survey,  Haldeman
was  transferred  to  his
own  state,  and  was
actively  engaged  on
the  survey  until  1842,
preparing  five  an-
nual reports,  and  per-
sonally  surveying  the
counties  of  Dauphin
and  Lancaster.  In
1840  he  began  the
publication  of  his
monograph  on  the
"  Fresh- Water  Uni-
valve Mollusca  of  the
United  States,"  in
which  he  described
the  Scolithus  linea-
ris, a  new  genus  and  species  of  fossil  plant,  the
most  ancient  organic  remains  in  Pennsylvania.
During  the  year  1842-'3  he  gave  a  course  of  lec-
tures on  zoology  at  the  Franklin  institute,  and  in
1851  became  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  This  chair  he  held
until  1855,  when  he  accepted  a  similar  professor-
ship in  Delaware  college.  Meanwhile  he  also
lectured  on  geology  and  chemistry  in  the  State
agricultural  college  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1869
became  the  first  occupant  of  the  chair  of  com-
parative philology  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, which  he  held  continuously  until  his  death.
Prof.  Haldeman  made  numerous  visits  to  Europe
for  purposes  of  research,  and  when  studying  the
human  voice  in  Rome  determined  the  vocal
repertoire  of  between  forty  and  fifty  varieties  of
human  speech.  His  ear  was  remarkably  delicate,
and  he  discovered  a  new  organ  of  sound  in  lepi-
dopterous  insects,  which  was  described  by  him  in
Silliman's  "  American  Journal  of  Science "  in
1848.  He  made  extensive  researches  among  Indian
dialects,  and  also  in  Pennsylvania  Dutch,  besides
investigations  in  the  English,  Chinese,  and  other
languages.  Prof.  Haldeman  was  an  earnest  advocate
of  spelling  reform,  and  was  the  author  of  several
manuals  of  orthography,  orthoepy,  and  etymology.
In  1858  he  gained  the  Trevelyan  prize  over  eigh-
teen competitors  by  his  essay  on  "  Analytical  Or-
thography "  (Philadelphia,  1860).  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  many  scientific  societies,  was  the  founder
and  president  of  the  Philological  society,  and  one
of  the  early  members  of  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  During  1851-2  he  edited  the  "  Pennsyl-
vania Farmer's  Journal."  He  was  a  contributor  to
the  "  Iconographic  Cyclopaedia"  (New  York,  1852),
and  furnished  the  articles  on  articulata,  insecta,
entomology,  conchology,  radiata,  and  others.  His
contributions  to  scientific  literature  have  been  large,
and  his  papers  on  philology,  conchology,  entomolo-
gy, geology,  chemistry,  and  paleontology  include
over  two  hundred  titles.  He  has  published,  besides
works  previously  mentioned.  "  Zoological  Contribu-
tions" (Philadelphia,  1842-3);  "Elements  of  Latin
Pronunciation"  (1851);  an  edition  of  Taylor's
"Statistics  of  Coal"  (2d  ed.,  1855);  "Tours  of  a
Chess  Knight "  (1865) ;  "  Affixes  in  their  Origin  and
Application"  (1865);  "Rhymes  of  the  Poets,"  un-


der the  pen-name  of  "  Felix  Ago  "  (1868) ;  "  Penn-
sylvania Dutch  "  (1872) ;  "  Outlines  of  Etymology  "
(1877);  and  "Word-Building"  (1881).

HALDERMAN,  John  Acoming,  diplomatist,
b.  in  Missouri,  15  April,  1833.  He  spent  his  boy-
hood in  Kentucky,  and  studied  law  there,  but  emi-
grated to  Kansas  in  1854.  In  his  new  home  he
opposed  slavery,  and  was  successively  private  sec-
retary to  the  first  governor,  judge  of  the  probate
court,  mayor  of  Leavenworth  two  terms,  member
of  both  houses  of  the  legislature,  and  regent  of  the
State  university.  He  was  major  of  the  1st  Kansas
infantry  during  the  civil  war,  provost-marshal-gen-
eral of  the  western  army,  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Na-
thaniel Lyon,  in  1861,  and  was  mentioned  in  the
official  report  for  "  gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct "  at  the  battle  of  Springfield.  After  the  war
he  travelled  extensively.  In  1880  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  consul  at  Bangkok.  Siam,  and  subsequently
promoted  to  the  post  of  consul-general  by  Presi-
dent Garfield.  In  1882  he  was  further  advanced
to  the  station  of  minister-resident  in  Siam.  In
1883  Highland  university  conferred  upon  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  For  his  endeavors  in  behalf  of
civilization  in  the  far  east  he  received  the  thanks
of  the  Universal  postal  union.  In  August,  1885,
he  resigned  his  office  and  returned  to  the  United
States.  In  recognition  of  his  "  faithful  observance
of  treaty  relations,"  and  of  his  efforts  to  suppress
a  nefarious  traffic  in  spirits  under  cover  of  the
American  flag,  his  majesty,  the  king  of  Siam,
honored  him  with  the  decoration  of  knight  com-
mander of  the  most  exalted  order  of  the  white  ele-
phant. King  Norodom  tendered  the  investiture  of
commander  of  the  royal  order  of  Cambodia  in  ap- /
preciation  of  his  efforts  to  introduce  posts  and
telegraphs  into  Cambodia  and  Cochin  China.  He
was  honored  by  the  friendship  of  Gen.  Grant,
who  felt  great  interest  in  his  mission  of  peace  and
justice  to  Siam,  and  to  the  great  soldier  is  as-
cribed the  declaration  that  the  "  minister's  career
in  southern  Asia  was  one  of  the  highest  successes
in  American  diplomacy."

HALDIMAND,  Sir  Frederick,  British  general,
b.  in  the  canton  of  Neuchatel,  Switzerland,  in  Oc-
tober, 1718;  d.  in  Yverdun,  Switzerland,  5  June,
1791.  He  early  entered  the  Prussian  service,  but
in  1754,  with  his  friend  Bouquet,  joined  the  Brit-
ish army.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  50th  Royal  American  regiment,  4  Jan.,  1756,
and  came  to  America  in  1757.  He  distinguished
himself,  8  July,  1758,  in  the  attack  on  Ticonde-
roga,  and  by  his  gallant  defence  of  Oswego  in
1759  against"  the  attack  of  4,000  French  and  In-
dians under  Chevalier  de  la  Come.  He  accom-
panied the  army  under  Amherst  from  Oswego  to
Montreal  in  1760,  and  in  1762  was  promoted  to
colonel.  He  was  employed  in  Florida  in  1767,
and  on  his  arrival  at  Pensacola  enlarged  the  fort
there,  widened  the  streets,  and  otherwise  improved
the  place.  On  25  May,  1772,  he  became  major-
general  in  America,  and  in  October  following
colonel  of  the  60th  foot.  He  returned  to  England
in  August,  1775,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  infor-
mation to  the  ministry  about  the  condition  of
affairs  in  the  colonies,  was  commissioned  a  general
in  America,  1  Jan.,  1776,  and  in  1777  a  lieutenant-
general  in  the  army.  On  27  June,  1778,  he  suc-
ceeded Sir  Guy  Carleton  as  governor  of  Canada,
and  administered  that  office  till  15  Nov.,  1784,
when  he  was  recalled  to  England.  In  his  adminis-
tration of  the  affairs  of  Canada  he  was  charged
with  being  severe  and  arbitrary,  and  successful  ac-
tions for  false  imprisonment  were  brought  against
him  after  his  return  to  England.


30


HALE


HALE


HALE,  Benjamin,  educator,  b.  in  Newburv-
port,  Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1797;  d.  there,  15  July,  1863.
lie  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1818,  studied
theology  at  Andover,  and  in  1822  was  licensed  to
preach  as  a  Congregationalist.  In  1823  he  became
tutor  in  Bowdoin,  but  subsequently  established  the
Gardiner  lyceum,  of  which  he  became  principal.
Prom  1827" till  1835  (when  his  chair  was  abolished)
he  was  professor  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy  at
Dartmouth,  and  aided  in  the  foundation  of  its  geo-
logical and  mineralogical  cabinet.  Meantime,  he
took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
The  winter  of  1835-'6  he  spent  in  St.  Croix,  W.  I.,
for  his  health.  In  1836.  he  became  president  of
Hobart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  and  held  the  office
till  feeble  health  compelled  him  to  resign  on  19
Jan.,  1858,  when  he  returned  to  his  native  town.
He  published  "  Introduction  to  the  Mechanical
Principles  of  Carpentry  "  (Boston,  1827)  and  "  Scrip-
tural Illustrations  of  the  Liturgy"  (1835).

HALE,  Eugene,  senator,  b.  in  Turner,  Ox-
ford, co.,  Me.,  9  June,  1836.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  studied  law  in  Portland,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1857,  and  began  to  prac-
tise at  Ellsworth,  Me.  He  was  for  nine  successive
years  county  attorney  for  Hancock  county,  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  of  Maine  in  1867-'80,  and
was  then  elected  a  representative  in  congress  from
that  state,  serving  from  1869  till  1879.  He  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  to  suc-
ceed Hannibal  Hamlin,  took  his  seat  4  March,  1881,
and  was  re-elected  in  1887.  He  was  appointed
postmaster-general  in  1874,  but  declined,  and  also
refused  a  cabinet  appointment  by  President  Hayes.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national  con-
ventions of  1868, 1876,  and  1880.  Mr.  Hale  has  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Colby  university.

HALE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  3  June,  1636 ;  d.  15  May,  1700.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1657.  In  1664  he  went
to  Beverly  as  a  religious  teacher,  and  on  20  Sept.,
1667,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  newly  organized
church  at  that  place — a  charge  which  he  retained
till  his  death.  He  was  chaplain  in  the  expedition
to  Canada  in  1690,  and  in  1734  his  services  were
rewarded  by  a  grant  of  three  hundred  acres  of
land  to  his  heirs  by  the  general  court.  During  the
Salem  witchcraft  trials  in  1692,  Mr.  Hale  attended
the  examinations  of  the  accused  persons,  and  ap-
proved of  the  judicial  murders  resulting  from  the
charges.  He  afterward  published  "  A  Modest  In-
quiry into  the  Nature  of  Witchcraft "  (1697),  which
indicated  a  change  of  opinion  relative  to  the  jus-
tice of  the  executions.  His  only  other  publication
was  an  "  election  sermon  "  of  nearly  two  hundred
pages  (1684).— His  grandson,  Robert,  physician,  b.
in  Beverly,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1703 ;  d.  20  March,  1767,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1721,  and  subse-
quently practised  as  a  physician  in  his  native
town.  He  commanded  a  regiment  under  Sir  Will-
iam Pepperell  at  the  capture  of  Louisburg  in  1745,
in  1747  was  appointed  by  the  legislature  of  Massa-
chusetts a  commissioner  to  New  York  to  adopt
measures  for  the  general  defence,  and  in  1755  was
a  commissioner  to  New  Hampshire  to  concert  an
expedition  against  the  French.  He  was  appointed
sheriff  of  Essex  county,  Mass.,  in  1761,  and  was  for
thirteen  years  a  member  of  the  legislature. — John's
great-grandson,  Nathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Coventry,
Conn.,  6  June,  1755 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  22  Sept.,
1776,  was  a  feeble  child,  and  gave  little  promise
of  surviving  his  infancy;  but  as  he  grew  up  he
became  fond  of  out-door  sports,  and  was  famous
for  his  athletic  feats.  His  attention  was  early
turned  to  books,  and  his  father  desired  him  to


study  for  the  ministry.  Accordingly,  he  was  fit-
ted for  college  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Huntington,
and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1773.  Dr.  Eneas
Munson,  of  New  Haven,  says  of  him  at  this  time
that  "  he  was  almost  six  feet  in  height,  perfectly
proportioned,  and  in  figure  and  deportment  he  was
the  most  manly  man  I  have  ever  met.  His  chest
was  broad  ;  his  muscles  were  firm ;  his  face  wore  a
most  benign  expression  ;  his  complexion  was  rose-
ate, his  eyes  were  light  blue,  and  beamed  with  in-
telligence ;  his  hair  was  soft  and  light-brown  in
color,  and  his  speech  was  rather  low,  sweet,  and
musical.  His  personal  beauty  and  grace  of  man-
ner were  most  charming.  Why,  all  the  girls  in
New  Haven  fell  in  love  with  him,  and  wept  tears
of  real  sorrow  when  they  heard  of  his  sad  fate.  In
dress  he  was  always  neat ;  he  was  quick  to  lend  a
helping  hand  to  a  being  in  distress,  brute  or  hu-
man :  was  overflowing  with  good  humor,  and  was
the  idol  of  all  his  acquaintances."  At  his  gradua-
tion he  was  engaged  with  William  Robinson  and
Ezra  Samson  in  a  Latin  syllogistic  dispute  followed
by  a  debate  on  the  question,  "  Whether  the  educa-
tion of  daughters  be  not,  without  any  just  reason,
more  neglected  than  that  of  the  sons."  His  class-
mate, James  Hillhouse,  wrote :  "  In  this  debate  Hale
was  triumphant.  He  was  the  champion  of  '  the
daughters,'  and  most  ably  advocated  their  cause."
He  then  taught  school  first  in  East  Haddam  and
afterward  in  New  London.  The  news  of  Lexington
reached  the  quiet  village  where  he  was  teaching,
and  a  town-meeting  was  at  once  held.  Among
the  speakers  was  Hale,  who  urged  immediate  action,
saying:  "Let  us  march  immediately,  and  never
lay  down  our  arms  until  we  have  obtained  our  in-
dependence." He  at  once  enrolled  himself  as  a
volunteer,  and  was  made  a  lieutenant  in  Col.  Charles
Webb's  regiment.  In  September,  1775,  his  regi-
ment was  ordered  to  Cambridge,  where,  after  par-
ticipating in  the  siege  of  Boston,  he  was  made  a
captain  in  January,  1776.  He  then  went  to  New
York,  where,  early  in  September,  with  a  few  picked
men,  he  captured  at  midnight  a  supply  vessel  that
was  anchored  in  the  East  river  under  the  protection
of  the  guns  of  the  British  man-of-war  "Asia."
The  stores  of  provisions  from  the  prize  were  dis-
tributed among  his  hungry  fellow-soldiers.  About
this  time  he  was  made  captain  of  a  company  in  the
"  Connecticut  Rangers,"  a  corps  known  as  "  Con-
gress's Own,"  commanded  by  Thomas  Knowlton.
In  response  to  a  call  from  Gen.  Washington,  he
volunteered  to  enter  the  British  lines  and  procure
intelligence.  Disguising  himself  as  a  school-master
and  loyalist,  he  visited  all  of  the  British  camps  on
Long  Island  and  in  New  York,  openly  making
observations,  drawings,  and  memoranda  of  fortifi-
cations. As  he  was  about  returning,  he  was  ap-
prehended and  taken  before  Sir  William  Howe,
who,  upon  the  evidence  found  in  his  shoes,  con-
demned him  to  be  executed  before  sunrise  on  the
next  morning.  He  was  denied  the  attendance  of
a  chaplain,  and  his  request  for  a  Bible  was  refused.
The  letters  he  had  written  to  his  sisters  and  be-
trothed (who  was  his  step-sister)  were  destroyed
before  his  eyes  by  the  provost-marshal,  William
Cunningham,  so  that,  as  he  afterward  said,  "the
rebels  should  never  know  that  thev  had  a  man
who  could  die  with  such  firmness.*  His  execu-
tion took  place  in  Col.  Henry  Rutgers's  orchard,
near  the  present  junction  of  Market  street  and
East  Broadway.  As  he  ascended  the  scaffold  he
said:  "You  are  shedding  the  blood  of  the  inno-
cent ;  if  I  had  ten  thousand  lives,  1  would  lay  them
down  in  defence  of  my  injured,  bleeding  country  " ;
and  his  last  words  were :  "  I  only  regret  that  I  have


HALE


HALE


31


but  one  life  to  lose  for  ray  country."  A  little  fort,
built  during  the  war  of  1812  on  Black  Rock,  at
the  entrance  of  New  Haven  harbor,  was  named
Fort  Hale  in  his  honor,  and  a  granite  memorial

was  erected  at
Coventry  in
1846.  The  illus-
tration repre-
sents Karl  Ger-
hardt's  bronze
statue,  which
was  placed  in
the  capitol  at
Hartford  on  14
June,  1887.  An
address  present-
ing the  statue
to  the  state  was
made  by  Charles
Dudley  Warner,
and  responded
to  by  Gov.  Phi-
neas  C.  Louns-
bury.  The  So-
ciety of  the  Sons
of  the  Revo-
lution have  at
present  (1887)
undertaken  the
raising  of  funds
for  the  purpose
of  erecting  a
statue  to  Capt.
Hale's  memory  in  Central  park.  The  manuscript
of  one  of  his  college  orations  is  preserved  by  the
Linonian  society  at  Yale.  President  Timothy
Dwight,  the  elder,  who  was  his  tutor  when  at  Yale,
has  commemorated  his  career  in  verse.  See  also
"  Life  of  Captain  Nathan  Hale,  the  Martyr  Spy  of
the  American  Revolution,"  by  Isaac  W.  Stuart
(Hartford,  1856),  and  "The  Two*Spies,  Nathan  Hale
and  John  Andre,"  by  Benson  J.  Lossing  (New  York,
1886). — Nathan's  nephew  Nathan,  journalist,  b.  in
Westhampton,  Mass.,  16  Aug.,  1784;  d.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  9  Feb.,  1863,  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1804,  was  two  years  a  tutor  in  Phillips  Exeter
academy,  and,  removing  to  Boston,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1810.  For  four  years  he  followed  his
profession,  and  then,  with  Henry  D.  Sedgwick,  be-
came editor  of  the  "Boston  Weekly  Messenger,"
the  first  weekly  periodical  devoted  to  literature
and  politics  that  was  established  in  the  United
States.  In  March,  1814  he  purchased  the  "  Boston
Daily  Advertiser,"  the  first  daily  in  New  England,
and  for  many  years  the  only  one,  and  continued
its  chief  editor  until  his  death.  In  politics  this
journal  was  first  Federalist,  then  Whig,  and  finally
Republican,  and  its  influence  became  very  great.
It  opposed  the  Missouri  bill  in  1820  and  the  Ne-
braska bill  in  1854,  and  was  the  first  paper  to  rec-
ommend the  free  colonization  of  Kansas.  The
principle  of  editorial  responsibility,  as  distinct
from  that  of  individual  contributions,  was  estab-
lished in  its  columns.  Mr.  Hale  was  editor  and
publisher  of  the  "Monthly  Chronicle"  during
1840-'2,  and  was  one  of  a  club  that  founded  the
"North  American  Review"  in  1815,  and  the
"Christian  Examiner"  in  1823.  He  was  acting
chairman  of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  internal
improvements  in  1828,  and  was  an  early  advocate
of  railroads  in  New  England.  He  was  first  presi-
dent of  the  Boston  and  Worcester  railroad,  the
first  company  in  New  England  to  use  steam  power,
and  continued  in  that  capacity  for  nineteen  years.
In  1846  he  was  appointed  chairman  of  the  com-


mission for  introducing  water  into  the  city.  He
was  at  various  times  a  member  of  the  legislature,
serving  in  both  houses,  and  was  a  delegate  to  two
Constitutional  conventions.  Mr.  Hale  was  an  active
member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences,  and  also  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society.  In  1816  he  married  Sarah  Preston,  sister
of  Edward  Everett.  He  published  an  excellent
map  of  New  England  (1825),  and  a  series  of  stereo-
type maps  on  a  plan  of  his  own  invention  (1830),
being  the  first  maps  with  names  printed  in  page
with  type  made  by  the  founders,  also  "  Journal  of
Debates  and  Proceedings  in  the  Massachusetts
Constitutional  Convention"  (Boston,  1821),  and
numerous  pamphlets  on  the  practicability  of  rail-
roads, on  canals,  and  other  topics. — Nathan's  broth-
er, Enoch,  physician,  b.  in  W  esthampton,  Mass.,  19
Jan.,  1790 ;  d.  in  Boston,  12  Nov.,  1848.  His  father,
of  the  same  name,  was  the  first  minister  of  West-
hampton (1779-1837).  The  son  was  educated  at
Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  medicine  in
1813,  and  began  practice  at  Gardiner,  Me.  In  1816
he  removed  to  Boston,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Massachu-
setts medical  society  and  of  the  American  academy
of  arts  and  sciences,  and  in  addition  to  frequent
essays  and  papers  in  medical  journals  was  the  au-
thor of  a  dissertation  on  "  Animal  Heat  and  Respi-
ration "  ;  "  History  and  Description  of  the  Spotted
Fever,"  which  prevailed  at  Gardiner,  Me.,  in  1814 ;
two  Boylston  prize  essays  in  1819  and  1821 ;  and
a  work  on  "  Typhoid  Fever." — Another  nephew  of
Nathan,  David,  journalist,  b.  in  Lisbon,  Conn.,
25  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  25  Jan.,
1849,  was  educated  at  public  schools  and  by  his
father,  who  was  a  clergyman.  He  settled  in  Boston
in  1809,  and  entered  mercantile  pursuits,  but  was
unsuccessful.  In  1827  he  came  to  New  York,  where
he  became  the  associate  editor  and  subsequently
joint  proprietor  with  Gerald  Hallock  of  the  "  New
York  Journal  of  Commerce."  Under  his  direction
this  journal  advocated  free-trade,  the  sub-treasury,
and  other  financial  measures  of  the  Democratic
party.  In  1840  he  purchased  the  Broadway  Taber-
nacle, where  an  orthodox  Congregational  church
was  established.  He  contributed  largely  to  benevo-
lent and  religious  enterprises,  and  for  many  years
supported  several  missionaries.  See  "  Memoir  of
David  Hale,  with  Selections  from  his  Writings"
(New  York,  1849). — Nathan,  son  of  the  second
Nathan,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  Nov.,
1818 ;  d.  there,  9  Jan.,  1871,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1838,  and  at  its  law-school  in  1841,  and
was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  courts  of  Mas-
sachusetts in  1841,  but  turned  his  attention  to  lit-
erary pursuits.  From  1841  till  1853  he  was  associ-
ated with  his  father  in  the  editorial  management
of  the  "  Boston  Daily  Advertiser,"  and  in  1842  also
undertook  the  editorship  of  the  "  Boston  Miscellany
of  Literature."  In  1853,  finding  that  this  double
duty  was  too  severely  taxing  his  constitution,  he
retired  from  editorial"  work.  Subsequently  he  was
for  a  short  time  acting  professor  of  mental  and
moral  philosophy  in  Union  college,  and  was  also
associated  with  his  brother,  Edward  Everett,  in  con-
ducting "Old  and  New."— His  sister,  Lucretia
Peabody,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1820,  was
educated  at  George  B.  Emerson's  school  in  Bos-
ton. Subsequently  she  devoted  herself  to  litera-
ture, and  was  a  member  of  the  Boston  school  com-
mittee for  two  years.  Besides  numerous  stories
contributed  to  periodicals  and  newspapers,  some  of
which  have  been  collected  in  book-form,  she  has
published  "  The  Lord's  Supper  and  its  Observance  "
(Boston,  1866);  "The  Service  of  Sorrow"  (1867) ;


32


IIAIiK


HALE


CZoL^^S-.  *&u£±


"The  Straggle  for  Life,  a  Story  of  Home  "(1867)
"  The  Wolf  at  the  Door,"  No  Name  Series  (1877)
"  The  Needlework  Series,  including  300  Results '
(1879) ;  "  The  Peterkin  Papers  "  (1882) ;  and  "  The
Last  of  the  Peterkins"  (1886).  — Her  brother,
Edward  Everett,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
3  April,  1822,  after  studying  at  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1839.  He
then  spent  two  years  as  an  usher  in  the  Latin-
school,  and  read  theology  and  church  history  with

the  Rev.  Samuel  K.
Lothrop  and  the
Rev.  John  G.  Pal-
frey. In  1842  he  was
licensed  to  preach
by  the  Boston  as-
sociation of  Con-
gregational minis-
ters, after  which  he
spent  several  years
in  ministering  to
various  congrega-
tions, passing  the
winter  of  1844-5  in
Washington.  His
first  regular  settle-
ment was  in  1846
as  pastor  of  the
Church  of  the  Unity  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  where  he
remained  until  1856.  In  that  year  he  was  called
to  the  South  Congregational  (Unitarian)  church  in
Boston,  where  he  still  (1887)  remains.  Mr.  Hale's  in-
fluence has  been  extensively  felt  in  all  philanthropic
movements.  His  book  "  Ten  Times  One  is  Ten  "
(Boston,  1870)  led  to  the  establishment  of  clubs  de-
voted to  charity,  which  are  now  scattered  through-
out the  United  States,  with  chapters  in  Europe,
Asia,  Africa,  and  the  islands  of  the  Pacific.  These
associations  have  a  membership  that  is  supposed  to
exceed  50,000  in  number,  and  are  called  "Harry
Wadsworth  clubs."  They  have  for  their  motto :
"Look  up  and  not  down;  look  forward  and  not
back;  look  out  and  not  in;  lend  a  hand."  The
"Look-up  Legion,"  a  similar  organization  among
the  Sunday-schools,  is  due  to  his  inspiration,  and
includes  upward  of  5,000  members.  He  also  has
taken  great  interest  in  the  Chautauqua  literary
and  scientific  circle,  of  which  he  is  one  of  the
counsellors,  and  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
"  Chautauquan."  Mr.  Hale  has  served  his  college
as  a  member  of  the  board  of  overseers  for  succes-
sive terms,  and  has  been  very  active  in  advancing
the  interests  of  Harvard.  He  has  also  held  the
office  of  president  of  the  *  B  K  society,  and  in
1879  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.*D.  from  Harvard.
As  a  boy  he  learned  to  set  type  in  his  father's
printing-office,  and  he  has  served  on  the  "  Daily
Advertiser  "  in  every  capacity  from  reporter  up  to
editor-in-chief.  Before  he  attained  his  majority
he  wrote  his  full  share  in  the  monthly  issues  of
the  "  Monthly  Chronicle  "  and  the  "  Boston  Miscel-
lany." In  later  years  he  edited  the  "Christian
Examiner,"  and  also  the  "  Sunday-School  Gazette."
In  1869  he  founded,  with  the  American  Unitarian
association,  "Old  and  New,"  for  the  purpose  of
giving  wider  currency  to  liberal  Christian  ideas
through  the  medium  of  a  literary  magazine.  Six
years  afterward  this  journal  was  merged  into
"Scribner's  Monthly."  In  1886  he  again  returned
to  journalism  and  began  the  publication  of  "  Lend
a  Hand;  a  Record  of  Progress  and  Journal  of
Organized  Charity."  As  a  writer  of  short  stories
Mr.  Hale  has  achieved  signal  distinction.  His
"  My  Double,  and  How  he  undid  Me,"  published  in
the  "Atlantic  Monthly"  in  1859,  at  once  caught


the  popular  fancy.  "  The  Man  Without  a  Coun-
try, published  anonymously  in  the  "Atlantic"
during  1863,  produced  a  deep  impression  on  the
public  mind,  and  has  a  permanent  place  among
the  classic  short  stories  of  American  writers.  His
"Skeleton  in  the  Closet"  also  well  known,  was
contributed  to  the  "  Galaxy "  in  1866.  He  has
been  associated  in  several  literary  combinations,
among  which  is  "  Six  of  One  by  Half  a  Dozen  of
the  Other  "  (Boston,  1872),  a  social  romance  jointly
constructed  by  Harriet  B.  Stowe,  Adeline  D.  T.
Whitney,  Lucretia  P.  Hale,  Frederick  W.  Loring,
Frederic  B.  Perkins,  and  Mr.  Hale  himself,  its
projector.  His  historical  studies  began  when  he
was  connected  with  the  "  Advertiser,  and  for  six
years  he  was  its  South  American  editor,  having
been  led  to  the  study  of  Spanish  and  Spanish-
American  history  at  a  time  when  he  expected
to  be  the  reader  and  amanuensis  of  William  H.
Prescott,  the  historian.  Beginning  in  this  way,
his  studies  have  increased  until  he  is  regarded  as
an  authority  on  Spanish-American  affairs.  He  has
contributed  important  articles  to  Justin  Winsor's
"  History  of  Boston,"  to  his  "  History  of  America,"
to  Bryant  and  Gay's  "  Popular  History  of  the
United  States,"  and  frequent  papers  to  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  American  antiquarian  society.  Of
the  latter,  perhaps  the  most  important  is  his  dis-
covery of  how  California  came  to  be  so  named.  He
has  edited  "  Original  Documents  from  the  State
Paper  Office,  London,  and  the  British  Museum,
illustrating  the  History  of  Sir  W.  Raleigh's  First
American  Colony  and  the  Colony  at  Jamestown,
with  a  Memoir  of  Sir  Ralph  Lane  "  (Boston,  1860),
and  John  Lingard's  "  History  of  England "  (13
vols.,  Boston,  1853).  Besides  the  foregoing  he  has
published  "  The  Rosary  "  (Boston,  1848) ; "  Margaret
Percival  in  America"  (1850);  "Sketches  of  Chris-
tian History  "  (1850) ;  "  Letters  on  Irish  Emigra-
tion "  (1852);  "Kansas  and  Nebraska"  (1854);
"Ninety  Days'  WTorth  of  Europe"  (1861);  with  the
Rev.  John  Williams,  "  The  President's  Words "
(1865);  "If,  Yes,  and  Perhaps"  (1868);  "Puritan
Politics  in  England  and  New  England"  (1869);
"The  Ingham  Papers"  (1869);  "How  To  Dolt"
(1870) ;  "  His  Level  Best,  and  Other  Stories  "  (1870);
"  Daily  Bread,  and  Other  Stories  "  (1870) ;  "  Ups
and  Downs,  an  Every-Day  Novel "  (1871) ;  "  Sybans,
and  Other  Homes"  (1871);  "Christmas  Eve,  and
Christmas  Day"  (1874);  "In  His  Name"  (1874):
"  A  Summer's  Vacation,  Four  Sermons "  (1874) ;
"  Workingmen's  Homes,  Essays  and  Stories  "  (1874);
"  The  Good  Time  Coming,  or  Our  New  Crusade  "
(1875);  "  One  Hundred  Years  "  (1875) ;  "  Philip  No-
lan's Friends  "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  Back  to  Back  "
(1877);  "Gone  to  Texas,  or  the  Wonderful  Ad-
ventures of  a  Pullman  "  (Boston,  1877) ;  "  What
Career  ?  "  (1878)  ;  "  Mrs.  Merriam's  Scholars  "
(1878) ;  "  The  Life  in  Common  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Bi-
ble and  its  Revision  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Kingdom  of
God"  (1880);  "Crusoe  in  New  York"  (1880);
"Stories  of  War"  (1880);  "June  to  May"  (1881);
"Stories  of  the  Sea"  (1881);  "Stories  of  Ad-
venture" (1881);  "Stories  of  Discovery"  (1883);
"Seven  Spanish  Cities"  (1883);  "Fortunes  of
Rachel  "(New  York,  1884);  "Christmas  in  a  Pal-
ace "  (1884) ;  "  Christmas  in  Narragansett "  (1884) ;
"  Stories  of  Invention  "  (Boston,  1885) ;  "  Easter  "
(1886);  "Franklin  in  France"  (1887);  "The  Life
of  Washington"  (New  York,  1887);  and  "The
History  of  the  United  States." — Another  brother,
Charles,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  June,
1831 ;  d.  there,  1  March,  1882,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1850,  and  entered  his  father's  em-
ploy as  a  reporter. In  1852  he  began  the  publica-


HALE


HALE


33


tion  of  "To-day,  a  Boston  Literary  Journal,"  a
weekly  of  which  only  two  volumes  were  published,
and  later  became  junior  editor  of  the  "  Daily  Ad-
vertiser." Meanwhile  he  also  contributed  to  the
"  North  American  Review  "  and  to  the  "  Nautical
Almanac."  In  1855  he  was  chosen  to  the  legisla-
ture from  one  of  the  Boston  districts,  and  continued
to  be  re-elected  until  1860,  being  speaker  during
his  last  term,  and  the  youngest  man  ever  chosen
to  that  office.  From  1864  till  1870  he  was  U.  S.
consul-general  to  Egypt,  and  it  was  largely
through  his  efforts  that  John  H.  Surratt  was  ar-
rested and  sent  back  to  the  United  States.  In  1871
he  returned  to  Boston,  and  was  elected  in  that
year  to  the  state  senate.  He  was  appointed  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  railroads,  in  which  ca-
pacity he  drew  up  the  general  railroad  act  now
in  force,  and  was  active  in  securing  its  enactment.
In  1872-'3  he  was  assistant  secretary  of  state  under
Hamilton  Fish.  He  then  returned  to  Boston,  be-
gan the  study  of  law,  and  in  1874  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  In  the  same  year  he  was  again  elected
to  the  legislature,  and  continued  to  serve  in  that
body  for  four  years.  During  the  latter  part  of  his
life  he  lived  in  retirement,  occupied  in  literary
work,  and  was  much  of  the  time  an  invalid. —
Another  sister,  Susan,  artist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
5  Dec,  1838,  was  educated  at  the  school  of  George
B.  Emerson,  and  then  for  many  years  was  a  suc-
cessful teacher  in  Boston.  Subsequently  she  gave
up  other  instruction  that  she  might  introduce  the
more  careful  study  of  water-color  painting,  which
•she  had  followed  under  English,  French,  and  Ger-
man masters.  She  exhibited  in  Boston  and  New
York  a  series  of  pictures  from  the  White  Moun-
tains, from  North  Carolina,  from  Spain,  and  other
countries  in  which  she  had  travelled.  Miss  Hale  has
been  associated  with  her  brother.  Edward  Everett
Hale,  in  the  publication  of  "A  Family  Flight
through  France,  Germany,  Norway,  and  Switzer-
land," "  A  Family  Flight  over  Egypt  and  Syria,"
"  A  Family  Flig'ht  through  Spain,"  "  A  Family
Flight  around  Home,"  "A  Family  Flight  through
Mexico "  (Boston,  1881-'6) ;  and  "  The  Story  of
Spain"  (New  York,  1886);  and  has  in  preparation
"The  Story  of  Mexico."  She  also  edited  "  Life  and
Letters  of  Thomas  Gold  Appleton "  (New  York,
1885). — Edward  Everett's  daughter,  Ellen  Day,
artist,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  11  Feb.,  1855,  was
educated  under  the  supervision  of  her  aunt,  Susan
Hale,  and  received  her  first  instructions  in  art
from  Dr.  William  Rimmer,  afterward  studying
under  William  M.  Hunt  and  Helen  M.  Knowlton,
and  in  Julien's  art-school  in  Paris.  Miss  Hale  has
travelled  in  Spain  and  Italy,  and  has  resided  in
Paris  and  in  London.  Her  present  home  is  in  Bos-
ton, where  she  is  engaged  in  artistic  work.  She
has  exhibited  "  Un  Hiver  Americain  "  and  "  An
Old  Retainer "  in  the  Paris  salon,  and  "  A  New
England  Girl "  in  the  Royal  academy,  London.

HALE,  John  Parker,  senator,  b.  in  Rochester,
N.  H.,  31  March,  1806 ;  d.  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  19  Nov.,
1873.  He  studied  at  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  and
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1827.  He  began  his
law  studies  in  Rochester  with  Jeremiah  H.  Wood-
man, and  continued  them  with  Daniel  M.  Chris-
tie in  Dover,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
20  Aug.,  1830.  In  March,  1832,  he  was  elected  to
the  state  house  of  representatives  as  a  Democrat.
On  22  March,  1834,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  district
attorney  bv  President  Jackson,  was  reappointed  by
President  Van  Buren,  5  April,  1838,  and  was  re-
moved, 17  June,  1841,  by  President  Tyler  on  party
grounds.  On  8  March,  1842,  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, and  took  his  seat,  4  Dec,  1843.  He  opposed
vol.  in. — 3


the  21st  rule  suppressing  anti-slavery  petitions,
but  supported  Polk  and  Dallas  in  the  presidential
canvass  of  1844,  and  was  nominated  for  re-election
on  a  general  ticket  with  three  associates.  The
New  Hampshire
legislature,  28  Dec,
1844,  passed  reso-
lutions instructing
their  representa-
tives to  vote  for  the
annexation  of  Tex-
as, and  President
Polk,  in  his  message
of  that  year,  advo-
cated annexation.
On  7  Jan.,  1845,
Mr.  Hale  wrote  his
noted  Texas  letter,
refusing  to  support
annexation.  The
State  convention  of
his  party  was  re-
assembled at  Con-
cord, 12  Feb.,  1845,  and  under  the  lead  of  Frank-
lin Pierce  struck  Mr.  Hale's  name  from  the  ticket,
and  substituted  that  of  John  Woodbury.  Mr.
Hale  was  supported  as  an  independent  candidate.
On  11  March,  1845,  three  Democratic  members
were  elected,  but  there  was  no  choice  of  a  fourth.
Subsequent  trials,  with  the  same  result,  took
place  23  Sept.  and  29  Nov.,  1845,  and  10  March,
1846.  During  the  repeated  contests,  Mr.  Hale
thoroughly  canvassed  the  state.  At  his  North
Church  meeting  in  Concord,  5  June,  1845.  Mr.
Pierce  was  called  out  to  reply,  and  the  debate  is
memorable  in  the  political  history  of  New  Hamp-
shire. At  the  election  of  10  March,  1846.  the
Whigs  and  Independent  Democrats  also  defeated  a
choice  for  governor,  and  elected  a  majority  of  the
state  legislature.  On  3  June.  1846,  Mr.  Hale  was
elected  speaker;  on  5  June,  the  Whig  candidate,
Anthony  Colby,  was  elected  governor;  and  on  9
June.  Mr.  Hale  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  the
term  to  begin  4  March.  1847.  In  a  letter  from
John  G.  Whittier,  dated  Andover,  Mass.,  3d  mo.,
18th,  1846,  he  says  of  Mr.  Hale  :  "  He  has  suc-
ceeded, and  his  success  has  broken  the  spell  which
has  hitherto  held  reluctant  Democracy  in  the  em-
braces of  slavery.  The  tide  of  anti-slavery  feeling,
long  held  back  by  the  dams  and  dykes  of  party,
has  at  last  broken  over  all  barriers,  and  is  washing
down  from  your  northern  mountains  upon  the
slave-cursed  south,  as  if  Niagara  stretched  its
foam  and  thunder  along  the  whole  length  of  Ma-
son and  Dixon's  line.  Let  the  first  wave  of  that
northern  flood,  as  it  dashes  against  the  walls  of  the
capitol,  bear  thither  for  the  first  time  an  anti-
slavery  senator."  On  20  Oct.,  1847,  he  was  nomi-
nated for  president  by  a  National  liberty  con-
vention at  Buffalo,  with  Leicester  King,  of  Ohio,
for  vice-president,  but  declined,  and  supported  Mr.
Van  Buren.  who  was  nominated  at  the  Buffalo  con-
vention of  9  Aug.,  1848.  On  6  Dec,  1847,  he  took
his  seat  in  the  senate  with  thirty-two  Democrats
and  twenty-one  Whigs,  and  remained  the  only
distinctively  anti-slavery  senator  until  joined  by
Salmon  P.  Chase,  3  Dec,  1849,  and  by  Charles
Sumner,  1  Dec,  1851.  Mr.  Hale  began  the  agita-
tion of  the  slavery  question  almost  immediately
upon  his  entrance  into  the  senate,  and  continued
it  in  frequent  speeches  during  his  sixteen  years  of
service  in  that  body.  He  was  an  orator  of  hand-
some person,  clear  voice,  and  winning  manners,
and  his  speeches  were  replete  with  humor  and  pa-
thos. His  success  was  due  to  his  powers  of  natural


34


II  ALU


HALE


oratory,  which,  being  exerted  against  American
chattel  -  slavery,  seldom  failed  to  arouse  sympa-
thetic sentiments  in  his  audiences.  Mr.  Halo  op-
posed flogging  and  the  spirit-ration  in  the  navy,
and  secured  the  abolition  of  the  former  by  law  of
28  Sept.,  1850,  and  of  the  latter  by  law  of  14  July,
1862.  He  served  as  counsel  in  1851  in  the  important
trials  that  arose  out  of  the  forcible  rescue  of  the
fugitive  slave  Shadrach  from  the  custody  of  the
U.  S.  marshal  in  Boston.  In  1852  he  was  nomi-
nated at  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  by  the  Free-soil  party
for  president,  with  George  W.  Julian  as  vice-presi-
dent, and  they  received  157,685  votes.  His  first
senatorial  term  ended,  and  he  was  succeeded  by
Charles  G.  Atherton,  a  Democrat,  on  4  March,
1853,  on  which  day  Franklin  Pierce  was  inaugu-
rated president.  The  following  winter  Mr.  Hale
began  practising  law  in  New  York  city.  But  the
repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise  measures  again
overthrew  the  Democrats  of  New  Hampshire  ;  they
failed  duly  to  elect  U.  S.  senators  in  the  legisla-
ture of  June,  1854,  and  in  March,  1855,  they  com-
Slctely  lost  the  state.  On  13  June,  1855,  James
ell,  a  Whig,  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  six
years  from  3  March,  1855,  and  Mr.  Hale  was
chosen  for  the  four  years  of  the  unexpired  term  of
Mr.  Atherton,  deceased.  On  9  June,  1858,  he  was
re-elected  for  a  full  term  of  six  years,  which  ended
on  4  March,  1865.  On  10  March,  1865,  he  was  com-
missioned minister  to  Spain,  and  went  immediately
to  Madrid.  Mr.  Hale' was  recalled  in  due  course,  5
April,  1869,  took  leave,  29  July,  1869,  and  returned
home  in  the  summer  of  1870.  Mr.  Hale,  without
sufficient  cause,  attributed  his  recall  to  a  quarrel
between  himself  and  Horatio  J.  Perry,  his  secretary
of  legation,  in  the  course  of  which  a  charge  had
been  made  that  Mr.  Hale's  privilege,  as  minister,
of  importing  free  of  duty  merchandize  for  his  offi-
cial or  personal  use,  had  been  exceeded  and  some
goods  put  upon  the  market  and  sold.  Mr.  Hale's
answer  was,  that  he  had  been  misled  by  a  com-
mission-merchant, instigated  by  Mr.  Perry.  The
latter  was  removed  28  June,  1869.  Mr.  Hale  had
been  one  of  the  victims  of  the  "  National  hotel  dis-
ease," and  his  physical  and  mental  faculties  were
much  impaired  for  several  years  before  his  death.
Immediately  upon  his  arrival  home  he  was  pros-
trated by  paralysis,  and  shortly  afterward  received
a  fracture  of  one  of  the  small  bones  of  the  leg
when  thrown  down  by  a  runaway  horse.  In  the
summer  of  1873  his  condition  was  further  aggra-
vated by  a  fall  that  dislocated  his  hip.

HALE,  Robert  Safford,  lawyer,  b.  in  Chelsea,
Vt.,  24  Sept.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  Y.,
14  Dec,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Vermont  in  1842,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  at  Elizabethtown,  Essex  co.,
N.  Y.,  in  1847.  He  was  surrogate  and  county  judge
from  1856  till  1864,  regent  of  the  University  of  New
York  from  1859  until  his  death,  and  presidential
elector  in  1860.  He  served  as  special  counsel  for
the  United  States  from  1868  till  1870,  being  charged
with  the  defence  of  the  "  abandoned  and  captured
property  claims,"  and  was  agent  and  counsel  for
the  United  States  before  the  American  and  British
mixed  commission,  under  the  treaty  of  Washington,
from  1871  till  1873.  He  was  a  member  of  congress
from  1865  till  1867,  and  again  from  1873  till  1875.
HALE,  Sal  in  ii,  historian,  b.  in  Alstead,  Cheshire
co.,  N.  H.,  7  March,  1787 ;  d.  in  Somerville,  Mass.,
19  Nov.,  1866.  His  father,  David  Hale,  joined  the
American  army  after  the  battle  of  Lexington,  and
served  throughout  the  Revolutionary  war.  Salma,
the  third  of  fourteen  children,  was  apprenticed
to  a  printer  in  Walpole,  N.  H. At  seventeen  he


wrote  an  English  grammar  (Worcester,  Mass.,
1804),  which  was  afterward  rewritten  under  the
title  M  A  New  Grammar  of  the  English  Language  "
(New  York,  1831).  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he
became  editor  of  "  The  Political  Observatory,"  at
Walpole,  N.  H.  He  then  studied  law,  became  clerk
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for  Cheshire  county,
and  removed  to  Keene,  N.  H.,  in  1813.  In  1817-34
he  was  clerk  of  the  supreme  judicial  court,  and  in
the  latter  year  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1816
he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  but
declined  a  re-election.  He  subsequently  devoted
himself  to  the  preparation  of  a  '•  History  of  the
United  States,"  which  gained  a  prize  of  $400  and
a  gold  medal  that  had  been  offered  by  the  Ameri-
can academy  of  belles-lettres  of  New  York  "for
the  best-written  history  of  the  United  States,  which
shall  contain  a  suitable  exposition  of  the  situation,
character,  and  interests,  absolute  and  relative,  of
the  American  republic,  calculated  for  a  class-book
in  academies  and  schools."  This  was  first  pub-
lished under  the  title  of  "The  History  of  the
United  States  of  America,  from  their  First  Settle-
ment as  Colonies  to  the  Close  of  the  War  with
Great  Britain  in  1815  "  (1821).  It  was  afterward
continued  to  1845,  and  went  through  many  edi-
tions. Mr.  Hale  was  a  trustee  of  Dartmouth  in
1816,  and  of  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1823,
and  received  honorary  degrees  from  each.  He  was
secretary  to  the  commissioners  for  determining  the
northeastern  boundary-line  of  the  United  States,
was  president  of  the  New  Hampshire  historical
society  in  1830,  a  member  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire house  of  representatives  in  1828  and  1844,
and  of  the  senate  in  1824  and  1845.  He  was  a
contributor  to  newspapers  and  periodicals,  was  in-
strumental in  organizing  the  first  agricultural  so-
ciety in  New  Hampshire,  and  in  promoting  tem-
perance, education,  the  abolition  of  slavery,  and
the  Unitarian  movement.  While  in  congress  he
opposed  the  Missouri  compromise.  His  works  in-
clude "  The  Administration  of  John  Q.  Adams
and  the  Opposition  by  Algernon  Sidney"  (Con-
cord, N.  H.,  1826) ;  "  Conspiracy  of  the  Spaniards
against  Venice,  translated  from  Abbe  Real,  and  of
John  Lewis  Fiesco  against  Genoa,  translated  from
Cardinal  De  Retz  "  (Boston,  1828) ;  "  Annals  of  the
Town  of  Keene,  from  its  First  Settlement  in  1734
to  1790 "  (Concord,  N.  H.,  1826,  and  a  continua-
tion to  1815,  Keene,  1851);  "An  Oration  on  the
Character  of  Washington "  (Keene,  N.  H.,  1832) ;
"Address  on  the  Connection  of  Chemistry  and
Agriculture,"  delivered  before  the  Cheshire  county
agricultural  society  (Keene,  1848);  and  an  "Ad-
dress before  the  New  Hampshire  Historical  Society
in  1828"  (Concord,  1832;  Manchester,  1870).— Hi's
son,  George  Silsbee,  lawyer,  b.  in  Keene,  N.  EL,
24  Sept.,  1825,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1844,
studied  at  the  law-school  there,  and  taught  in  Rich-
mond, Va.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Boston
in  1850,  where  he  has  since  been  engaged  in  the
practice  of  his  profession.  He  has  been  a  trustee
of  various  institutions  and  in  the  city  government
of  Boston,  is  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  and
New  Hampshire  historical  and  of  the  New  Eng-
land historic-genealogical  societies,  president  of  the
American  Unitarian  association,  and  has  taken  ac-
tive interest  in  philanthropic  and  charitable  move-
ments. He  edited,  in  connection  with  George  P.
Sanger,  and  later  with  John  Codman,  the  16th,  17th,
and  18th  volumes  of  the  "  Boston  Law  Reporter,"
was  the  sole  editor  of  the  16th,  17th,  and  18th  vol-
umes of  the  "  United  States  Digest,"  and  of  the
19th  with  II.  Farnam  Smith.  He  has  written  "  Me-
moirs of  Joel  Parker,"  some  time  chief  justice  of


HALE


HALE


35


New  Hampshire  (Boston,  1876),  and  of  "Theron
Metcalf,"  of  the  Supreme  judicial  court  of  Massa-
chusetts (Boston,  1876).  The  "  Memorial  History
of  Boston"  also  contains  an  historical  sketch  by
him  of  the  charities  of  that  city.

HALE,  Sarah  Josepha  (Buell),  author,  b.  in
Newport,  N.  H.,  24  Oct.,  1788;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
30  April,  1879.  She  was  taught  by  her  mother,
and  her  childhood's  reading  was  derived  princi-
pally from  the  English  poets.  In  1813  she  married
David  Hale,  a  lawyer,  brother  of  Salma  Hale,  and
was  left  a  widow  with  five  children  in  1822.  Mrs.
Hale  then  resorted  to  the  pen  as  a  means  of  sup-
port, and  in  1828  removed  to  Boston  to  take  charge
of  the  newly  established  "  Ladies'  Magazine,"  which
she  conducted  till  1837.  In  that  year  it  was  united
with  "  Godey's  Lady's  Book,"  published  in  Phila-
delphia, and  Mrs.  Hale  became  editor  of  that  pe-
riodical, but  did  not
remove  to  Philadel-
phia till  1841.  In
Boston  she  origi-
nated the  Seaman's
aid  society,  the  par-
ent of  many  simi-
lar organizations  in
various  ports.  In
her  position  as  edit-
or she  advocated
the  advancement  of
women,  urging  es-
pecially their  em-
ployment as  teach-
ers, and  the  estab-
lishment of  semina-
ries for  their  higher
education.  The  idea
of  educating  women
for  medical  and  missionary  service  in  heathen  lands
was  another  of  her  thoughts,  and  she  devoted  much
labor  to  securing  its  practical  adoption.  This  was
first  attempted  through  the  Ladies'  medical  mis-
sionary society,  which  was  formed  in  Philadelphia.
mainly  by  her  exertions.  The  object  was  finally
accomplished  through  the  Woman's  union  mission-
ary society  for  heathen  lands,  formed  in  New  York
in  1860,  with  its  chief  branch  in  Philadelphia,  of
which  Mrs.  Hale  was  president  for  several  years.
Mrs.  Hale  proposed  through  her  Boston  magazine
that  the  women  of  New  England  should  raise  $50,-
000  to  complete  the  Bunker  Hill  monument,  and
took  a  leading  part  in  organizing  the  fair  by  which
the  suggestion  was  successfully  carried  out.  About
the  same  time  she  suggested  that  Thanksgiving-
day  should  be  made  a  national  festival,  and  be
held  on  the  same  day  throughout  the  country.
She  continued  to  urge  this  for  twenty  years,  not
only  in  her  magazine,  but  by  personal  correspond-
ence with  the  governors  of  states  and  with  presi-
dents of  the  United  States.  President  Lincoln
adopted  her  suggestion  in  1864,  and  the  observ-
ance has  now  become  established.  Mrs.  Hale  re-
tired from  editorial  work  in  1877.  Her  fugitive
poems,  including  "  The  Light  of  Home,"  "  Mary's
Lamb,"  and  "  It  Snows,"  became  widely  familiar.
Her  best-known  work  is  "  Woman's  Record,  or
Sketches  of  all  Distinguished  Women  from  the
Creation  to  the  Present  Day  "  (New  York,  1853 ;
3d  ed.,  revised  and  enlarged,  1869).  Her  other
publications  are  "The  Genius  of  Oblivion  and
Other  Poems"  (Concord,  1823);  "  North  wood,"  a
novel  (Boston.  1827;  republished  in  London  as
"A  New  England  Tale";  New  York,  1852):
"  Sketches  of  American  Character  "  (1830) ;  "  Traits
of  American  Life  "  (Philadelphia,  1835) ;  "  Flora's


Interpreter  "  (Boston,  1835 ;  reprinted  in  London) ;
"The  Ladies'  Wreath,"  a  selection  from  the  fe-
male poets  of  England  and  America  (1835);  "The
Way  to  Live  Well,  and  to  be  Well  while  we  Live  "
(1838);  "Grosvenor,  a  Tragedv"  (1838);  "The
White  Veil,"  a  bridal  gift  (Philadelphia,  1854);
"  Alice  Ray,"  a  romance  in  rhyme  (Boston,  1846) ;
"  Harry  Gray,  the  Widow's  Son,"  a  story  of  the
sea  (1848);  "Three  Hours,  or  the  Vigil  of  Love"
(Philadelphia,  1848) ;  "  Ladies'  New  Book  of  Cook-
erv  "  New  York,  1852) ;  "  New  Household  Receipt-
Book"  (1853;  2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1855);  "A
Dictionary  of  Poetical  Quotations  "  (1854) ;  "  The
Judge,  a  Drama  of  American  Life"  (1854) ;  "The
Bible  Reading-Book  "  (1854) ;  "  Manners,  or  Happy
Homes  and  Good  Society"  (Boston,  1868);  and
"  Love,  or  Woman's  Destiny,  with  Other  Poems  "
(Philadelphia,  1870).  She  also  edited  several  an-
nuals, including  "  The  Opal  "  and  "  The  Crocus,"
also  "The  Poet's  Offering"  (Philadelphia);  "  Miss
Acton's  Cookery " ;  "  Letters  of  Madame  de  Se-
vigne"  (1856);  "Letters  of  Lady  Mary  Wort  ley
Montagu  "  (1856) ;  and  other  works. — Her  son,
Horatio,  ethnologist,  b.  in  Newport,  N.  H.,  3
May.  1817,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1837,
and  was  appointed  in  the  same  year  philologist  to
the  U.  S.  exploring  expedition  under  Capt.  Charles
Wilkes.  In  this  capacity  he  studied  a  large  num-
ber of  the  languages  of  the  Pacific  islands,  as  well
as  of  North  and  South  America,  Australia,  and
Africa,  and  also  investigated  the  history,  tradi-
tions, and  customs  of  the  tribes  speaking  those  lan-
guages. The  results  of  his  inquiries  are  given  in
his  "  Ethnography  and  Philology  "  (Philadelphia,
1846),  which  forms  the  seventh  volume  of  the  ex-
pedition reports.  Dr.  Robert  G.  Latham,  the  Eng-
lish philologist,  speaks  of  it  as  comprising  "the
greatest  mass  of  philological  data  ever  accumulated
by  a  single  inquirer."  On  the  completion  of  this
work  he  spent  some  years  in  travel  and  in  literary
and  scientific  studies,  both  in  Europe  and  in  the
United  States.  Subsequently  he  studied  law,  and
was  in  1855  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Chicago.  A
year  later  he  removed  to  Canada  to  take  charge  of
an  estate  acquired  by  marriage.  Mr.  Hale  took  up
his  residence  in  the  town  of  Clinton,  Ontario,  where
he  has  since  devoted  his  time  in  part  to  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  and  in  part  to  scientific  pur-
suits. He  has  published  numerous  memoirs  on  an-
thropology and  ethnology,  is  a  member  of  many
learned  societies  both  in  Europe  and  in  America,
and  in  1886  was  vice-president  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  presid-
ing over  the  section  of  anthropology.  His  intro-
ductory address  on  "  The  Origin  of  Languages
and  the  Antiquity  of  Speaking  Man "  proposed
some  novel  theories  which  have  excited  much  in-
terest and  discussion.  His  other  publications  in-
clude "Indian  Migrations  as  evidenced  by  Lan-
guage" (Chicago,  1883);  "The  Iroquois  Book  of
Rites"  (Philadelphia,  1883):  and  a  "Report  on  the
Blackfoot  Tribes,"  presented  to  the  British  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science  at  its  Ab-
erdeen meeting  in  1885. — Mrs.  Hale's  nephew,  Ed-
win Moses,  physician,  b.  in  Newport,  N.  H.,  2
Feb.,  1829.  He  became  a  printer  in  early  life,  em-
ploying his  leisure  hours  in  study.  He  was  grad-
uated at  the  Cleveland  homoeopathic  medical  col-
lege in  1859,  practised  his  profession  for  twelve
years  in  Jonesville,  Mich.,  became  in  1863  profes-
sor of  materia  medica  and  therapeutics  in  the
Hahnemann  medical  college,  Chicago,  and  held  the
same  chair  in  Chicago  homoeopathic  college  from
1880  till  1884,  when  he  became  professor  emeritus.
In  1871  he  began  a  series  of  s[>ecial  lectures  on  dis-


36


HALIBURTON


HALL


eases  of  the  heart.  In  addition  to  his  editorial  con-
nection with  various  journals  he  is  the  author  of
many  monographs  and  of  several  treatises,  among
which  are  "  New  Remedies"  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1867);  "Pocket  Manual  of  Domestic  Practice"
(1870) ;  "  Lectures  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart "  (1871) ;
and  "  Diseases  of  Women  "  (1875).

HALIBURTON,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Rhode
Island  in  1739 ;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in  1808.  He
removed  to  Halifax,  being  a  loyalist,  about  1776,
and  during  the  Revolutionary  war  was  a  surgeon  in
the  British  navv.  At  its  conclusion  he  returned  to
practice  in  Halifax,  held  several  public  offices,  and
was  a  member  of  the  council.  He  ranked  high  in
his  profession.  His  wife  was  a  sister  of  Admiral
Brenton.— His  son,  Sir  Brenton,  jurist,  b.  in
Rhode  Island  in  1773;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in
1860,  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
Rising  rapidly  in  his  profession,  he  was  appointed
chief  justice  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  at  the  age  of
eighty-six  received  the  honor  of  knighthood.  The
chief  justice  was  highly  esteemed  as  an  able,  pains-
taking, conscientious  judge,  and  a  man  of  kindly
disposition  and  great  liberality  of  opinion.

HALIBURTON,  Thomas  Chandler,  author,  b.
in  Windsor,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1797 ;  d.  in  Isleworth,
England,  27  Aug.,  1865.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1820,  and  afterward  elected  a  member  of
the  house  of  assembly.  In  1829  he  was  appointed
chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  in
1840  became  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  Two
years  later  he  resigned  that  office  and  removed  to
England,  where  he  afterward  resided.  In  1859  he
was  returned  to  parliament  for  Launceston  as  a
Conservative,  holding  the  seat  until  the  dissolution
in  July,  1865.  Owing  to  infirm  health,  he  did  not
offer  himself  for  re-election.  In  1858  he  received
the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the  University  of  Ox-
ford. In  1835  he  wrote  a  series  of  newspaper
sketches  satirizing  the  New  England  character,
which  were  subsequently  collected  and  published
under  the  title  of  "  The  Clockmaker,  or  the  Sayings
and  Doings  of  Samuel  Slick,  of  Slickville  "  (1837).
These  were  followed  by  a  second  series,  which  ap-
peared in  1838,  and  a  third  in  1840.  Of  Judge
Haliburton's  success  in  portraying  the  typical  New
Englander,  President  Cornelius  C.  Felton  says:
"  We  can  distinguish  the  real  from  the  counterfeit
Yankee  at  the  first  sound  of  the  voice,  and  by  the
turn  of  a  single  sentence ;  and  we  have  no  hesita-
tion in  declaring  that  Sam  Slick  is  not  what  he
pretends  to  be ;  that  there  is  no  organic  life  in  him ;
that  he  is  an  impostor,  an  impossibility,  a  non-
entity." On  the  other  hand,  the  "  London  Athe-
naeum "  asserts  that  "  he  [Sam  Slick]  deserves  to
be  entered  on  our  list  of  friends,  containing  the
names  of  Tristram  Shandy,  the  shepherd  of  the
1  Noctes  Ambrosiana?,'  and  other  rhapsodical  dis-
courses on  time  and  change,  who,  besides  the  de-
lights of  their  discourse,  possess  also  the  charm  of
individuality."  He  afterward  wrote  "  The  Attache,
or  Sam  Slick  in  England  "  (1843 ;  2d  series,  2  vols.,
1844 ;  new  ed.,  4  vols.,  1846),  in  which  British  so-
ciety is  amusingly  depicted.  Judge  Haliburton  is
also  the  author  of  "  An  Historical  and  Statistical
Account  of  Nova  Scotia  "  (1828-'39) ;  "  Bubbles  of
Canada,"  "  The  Old  Judge,  or  Life  in  a  Colony,"
and  "Letter- Bag  of  the  Great  Western"  (1839);
"  Rule  and  Misrule  of  the  English  in  America "
(2  vols.,  1851);  "Yankee  Stories "  and  "  Traits  of
American  Humor "  (3  vols.,  1852) ;  "  Nature  and
Human  Nature  "  (1855-'8) ;  "  Letters  to  Lord  Dur-
ham," and  "  Wise  Saws  and  Modern  Instances."  He
also  edited  several  works,  including  one  on  the
"Settlement  of  New  England."


HALKETT,  Sir  Peter,  bart.,  soldier,  of  Pit-
firrane,  Pifeshire,  Scotland ;  d.  near  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
9  July,  1755.  He  was  the  son  of  Sir  Peter  Wedder-
burn,  of  Gosport,  who  assumed  his  wife's  name.
The  son  entered  the  army,  and  represented  Dun-
fermline in  parliament  in  1734.  In  1745  he  was
lieutenant-colonel  of  Lee's  regiment  (the  44th)  at
the  battle  of  Preston- Pans,  was  taken  prisoner  by
the  troops  of  the  Pretender,  and  released  on  parole.
Subsequently  he  was  one  of  the  five  officers  who,
in  February,  1746,  refused  to  rejoin  their  regiment
on  the  command  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  and
the  threat  that  in  the  event  of  non-compliance
their  commissions  would  be  forfeited.  Their  reply,
"  that  his  royal  highness  was  master  of  their  com-
missions, but  not  of  their  honor,"  was  approved
by  the  government,  and  Sir  Peter  embarked  for
America  in  command  of  his  regiment  in  1754.  He
was  killed,  with  his  youngest  son,  James,  in  the
battle  of  the  Monongahela,  when  Braddock  was  de-
feated.— His  nephew,  John,  author,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1768;  d.  in  Brighton,  England,  in
November,  1852,  was  appointed  governor  of  the
Bahamas,  5  Dec,  1801,  and  of  Tobago,  27  Oct.,
1803.  From  1814  till  1819  he  was  chairman  of  the
board  of  commissioners  of  West  India  accounts.
In  1821  or  1822  he  visited  the  United  States,  and
on  his  return  to  England  (1823)  published  "  His-
torical Notes  respecting  the  Indians  of  North
America."  He  was  also  the  author  of  a  "State-
ment," respecting  the  attempt  of  his  uncle,  the
Earl  of  Selkirk,  to  form  a  settlement  on  the  Red
river,  regarding  which  there  are  many  contradic-
tory accounts  (London,  1817).

HALL,  Andrew  Douglass,  physician,  b.  in  St.
George's  parish,  Hempstead,  Queens  co.,  N.  Y.,  2
July,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1851,  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college  in  1854.  After  serving  as  resident  physi-
cian in  the  Episcopal  and  Pennsylvania  hospitals
in  Philadelphia,  he  entered  on  general  practice  in
that  city  in  1858.  In  1863  he  was  elected  attend-
ing surgeon  to  the  Wills  hospital,  and  in  1867
surgeon  to  St.  Mary's  hospital,  which  latter  office
he  resigned  after  five  years'  service.  His  specialty
is  diseases  of  the  eye.  He  is  a  member  of  several
medical  associations,  and,  as  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  Pathological  society,  has  con-
tributed numerous  papers  to  its  first  volume  of
"Transactions."  Articles  from  his  pen  on  sub-
jects connected  with  ophthalmology  have  frequent-
ly appeared  in  professional  journals.

HALL,  Arethusa,  educator,  b.  in  Norwich  (now
Huntington),  Hampshire  co..  Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1802.
She  had  limited  opportunities  for  obtaining  an
education,  but  subsequently  made  up  for  early
deficiencies  by  private  study.  At  the  age  of
nine  she  became  a  member  of  the  family  of  Rev.
Sylvester  Judd,  of  Westhampton,  Mass.  She  was
principal  of  the  Greenland,  N.  H.,  academy  in
1826,  and  afterward  of  that  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,
where  she  was  the  teacher  of  the  poet  Whittier.
She  continued  to  teach  in  New  England  schools
until  1849,  and  in  that  year  came  to  the  Brooklyn
female  academy  (now  Packer  institute),  and  after
two  years'  service  was  associated  with  Prof.  Alonzo
Gray  in  the  Brooklyn  Heights  seminary  for  young
ladies,  where  she  remained  as  associate  principal
until  1860.  Failing  health  soon  afterward  com-
pelled her  to  retire.  She  published  "  Thoughts  of
Blaise  Pascal"  (Andover,  1846);  "A  Manual  of
Morals"  (1849);  "The  Literary  Reader"  (Boston,
1850) ;  "  Life  of  the  Rev.  Sylvester  Judd  "  (Boston,
1854) ;  and  "  Memorabilia  of  Sylvester  Judd,  Sr."
(printed  privately,  Northampton,  1882).


HALL


HALL


37


HALL,  Asaph,  astronomer,  b.  in  Goshen,  Conn.,
15  Oct.,  1829.  fie  was  educated  in  a  common
school,  and  then  worked  on  a  farm  till  he  was
sixteen  years  old,  after  which  he  followed  the  trade
of  a  carpenter.  In  1853  he  began  the  study  of
geometry  and  algebra  in  Norfolk  academy,  and
afterward  went  to  Wisconsin,  where  he  taught
school  for  several  years.  He  then  studied  at  the
University  of  Michigan  for  a  single  term,  and
after  teaching  for  a  year  at  Shalersville,  Ohio,  en-
tered the  observatory  of  Harvard  college  as  a
student.  From  1857  till  1862  he  was  assistant  in
the  observatory,  and  in  August  of  the  latter  year
was  appointed  aide  in  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory
in  Washington.  In  May,  1863,  he  was  made  pro-
fessor of  mathematics,  with  the  relative  rank  of
captain.  He  has  been  connected  with  all  the  im-
portant astronomical  expeditions  sent  out  under
the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  government,  including
those  sent  to  observe  solar  eclipses  from  the  Ber-
ing sea  in  1869,  and  in  Sicily,  in  1870.  During
the  transit  of  Venus  in  1874  he  had  charge  of  the
American  party  at  Vladisvostok,  in  Siberia,  and
at  the  later  transit  in  1882  was  chief  astrono-
mer of  the  party  stationed  in  San  Antonio,  Texas.
Prof.  Hall  has  won  great  distinction  by  his  dis-
covery of  the  moons  of  Mars.  On  the  night  of  11
Aug.,  1877,  he  noticed  a  small  star  near  the  disk  of
Mars,  which,  from  subsequent  examination,  he  was
persuaded  was  a  satellite  of  that  planet.  A  week
later  he  discovered  a  second  satellite  interior  to  the
first,  and  of  somewhat  superior  brightness.  These
discoveries  were  at  once  communicated  to  Joseph
Henry,  secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  institution,  by
whom  they  were  announced  to  the  principal  astron-
omers both  in  Europe  and  America.  Exact  calcu-
lations were  made  of  their  orbits,  and  Prof.  Hall
gave  to  them  the  names  of  Deimos  and  Phobos
(Terror  and  Fear),  from  the  passage  in  Homer's
"  Iliad,"  where  these  two  divinities  are  mentioned
as  the  attendants  of  the  god  of  war.  His  subse-
quent work  has  included  important  observations
of  double  stars  in  1880,  and  determinations  of  the
orbits  of  the  satellites  of  Saturn.  In  1879  he  was
awarded  the  gold  medal  of  the  Royal  astronomical
society  of  London  for  his  discoveries,  and  received
the  degrees  of  Ph.  D.  from  Hamilton  in  1878,  and
LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1879,  and  from  Harvard  in
1886.  Prof.  Hall  is  a  member  of  numerous  scien-
tific societies,  both  in  the  United  States  and  Eu-
rope, and  was  chosen  vice-president  of  the  Ameri-
can association  for  the  advancement  of  science  in
1880.  In  1875  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Na-
tional academy  of  sciences,  and  in  1883  was  ap-
pointed to  the  office  of  home  secretary  in  that
body.  His  publications  have  been  confined  to  his
specialty,  and  have  appeared  in  astronomical  jour-
nals on  both  continents,  and  also  in  the  annual
volumes  of  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory.

HALL,  Basil,  author,  b.  in  Edinburgh,  Scot-
land, 31  Dec.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth.  England,
11  Sept.,  1844.  He  was  the  son  of  Sir  James  Hall
of  Dunglass,  a  writer  on  architecture  and  geology ;
his  mother  was  the  daughter  of  the  fourth  Earl  of
Selkirk.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1802,  and  in
1816  commanded  the  brig  "  Lyra,"  which  accom-
panied Lord  Amherst  to  China.  He  was  made
post-captain  in  1817,  and  from  1820  till  1822  was
stationed  on  the  Pacific  coast  of  America.  In
1827-8  he  travelled  in  the  United  States  and  Can-
ada, and  afterward  visited  various  parts  of  Europe,
In  the  latter  part  of  his  life  his  mind  became  im-
paired, and  he  died  insane.  Besides  contributions
to  scientific  periodicals  and  to  the  "Encyclopaedia
Britannica,"  and  minor  works  of  travel,  he  pub-


lished "  A  Voyage  of  Discovery  to  the  Western
Coast  of  Corea  and  the  Great  Loo  Choo  Island "
(1818);  "Extracts  from  a  Journal  written  in
1820-'22  on  the  Coasts  of  Chili,  Peru,  and  Mexi-
co "  (2  vols.,  1823-'4) ;  "  Travels  in  North  Ameri-
ca "  (3  vols.,  1829) ;  "  Fragments  of  Voyages  and
Travels  "  (9  vols.,  1831-'40) ;  "  Schloss  Hainfield,
or  A  Winter  in  Lower  Styria  "  (1836) ;  "  Spain  and
the  Seat  of  War  in  Spain  "  (1837) ;  "  Voyages  and
Travels  in  Conjunction  with  Ellis  and  Pringle  "
(1840) ;  and  "  Patchwork :  Travels  in  Stories  "
(3  vols.),  and  '"  Travels  in  South  America  "  (1841).
"  Fragments "  is  generally  considered  his  best
work.  His  book  on  America  aroused  great  indig-
nation in  this  country  by  the  partial  and  hostile
character  of  its  criticisms.

HALL,  Barnard  Rust,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia in  1798 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  23  Jan.,
1863.  He  was  the  son  of  Dr.  John  Hall,  an  emi-
nent surgeon  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Washington,
and  was  left  at  an  early  age  heir  to  a  large  for-
tune, but  never  came  into  its  possession,  owing  to
mismanagement.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1820,  and  at  the  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1823,  and  went  to  the  west  as  a  mis-
sionary. While  there  he  was  pastor  of  a  church
in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  and  president  of  the  college
in  the  same  place  from  1823  till  1831.  Returning
to  the  east,  he  had  charge  for  seven  years  of  a  con-
gregation at  Bedford,  Pa.,  where  he  was  also  the
principal  of  an  academy.  From  1838  till  1846  he
taught  in  Bordentown  and  Trenton,  N.  J.,  and
Poughkeepsie,  Newburg,  and  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In
1848  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Rutgers
college.  The  last  years  of  his  life  were  devoted  to
preaching  among  the  poor.  He  published  a  Latin
grammar  (1828),  and  was  also  the  author  of  "  The
New  Purchase,  or  Life  in  the  Far  West,"  which
enjoyed  a  wide  popularity  (New  York,  1843) ;
"  Something  for  Everybody  "  (1843) ;  "  Teaching
a  Science  ;  The  Teacher  an  Artist  " ;  and  "  Frank
Freeman's  Barber-Shop  "  (1852).

HALL,  Charles  Francis,  explorer,  b.  in  Roch-
ester, N.  H.,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  the  arctic  regions.  8
Nov.,  1871.  His  early  education  was  acquired  in  the
common  school  and
the  local  academy.
He  was  blacksmith,
journalist,  station-
er, and  engraver  in
turn.  In  1850,  while
living  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  he  be-
came interested  in
the  fate  of  Sir  John
Franklin,  and  for
nine  years  improved
every  opportuni-
ty to  increase  his
knowledge  of  Arc-
tic America,  and
especially  of  the
Franklin  search.
Despite  the  admira-
ble and  convincing
report  in  1859  by
Capt.  Leopold  Mc-
Clintock,  R.  N.,  of  the  death  of  Franklin  and  the
fate  of  his  companions,  Hall  believed  that  some
members  of  that  expedition  still  survived  and
that  they  and  their  records  could  be  found.  His
enthusiasm  enlisted  the  interest  of  Henry  Grin-
nell  and  other  friends  of  arctic  research,  and  by
aid  of  public  subscriptions  his  journev  was  ren-
dered possible. On  29  May,  I860,  Hall  sailed  from


38


HALL


HALL


New  London  on  the  whaler  "George  Henry,"
which,  commanded  by  Cant.  S.  O.  Buddington,
was  bound  for  Cumberland  gulf.  Hall  returned
to  New  London,  13  Sept.,  1862,  having  been  un-
successful in  his  search,  but  he  had  acquired  much
knowledge  of  Esquimau  life,  speech,  and  habits,
and  had  discovered  relics  of  Frobisher's  expedition
of  1577-'8.  The  country  was  in  the  midst  of  a
great  civil  war,  and  he  failed,  by  lecturing  or  by
personal  appeals,  to  obtain  sufficient  means  for  a
special  expedition.  Undismayed,  he  sailed  again,
1  July,  1864,  sparsely  fitted  out  bv  private  sub-
scription, and  in  August  was  landed  on  Depot
island,  64°  N.,  90°  W.,  with  boat  and  provisions.
Hall  became  thoroughly  domesticated  with  the
Esquimaux,  among  whom  he  passed  five  years,  re-
ceiving occasional  supplies  from  whalers.  In
May,  1869,  he  reached  the  southeastern  coast  of
King  William's  Land,  but  passed  only  four  days
there,  as  his  native  companions  would  stay  no
longer.  Hall  gathered  up  many  relics  of  the
Franklin  expedition  and  brought  back  a  skele-
ton, supposed  to  be  that  of  an  officer  of  the  "  Ere-
bus." The  Esquimaux  informed  him  of  their
finding  a  large  tent  near  Terror  bay,  with  remains
of  many  men,  and  said  that  one  of  the  Franklin
ships,  after  being  abandoned,  made  the  northwest
passage  by  drifting.  After  his  return  in  1869  Hall
succeeded  in  engaging  the  attention  of  congress,
which  authorized  "  An  Expedition  to  the  North
Pole,"  the  only  one  in  the  history  of  the  nation  ;
$50,000  was  appropriated  for  the  expedition,  and  a
vessel  selected  from  the  navy  was  thoroughly
fitted  out  at  an  expense  of  $90,000.  The  "Po-
laris "  sailed  from  New  London,  3  July,  1871,  Hall
commanding,  with  S.  O.  Buddington  as  sailing-
master,  Dr.  Emil  Bessels  as  chief  of  scientific  work,
and  twenty-four  others.  The  "  Congress  "  accom-
panied them  as  tender  to  Godhavn,  Greenland.
There  is  no  doubt  that  Hall  was  uncertain  as  to
his  route,  whether  via  Jones  sound  or  Smith  sound,
but  he  decided  on  the  latter.  Favored  by  a  sea
unusually  free  of  ice,  the  "  Polaris  "  passed  with-
out difficulty  through  Smith  sound  into  Kane  sea,
and  thence  through  Kennedy  and  Robeson  chan-
nels to  the  polar  sea,  where  heavy  ice  was  met
with.  On  29  Aug.  the  "  Polaris  "  was  in  latitude
82°  11'  N.,  the  highest  point  at  that  time,  ever  at-
tained by  any  vessel.  Returning  southward,  she
went  into  winter  quarters  in  81°  38'  N.,  at  Thank
God  harbor,  Greenland.  Hall  left  the  ship  on  10
Oct.  on  a  sledge  journey,  during  which  he  reached
Cape  Brevoort,  82°  N.  Returning  on  24  Oct.,  he
was  immediately  taken  sick  and  soon  died  of
apoplexy.  He  was  buried  near  by,  in  the  most
northern  grave  of  that  time.  The  death  of  Hall
insured  the  failure  of  geographical  work.  The
only  extended  sledge  journey  was  to  the  south
under  Dr.  Bessels.  A  boat  journey  in  1872,  at-
tempted by  Mr.  Chester,  reached  Newman  bay
only,  but  Meyer  and  Lynn  on  foot  reached  82°  09'
N.,.  near  Repulse  bay,  the  most  northerly  land
that  had  been  attained  up  to  that  time.  Capt.
Buddington.  attempting  to  return  home,  left
Thank  God  harbor,  13  Aug.,  1872.  The  "  Polaris,"
beset  in  Kennedy  channel,  drifted  steadily  south-
ward with  the  pack,  and  on  13  Oct.  was  near  Lit-
tleton island.  The  ship  was  so  badly  nipped  dur-
ing a  gale  on  15  Oct.  that  preparations  were  made
to  abandon  her,  and  a  large  quantity  of  stores
were  thrown  upon  the  ice,  when  her  ice-anchor
slipped,  leaving  nineteen  men  on  the  floe.  The
floe  party,  after  drifting  nearly  2,000  miles  and
subsisting  largely  on  sea-game,  were  all  rescued  by
the  sealer  "  Tigress,"  30  April,  1872,  off  the  coast


of  Labrador.  Capt.  Buddington  beached  the  leak-
ing and  damaged  "  Polaris  "  near  Life  Boat  cove,
where  a  comfortable  house  was  built  of  the  vessel
for  winter.  In  the  spring  of  1873  two  boats  were
constructed.  On  3  June  the  party  set  out  for
Upernavik,  and  after  a  journey  of  about  two  hun-
dred miles  were  picked  up  near  Cape  York  by  the
Scotch  whaler  "  Ravenscraig."  The  Roquette
medal  for  1875  was  awarded  to  Hall  by  the  So-
ciete  de  geographie  of  Paris.  Hall's  arctic  work
has  stood  the  test  of  criticism  and  verification,  and
the  incorrect,  misleading  charts  of  the  "  Polaris  "
expedition  are  not  chargeable  to  him.  The  explo-
ration of  the  west  Greenland  channel,  the  discov-
ery of  the  frozen  sea,  and  the  extension  of  Green-
land and  Grinnell  Land  a  degree  and  a  half  of
latitude  toward  the  pole,  are  results  that  attest
the  capacity  of  Hall  and  justify  the  epitaph  placed
by  the  British  polar  expedition  of  1876  over  his
grave,  as  one  "  who  sacrificed  his  life  in  the  ad-
vancement of  science,"  and  who  had  by  his  expe-
perience  benefited  them,  his  followers.  Hall  pub-
lished "  Arctic  Researches  "  and  "  Life  among  the
Esquimaux  "  (New  York,  1864).  His  unique  expe-
riences during  his  second  expedition  have  been
compiled,  under  the  title  of  "  Narrative  of  the  Sec-
ond Arctic  Expedition  "  (Washington,  1879),  from
his  manuscripts,  purchased  by  congress  for  $15,000
after  his  death.  See  also  "Arctic  Experiences,"
edited  by  E.  V.  Blake  (New  York,  1874).

HALL,  Charles  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Au-
gusta, Ga.,  7  Nov.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1842,  studied  theology  at  the  General
Protestant  Episcopal  theological  seminary  in  New
York,  and  was  ordained  deacon  in  1844,  and  priest
in  the  following  year.  After  holding  pastorates  at
Huntington,  L.  I.,  West  Point,  N.  Y.,  and  John's
Island,  S.  C,  he  became  rector  of  the  Church  of
the  Epiphany,  Washington,  D. C,  in  1856,  and  in
1869  was  called  to  Holy  Trinity,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
where  he  still  remains  (1887).  Previous  to  the  civil
war  and  during  that  period  Dr.  Hall  carefully
avoided  politics  in  his  sermons.  He  has  always
been  a  Democrat,  but  took  no  active  part  in  politics
until  1884,  when  he  made  several  addresses  in  favor
of  the  election  of  Grover  Cleveland  to  the  presidency,
and  was  chairman  of  the  Democratic  meeting  held
in  Brooklyn  in  June  of  that  year.  Dr.  Hall's  theo-
logical views  are  broad,  and  he  is  clear  and  incisive
as  a  pulpit  orator.  He  is  at  the  head  of  the  stand-
ing committee  of  his  diocese,  is  chaplain  of  the
23d  New  York  regiment,  a  director  in  the  Brook-
lyn historical  society,  and  is  connected  with  nu-
merous ecclesiastical  and  charitable  organizations*
Dr.  Hall  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Henry  Ward
Beecher,  and  co-worker  with  him  in  many  religious
enterprises,  and  was  chosen  by  him  to  officiate  at
his  funeral.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Hobart  in  1860,  and  from  Columbia  in  1861.  He
has  published  "Commentaries  on  the  Gospels"
(Philadelphia,  1867) ;  "  Protestant  Ritualism  "  (New
York,  1871) ;  and  "  Spina  Christi "  (1883).

HALL,  Charles  Hershall,  physician,  b.  in  New-
port, Ind.,  5  April,  1835.  He  received  his  prelimi-
nary education  in  Indiana  university,  and  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  Willa-
mette university,  Ore.,  in  1868.  The  next  year  he
settled  in  Salem,  and  was  in  the  government  In-
dian service  at  Fort  Yamhill  in  1871-3,  but  re-
signed in  1874  to  become  professor  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine  in  Willamette  univer-
sity, where  he  still  remains  (1887).  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  Oregon  medical  society,  and  the  Ameri-
can medical  association.  Since  1876  he  has  edited
the  "Oregon  Medical  Journal."


HALL


HALL


39


HALL,  Christopher  Webber,  geologist,  b.  in
Wardsboroujrh,  Vt,  28  Feb.,  1845.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Middlebury  college,  Vt.,  in  1871,  and  then
became  principal  of  Glens  Falls  academy.  In
1873-'5  he  was  superintendent  of  city  schools  in
Owatonna,  Minn.  He  then  went  abroad  and  spent
three  years  in  scientific  study  in  the  University  of
Leipsic.  In  1878  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
geology,  mineralogy,  and  biology  in  the  University
of  Minnesota,  which  he  still  retains  (1887).  While
in  Leipsic  he  performed  some  lithological  work  on
the  geological  survey  of  Saxony,  under  Credner,  and,
after  being  called  to  the  professorship  that  he  now
holds,  he  was  appointed  assistant  geologist  on  the

feological  and  natural  history  survey  of  Minnesota,
n  1883  he  became  an  assistant  geologist  on  the
U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  was  assigned  to  the
Lake  Superior  division.  He  was  given  the  inves-
tigation of  the  crystalline  rocks  of  central  and
southwestern  Minnesota,  in  which  work  he  is  still
engaged  as  far  as  his  professional  duties  will  per-
mit. Prof.  Hall  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,
and  his  papers  have  appeared  chiefly  as  reports  of
his  work  contributed  to  surveys.

HALL,  David,  printer,  b.  in  Edinburgh,  Scot-
land, in  1714  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24  Dec,  1772.
He  learned  the  printing  business  at  Edinburgh,
and  afterward  worked  in  London  in  a  printing-
house  in  which  Strahan,  who  became  law-printer
to  the  king,  was  at  that  time  a  journeyman.  He
came  to  America  about  1747,  entered  into  a  part-
nership with  Benjamin  Franklin,  which  was  dis-
solved in  May,  1766,  and  then  formed  another  with
William  Sellers.  As  a  member  of  these  firms  he
was  one  of  the  printers  of  the  "  Pennsylvania  Ga-
zette." The  firm  of  Hall  and  Sellers  were  the
printers  of  the  paper  money  issued  by  congress
during  the  Revolutionary  war.  Hall  also  conducted
a  large  book  and  stationery  store  on  his  own  ac-
count. He  was  well  acquainted  with  the  art  of
printing,  a  prudent  and  impartial  conductor  of  the
"Gazette,"  and  a  benevolent  man.  After  his  death,
his  sons,  William  and  David,  became  the  partners
of  Sellers,  and  afterward  the  business  was  carried
on  in  the  names  of  William  and  David  Hall.
William  was  for  several  years  a  member  of  the
Pennsylvania  legislature.  The  business  was  sub-
sequently transferred  to  William  Hall,  Jr.

HALL,  Dominick  Augustine,  jurist,  b.  in
South  Carolina  in  1765 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
12  Dec,  1820.  He  began  the  practice  of  law  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  was  district  judge  of  Orleans
territory  from  1809  till  1812,  when  Louisiana  was
admitted  to  the  Union,  and  was  afterward  one  of
its  U.  S.  judges.  He  resigned  his  seat  on  the
bench  to  accept  a  judgeship  of  the  state  supreme
court,  but  was  reappointed  Federal  judge  instead,
and  remained  in  the  U.  S.  court  until  his  death.  In
December,  1814,  Judge  Hall  was  ordered  by  the
military  authorities  to  adjourn  his  court  for  two
months,  owing  to  the  operations  of  the  British
force  against  New  Orleans.  In  March,  1815,  while
the  city  was  under  martial  law,  he  granted  a  writ
of  habeas  corpus  for  the  release  of  Louis  Louillier,
a  member  of  the  state  legislature,  who  was  then
under  arrest,  by  order  of  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,
for  exciting  a  seditious  meeting  among  his  troops.
Gen.  Jackson  refused  to  recognize  Judge  Hall's
authority,  and  at  once  ordered  Louillier's  rearrest
and  imprisonment,  and  committed  Hall  to  jail.
The  latter  was  released  the  next  morning,  and
summoned  Gen.  Jackson  to  answer  for  contempt
of  court  in  disregarding  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus,
in  detaining  an  original  paper,  and  in  imprisoning
a  judge. The  general  appeared  in person,  and,


after  an  argument  by  counsel,  was  sentenced  to  pay
a  fine  of  $  1,000.  But  congress  refunded  him  this
sum.  with  interest,  in  1844.

HALL,  Edwin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Granville,  N.
Y..  11  Jan.,  1802;  d.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,
1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college  in
1826.  From  1831  till  1832  he  was  principal  of  an
academy  in  Bloomfield,  N.  Y.,  and  was  pastor  of  the
1st  Congregational  church  at  Norwalk,  Conn.,  from
1832  till  1854,  when  he  was  elected  professor  of
theology  in  Auburn  seminary.  He  occupied  this
chair  until  1876,  and  was  professor  emeritus  from
that  time  till  his  death.  He  published  "  The  Law
of  Baptism  "  ( N ew  York,  1840) ;  "  The  Puritans  and
their  Principles  "  (1846) ;  "  Historical  Records  of
Norwalk  "  (1847) :  "  Shorter  Catechism  with  Proofs  "
(1859) ;  and  numerous  tracts  and  pamphlets. — His
son,  Isaac  Hollister,  oriental  scholar,  b.  in  Nor-
walk, Conn.,  12  Dec,  1837,  was  graduated  in  Ham-
ilton in  1859,  was  tutor  there  in  1861-'3,  and  in
1864  removed  to  New  York  city,  where  he  was
graduated  at  Columbia  law-school  in  1865,  and
practised- his  profession.  He  visited  Syria  in  1875,
and  was  professor  for  two  years  in  the  Beirut
Protestant  college,  but  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1877,  and  associated  himself  with  the
"Sunday-School Times," published  in  Philadelphia.
In  1875  he  established  the  column  of  "  Biblical
Research  "  in  the  "  New  York  Independent."  Since
1884  he  has  been  connected  with  the  Metropolitan
museum  of  New  York  city,  and  is  lecturer  on  New
Testament  Greek  in  Johns  Hopkins  university.
He  was  the  first  to  read  an  entire  inscription  in
Cypriote,  and  has  published  an  important  series  of
articles  on  that  language  and  its  inscriptions.  He
is  an  authority  on  Greek,  Phoenician,  Himyantie,
and  other  oriental  inscriptions,  and  in  1876  dis-
covered in  Beirut  a  Syriac  manuscript  of  the  Gos-
pels, Acts,  and  most  of  the  Epistles,  an  account  of
which,  with  fac-simile  pages,  he  published  in  1884.
The  date  of  this  manuscript  is  between  700  and
900  a.  d.  Mr.  Hall  is  a  member  of  various  archaeo-
logical and  biblical  societies  in  this  country  and
abroad,  and  is  the  author  of  "  A  Critical  Bibliog-
raphy of  the  Greek  New  Testament,  as  Published
in  America"  (Philadelphia.  1884).

HALL,  Fitzedward,  philologist,  b.  in  Trov,
N.  Y.,  21  March.  1825.  He  was  educated  at  the
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  from  which  he
received  the  degree  of  civil  engineer  in  1842,  and
at  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1846.
During  his  collegiate  course  he  published  enough
German  translations  anonymously  to  fill  three  vol-
umes. Immediately  on  leaving  college,  he  sailed
from  Boston  for  Calcutta,  where  he  remained  near-
ly three  years,  studying  first  Hindustani  and  Per-
sian, and  subsequently  Bengalee  and  Sanskrit.  He
supported  himself  by  contributing  to  local  journals
not  only  original  matter,  but  translations  in  prose
and  verse  from  the  French,  Italian,  and  modern
Greek.  After  residing  five  months  at  Ghazeepore,
he  removed  to  Benares  in  January,  1850,  and  a
month  later  was  appointed  to  a  tutorship  in  the
government  college  there.  In  1853  he  was  pro-
moted professor,  and  in  July,  1855,  was  transferred
to  Ajmere  as  inspector  of  schools  for  Ajmere  and
Mairwara.  to  which  was  added  the  superintendency
of  the  Ajmere  government  school.  His  last  ap-
pointment in  India  was  that  of  school-inspector
for  the  Sangor  and  Nerbudda  territories,  which
office  he  retained  from  1856  till  1862.  During  the
Indian  mutinies  Prof.  Hall  was  besieged  for  seven
months  in  the  Sangor  fort.  In  1860  he  received
the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  Oxford.  Settling  in
London  in  November,  1862,  he  accepted  the  chair


40


HALL


HALL


of  Sanskrit,  and  that  of  Indian  jurisprudence  in
King's  college,  and  also  filled  other  offices.  In
1869  he  removed  to  Marlesford,  Suffolk,  where  he
still  (188?)  resides.  Prof.  Hall  was  the  first  Ameri-
can to  edit  (in  1852)  a  Sanskrit  text.  He  has  also
discovered  several  interesting  Sanskrit  works  sup-
posed to  have  been  lost,  such  as  "  Bharata's  Naty-
asastra,"  the  "  Harshacharita,"  and  a  complete  copy
of  the  valuable  "  Brihaddevata,"  of  which  only  a
small  fragment  was  previously  known  to  exist.
The  various  Sanskrit  inscriptions  that  he  has  de-
ciphered and  translated  throw  much  new  light  on
the  history  of  ancient  India.  He  is  at  present  one
of  the  editors  of  the  new  English  dictionary  that
is  in  course  of  publication  at  Oxford  under  the
supervision  of  James  A.  H.  Murray.  Prof.  Hall's
principal  works  are,  Sanskrit :  "  The  Atmabodha,
with  its  Commentary,  and  the  Tattvabodha "
(Mirzapore,  1852) ;  "  The  Sankhyapravachana "
(Calcutta,  1856) ;  "  The  Siiryasiddhanta  "  and  "  The
Vasavadatta  "  (Calcutta,  1859) ;  "  The  Sankhyasara  "
(Calcutta,  1862),  and  "  The  Dasariipa,  with  its  Com-
mentary, and  Four  Chapters  of  Bharata's  Natya-
sastra  "  (Calcutta,  1865).  Hindi :  "  The  Tarkasan-
graha,  translated  into  Hindi  from  the  Sanskrit  and
English  "  (Allahabad,  1850) ;  and  "  The  Siddhanta-
sangraha  "  (Agra,  1855).  Prof.  Hall  has  also  edited
Dr.  J.  R.  Ballantyne's  "Hindi  Grammar"  (Lon-
don, 1868),  and  published  a  "  Reader  "  (Hertford,
1870)  in  that  language.  Besides  other  works  of  a
similar  character,  he  has  issued  "  Lectures  on  the
Nyaya  Philosophy,  Sanskrit  and  English "  (Ben-
ares, 1852) ;  "  A  Rational  Refutation  of  the  Hindu
Philosophical  Systems,  translated  from  the  Hindi
and  Sanskrit "  (Calcutta,  1862) ;  "  Recent  Exempli-
fications of  False  Philology"  (New  York,  1872);
"  Modern  English  "  (New  York  and  London,  1873) ;
and  "  On  English  Adjectives  in  -able,  with  Spe-
cial Reference  to  Reliable"  (London,  1877). — His
brother,  Benjamin  Homer,  author,  b.  in  Troy,
N.  Y„  14  Nov.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1851,  and  in  1856  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  Troy,  N.  Y.  He  served  as  city  clerk  in  1858-9,
and  was  city  chamberlain  from  1874  till  1877,  and
again  from  1884  till  1885.  Mr.  Hall  has  contrib-
uted freely  to  the  periodicals  of  the  day,  both  in
prose  and  verse,  and  is  the  author  of  articles  in  the
"  Harvard  Book  "  (Cambridge,  1875),  and  Sylves-
ter's "  History  of  Rensselaer  County,  N.  Y."  (Phila-
delphia, 1880).  He  has  published  "  A  Collection  of
College  Words  and  Customs"  (Cambridge,  1851;
revised  and  enlarged  ed.,  1856) ;  "  History  of  East-
ern Vermont,  etc."  (New  York,  1858 ;  2  vols.,  Al-
bany, 1865);  and  "Bibliography  of  the  United
States:  Vermont"  (New  York,  1860).  He  has
edited  "  A  Tribute  by  the  Citizens  of  Troy  to  the
Memory  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (Troy,  1865).

HALL,  Francis,  journalist,  b.  in  Taunton,
Somerset,  England,  12  March,  1785;  d.  in  New
York  city,  11  Aug.,  1866.  He  came  to  the  United
States  when  fourteen  years  of  age,  and  was  ap-
prenticed to  a  printer.  In  1811  he  entered  the
office  of  the  New  York  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"
and  two  years  afterward  became  part  owner  and
co-editor  of  that  journal,  with  which  he  remained
connected  for  fifty-three  years.  He  was  identified
with  most  of  the  religious  and  charitable  societies
of  the  city,  and  was  an  officer  of  the  Methodist
missionary  society,  the  Young  men's  Bible  society,
the  American  Bible  society,  the  American  tract
society,  the  deaf  and  dumb  institution,  and  the
New  York  state  colonization  society.  Mr.  Hall
was  for  thirty  years  recording  secretary  of  the
Methodist  missionary  society,  and  was  deputed  to
visit  the  Indian  missions  of  Upper  Canada  in  be-


half of  that  body.  About  1833  he  united  with
Messrs.  Suckley,  Innis,  and  others  in  organizing
the  first  "  pewed  "  Methodist  church  in  New  York.
It  was  called  the  "  First  Wesleyan  Chapel,"  and
stood  in  Vestry  street.  In  1854  Mr.  Hall  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Wesleyan  university.

HALL,  Frederick,  teacher,  b.  in  Grafton,"Vt.,
in  November,  1780;  d.  in  Peru,  111.,  27  July,  1843.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1803,  was  a
tutor  there  in  1804-'5,  and  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,
from  1805  till  1806,  when  he  was  elected  professor
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  there.  He
remained  at  Middlebury  until  1824,  studied  medi-
cine in  1825-'6,  and  was  graduated  at  the  medical
school  at  Castleton,  Vt.,  in  1827.  He  afterward
held  the  professorships  of  chemistry  and  miner-
alogy at  Trinity,  was  president  of  Mount  Hope
college  near  Baltimore,  and  at  his  death  occupied
the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Columbian  college,  D.  C.
Dr.  Hall  gave  to  Dartmouth  several  thousand  dol-
lars and  a  valuable  cabinet  of  minerals.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Eulogy  on  Solomon  M.  Allan "
(New  York,  1818) ;  "  Statistics  of  Middlebury  Col-
lege," in  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Collections,"
vol.  ix.  (1840) ;  and  "  Letters  from  the  East  and
from  the  West "  (Baltimore,  1840).

HALL,  George,  first  mayor  of  Brooklyn,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  21  Sept.,  1795;  d.  there,  16  Sept.,
1868.  He  was  a  printer,  and  the  greater  portion
of  his  life  was  devoted  to  the  interests  of  his  native
city,  of  which  he  was  a  trustee  at  the  time  of  its
incorporation,  and  under  that  act  became  its  first
mayor.  He  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  temper-
ance, and  did  good  service  in  the  cause  of  that  re-
form.— His  son,  George  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Brooklyn
in  1826,  d.  there,  24  May,  1864,  entered  the  New
York  militia  as  a  private,  and  rapidly  rose  through
several  grades.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican
war  he  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the  first  regi-
ment of  New  York  volunteers,  and  served  at  Vera
Cruz,  Cerro  Gordo,  Contreras,  and  Churubusco.
In  1850  he  was  commissioned  major  of  the  13th
militia  regiment,  and  the  following  year  lieuten-
ant-colonel. He  was  a  clerk  in  New  York  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  engaged  in  raising
troops.  He  was  elected  colonel  of  the  27th  New
York  regiment,  and  participated  in  many  engage-
ments, from  that  of  the  Stafford  raid  of  1862  to
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.

HALL,  George  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Manchester,
N.  H.,  21  Sept.,  1825.  His  father  removed  to  Bos-
ton when  the  son  was  four  years  old.  In  1849
George  went  to  Diisseldorf,  studied  art  one  year,
and  removed  to  Paris,  and  afterward  to  Rome,
where  he  opened  a  studio.  In  1852  he  returned  to
the  United  States  and  settled  in  New  York  city,
where  he  now  resides  (1887).  He  was  elected  an
associate  in  1853,  and  in  1868  a  member,  of  the
National  academy  of  design.  Mr.  Hall  has  visited
Spain  several  times,  and  spent  a  year  in  study  in
Egypt.  His  specialties  are  still-life  and  figures.
He  has  exhibited  at  the  National  academy  "  Pre-
cious Lading,"  a  Spanish  scene  (1868) ;  "  Thursday
Fair  at  Seville  "  (1869) ;  "  A  Young  Lady  of  Se-
ville and  her  Duenna  "  and  "  Lilacs  "  (1870) ;  "  The
Four  Seasons"  (1871);  "The  Roman  Fountain"
(1874) ;  "  Autumn  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Winter,"  "  A  Rug
Bazaar  at  Cairo,"  "  Oven  at  Pompeii  "  (1887),  and
"  Pomegranates  and  Grapes  "  (1887).

HALL,  Henry  Bryan,  engraver,  b.  in  London,
England,  11  March,  1808:  d.  in  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,
28  April,  1884.  For  many  years  he  was  employed
by  the  historical  engraver  to  the  queen,  and  exe-
cuted all  the  portrait  work  in  the  large  plates  of
that  engraver,  among  them  "  The  Coronation  of


HALL


HALL


41


Victoria."  after  Sir  George  Hayter.  He  removed
to  New  York  in  1850,  and  illustrated  many  artistic
and  literary  publications.  His  engravings  are
chiefly  of  portraits,  twelve  of  which  were  of  Wash-
ington, after  different  artists.  He  went  into  busi-
ness in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  with  his  three
sons,  but  devoted  his  personal  attention  to  etchings
of  historical  characters  of  the  Revolution  for  the
collections  of  Dr.  Thomas  Addis  Emmet  and
Francis  S.  Hoffman.  His  sons  continue  the  busi-
ness in  New  York,  and  have  engraved  many  of  the
steel  portraits  that  illustrate  this  work.

HALL,  Hiland,  jurist,  b.  in  Bennington,  Vt.,
20  July,  1795 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  18  Dec,
1885.  He  was  educated  in  the  common  schools,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1819,  and  elected  to  the
Vermont  legislature  in  1827.  He  was  state  attor-
ney in  1828-'31,  and  served  in  congress  from  1833
till  1843,  having  been  elected  as  a  Whig.  He
was  then  appointed  bank-commissioner,  became
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1846,  and  in
1850  2d  comptroller  of  the  treasury,  and  land-com-
missioner to  California  to  settle  disputed  titles  be-
tween citizens  of  the  United  States  and  Mexicans.
Judge  Hall  was  an  earnest  advocate  for  anti-sla-
very, and  a  delegate  to  the  first  National  Republi-
can convention  in  1856.  In  1858  he  succeeded  Ry-
land  Fletcher  as  governor  of  Vermont,  and  was
re-elected  in  1859.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Peace
congress  that  was  held  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in
February,  1861.  Gov.  Hall  was  president  of  the
Vermont  historical  society  for  twelve  years,  and
for  twenty-five  years  was  vice-president  of  the  New
England  historic-genealogical  society.  He  is  the
author  of  a  "  History  of  Vermont "  (Albany,  1868).

HALL,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,
22  Aug.,  1744;  d.  in  Bethany,  N.  C,  25  July,  1826.
When  he  was  eight  years  of  age  his  parents  re-
moved to  Rowan  (now  Iredell)  county,  N.  C.  He  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1774.  About  1775  he
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Orange,
and  on  8  April,  1778,  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the
united  congregations  of  Fourth  Creek,  Concord,
and  Bethany,  N.  C.  In  1790  he  severed  his  con-
nection with  all  but  the  Bethany  congregation.
During  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was  an  ardent
patriot,  and  was  instrumental  in  organizing  a  com-
pany of  cavalry,  which  he  led  on  an  expedition  into
South  Carolina,  performing  the  double  office  of
commander  and  chaplain.  Subsequently,  when
the  troops  marched  into  the  Cherokee  country,
Georgia,  to  encounter  the  Indians,  Dr.  Hall  ac-
companied them  as  chaplain.  In  the  autumn  of
1800,  under  a  commission  of  the  Presbyterian  gen-
eral assembly,  he  established  a  mission  at  Natchez,
which  was  the  first  in  the  series  of  Protestant  mis-
sionary efforts  in  the  lower  valley  of  the  Missis-
sippi. He  was  for  many  years  a  commissioner  to
the  general  assembly  of  his  church  from  the  pres-
bytery of  Orange,  and  was  moderator  of  that  body
in  1803.  He  did  much  to  advance  education,  and
opened  at  his  house  an  "  academy  of  sciences,"  in
which  he  was  the  sole  teacher.  "  He  published  a
"  Narrative  of  a  Most  Extraordinary  Work  of  Re-
ligion in  North  Carolina  "  (1802),  and  a  "  Report
of  a  Missionary  Tour  through  the  Mississippi  and
the  Southwestern  Country."

HALL,  James,  paleontologist,  b.  in  Hingham.
Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1811.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Rensselaer  school  (now  the  Troy  polytechnic  in-
stitute) in  1832,  and  remained  there  as  assistant
professor  of  chemistry  and  natural  sciences  until
1836,  when  he  was  made  professor  of  geology.  On
the  organization  of  the  geological  survey  of  New
York  in  1836,  he  was  appointed  assistant  geologist


/^r&srrv-e*/  la£*£^£>


of  the  second  district,  and  in  1837  was  made  state
geologist  in  charge  of  the  fourth  district.  He  be-
gan his  explorations  in  the  western  part  of  the
state  during  that  year,  and  from  1838  till  1841
published  annual  reports  of  progress.  In  1843  he
made  his  final  report  on  the  survey  of  the  fourth
geological  district,  which  was  published  as  "  Geol-
ogy of  New  York,"
Part  IV.  (Albany,
1843).  Retaining  the
title  of  state  geolo-
gist, he  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  paleon-
tological  work.  His
results  have  been  em-
bodied in  the  "  Pa-
leontology of  New
York "  (Albanv,

1847-79),  of  which
five  volumes  have  at
present  been  given
to  the  public.  In
addition  to  the  fore-
going, Prof.  Hall  has
prepared  a  complete
revision  of  the  palae-
ozoic brachiopoda  of
North  America,  with
fifty  plates.  This  comprehensive  study  of  the
palaeozoic  fauna  of  New  York,  which  is  to  termi-
nate with  the  base  of  the  coal-formation,  has  de-
manded researches  beyond  the  limits  of  the  state,
and  Prof.  Hall  has  extended  his  investigations
westward  to  the  Rocky  mountains.  These  ex-
plorations have  served  as  the  basis  of  all  our
knowledge  of  the  geology  of  the  Mississippi  basin.
The  general  results  of  these  comparative  studies
will  be  found  in  the  introduction  to  the  third
volume  of  the  "  Paleontology."  In  1855  he  was
offered  the  charge  of  the  paleontology  of  the  geo-
logical survey  of  Canada,  with  promise  of  suc-
ceeding Sir  William  E.  Logan  as  director,  but
declined  the  offer.  Subsequently  he  prepared  a
monograph  on  the  "  Graptolites  of  the  Quebec
Group"  (Montreal,  1865),  which  was  contributed
to  the  Canadian  survey.  Prof.  Hall  also  held  the
appointments  of  state  geologist  of  Iowa  in  1855,
and  of  Wisconsin  in  1857.  For  the  former  he  pre-
pared the  geological  and  paleontological  portions
of  the  two  volumes  of  the  "  Geological  Survey  of
Iowa "  (Albany,  1858-'9),  and  he  wrote  the  chap-
ters on  physical  geography,  geology,  and  paleon-
tology for  the  "  Report  on  the  Geological  Survey  of
the  State  of  Wisconsin  "  (Madison,  1862).  The  ex-
amination and  description  of  the  specimens  col-
lected for  the  government  frequently  have  been
assigned  to  him,  and  he  has  written  the  paleonto-
logical portions  of  "Fremont's  Exploring  Expe-
dition ;  Appendix  A  "  (Washington,  1845) ;  "  Ex-
pedition to  the  Great  Salt  Lake"  (Philadelphia,
1852);  "United  States  and  Mexican  Boundary
Survey"  (Washington,  1857);  and  "U.  S.  Geologi-
cal Exploration  of  the  Fortieth  Parallel,"  vol.  iv.
(1877).  In  1866,  on  the  reorganization  of  the  New
York  state  museum,  he  was  appointed  director,
which  place,  in  addition  to  that  of  state  geologist,
he  still  holds.  In  connection  with  this  office  he
has  made  each  year,  in  his  annual  reports,  valu-
able contributions  to  science.  Prof.  Hall  has  de-
voted much  time  to  crystalline  stratified  rocks,
and  was  the  first  to  point  out  the  persistence
and  significance  of  mineralogical  character  as  a
guide  to  classification.  He  has  also  laid  the  foun-
dation for  a  rational  theory  of  mountains.  He
received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Union  in  1842.


42


HALL


HALL


and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Hamilton  in  1863,  and
from  McGill  in  1884.  Prof.  Hall  received  the  quin-
quennial grand  prize  of  $1,000  awarded  in  1884  by
the  Boston  society  of  natural  history.  In  1840  he
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  associa-
tion of  geologists  and  naturalists,  and  after  its
growth  into  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science  was  elected  president  in  1856,
delivering  his  retiring  address,  on  "Contributions
to  the  Geological  History  of  the  American  Conti-
nent," at  the  Montreal  meeting  in  1857.  He  was
one  of  the  original  members  of  the  National  acade-
my of  sciences.  In  1876  he  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  International  congress  of  geologists,  and
was  one  of  the  vice-presidents  at  the  session  held
in  Paris  in  1878,  also  in  Bologna  in  1881,  and  in
Berlin  in  1885.  He  was  elected  one  of  the  fifty
foreign  members  of  the  geological  society  of  Lon-
don in  1848,  and  in  1858  was  awarded  its  Wollaston
medal.  In  1884  he  was  elected  correspondent  of
the  Academy  of  sciences  in  Paris,  and  he  is  a  mem-
ber of  many  other  scientific  societies  at  home  and
abroad.  Besides  his  larger  works,  most  of  which
have  been  referred  to,  he  is  the  author  of  nearly
250  separate  papers,  of  which  a  full  list,  from  1836
till  1882,  is  given  in  the  "  Thirty-sixth  Annual  Re-
port of  the  New  York  Museum  of  Natural  His-
tory "  (Albany,  1884).

HALL,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Waynesboro,  Va.,  in
1767 :  d.  in  Warrenton,  N.  C,  29  Jan.,  1833.  He
went  to  North  Carolina  at  an  early  age.  was  edu-
cated at  William  and  Mary,  settled  in  Warrenton
in  1792,  and  became  eminent  as  a  lawyer.  He  was
a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  North  Carolina
from  1801  till  1818,  and  of  the  supreme  court  from
1818  till  1832. — His  son,  Edward,  a  distinguished
lawyer,  became  a  judge  in  1840.

HALL,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
11  Aug..  1806.  He  was  educated  at  University  of
Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  in  December,  1827,
was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar.  He  relin-
quished the  practice  of  law  in  1832,  was  elected
manager  and  subsequently  secretary  of  the  Amer-
ican Sunday-school  union,  licensed  to  preach  by
the  presbytery  of  Philadelphia  in  1839,  and  or-
dained pastor  of  the  1st  church  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,
11  Aug.,  1841.  In  1852-'3  he  delivered  a  course  of
lectures  in  Princeton  theological  seminary.  He
was  editor  of  the  "  Sunday-School  Journal "  in
1832-40,  of  the  "  Youth's  Friend,"  and  has  been
a  frequent  contributor  to  various  religious  and
literary  periodicals.  He  also  edited  for  a  time  the
"Morning  Journal"  in  Philadelphia,  lectured  at
the  Smithsonian  institution  in  1850,  and  was  anni-
versary orator  of  the  New  Jersey  society  of  the
Cincinnati  in  1859.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Trans-
mit ion  of  Milton's  Latin  Letters"  (Philadelphia,
1829) ;  Gaston's  "  Collection  of  Scripture  Texts  on
the  Christian  Faith,"  corrected  and  revised  (1841) ;
"  History  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Trenton.
N.  J."  (New  York,  1859);  "  Forty  Years'  Familiar
Letters  of  James  W.  Alexander,  D.  D."  (2  vols.,
1860) ;  and  various  works  issued  by  the  Presbyterian
board  of  publication  and  the  Sunday-school  union.

HALL,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  County  Armagh,
Ireland,  31  July,  1829."  He  is  of  Scottish  descent.
Ho  entered  Belfast  college  at  the  age  of  thirteen,
and,  notwithstanding  his  extreme  youth,  was  re-
peatedly Hebrew  prize  man.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1849,  and  at  once  engaged  in  labor  as  a
missionary  in  the  west  of  Ireland.  In  1852  he  was
installed  pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  at
Armagh,  and  in  1858  was  called  to  the  church
of  Mary's  Abbey  (now  Rutland  square)  in  Dublin.
He  was  an  earnest  friend  of  popular  education,


and  received  from  the  queen  the  honorary  appoint-
ment of  commissioner  of  education  for  Ireland.
In  1867  he  was  a  delegate  from  the  general  assem-
bly of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Ireland  to  the
Presbyterian  churches  of  the  United  States,  and
after  his  return  to  Ireland  be  received  a  call  to  the
Fifth  avenue  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York,
which  he  accepted,  entering  upon  his  labors  on  3
Nov.,  1867.  In  1875  a  new  church  edifice  was
erected  for  him,  at  a  cost  of  about  $  1,000,000,  on
the  corner  of  Fifth  avenue  and  Fifty-fifth  street.
In  1882  he  was  elected  chancellor  of  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York.  He  was  selected  to
deliver  the  funeral  sermon  of  Chief-Justice  Chase,
who  belonged  to  a  different  denomination.  Dr.
Hall  is  the  author  of  "  Family  Prayers  for  Four
Weeks  "  (New  York.  1868) ; "  Papers  for  Home  Read-
ing" (1871)  "  Familiar  Talk  to  Boys" ;  "  Questions
of  the  Day"  (1873) ;  "  God's  Word  through  Preach-
ing," Lyman  Beecher  lectures  at  Yale  seminary
(1875);  '" Foundation-Stones  for  Young  Builders"
(Philadelphia,  1880) ;  and  "  A  Christian  Home ;
How  to  Make  and  how  to  Maintain  it "  (1883).

HALL,  Jonathan  Prescott,  jurist,  b.  in  Pom-
fret,  Conn.,  9  July,  1796;  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  29
Sept.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1817,
practised  law  in  New  York,  and  during  the  admin-
istrations of  Tyler  and  Fillmore  was  district  attor-
ney for  the  southern  district  of  New  York,  and  was
noted  as  a  brilliant  orator.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Superior  Court  of  the  City
of  New  York,  1828-'9  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1831-'3).

HALL,  Louisa  Jane  Park,  poet,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  7  Feb.,  1802.  Her  father,  James
Park,  was  a  physician,  but  abandoned  his  profes-
sion and  removed  to  Boston  in  1804  to  edit  the
"Repertory,"  a  Federalist  journal.  In  1811  he
opened  a  school  for  young  ladies  in  Boston,  where
his  daughter  received  a  good  education ;  but  in
1831  he  removed  with  his  family  to  Worcester.
She  was  almost  blind  for  several  years,  and  during
this  period  her  father  read  to  her,  and  assisted  in
the  preparation  of  her  books.  In  1840  she  married
Rev.  Edward  B.  Hall,  a  Unitarian  clergyman  of
Providence,  R.  I.  Her  works  are  "  Miriam,"  a  dra-
matic poem,  illustrative  of  the  early  conflicts  of
the  Christian  church,  partly  written  in  1825  (1837);
"  Joanna  of  Naples,"  an  historical  tale  in  prose
(Boston,  1838) ;  and  the  "  Life  of  Elizabeth  Carter."

HALL,  Lyman,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Connecticut  in  1725;  d.  in
Burke  county,
Ga.,  19  Oct..  1790.
He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1747,
studied  medicine,
and  removed  to
Georgia  in  1752,
settling  in  Sun-
bury,  where  he
acquired  a  large
practice.  He  took
an  active  part  in
the  pre  -  Revolu-
tionary move  -
ments,  was  a
member  of  the
conventions  held
in  Savannah  in
1774  and  1775,
and  was  influen-
tial in  causing
Georgia  to  join
the  other  colonies,
parish  of  St.  John  to  congress,  and  served  till  1780.


In  1775  he  was  elected  bv  the


HALL


HALL


43


When  the  British  took  possession  of  Georgia  he  re-
moved with  his  family  to  the  north,  and  all  his
property  was  confiscated  by  the  royal  government.
In  1782  he  returned  to  Georgia,  before  the  evacu-
ation of  Savannah,  and  was  governor  of  the  state  for
one  term,  after  which  he  retired  from  public  life.

HALL,  Nathan  Kelsey,  statesman,  b.  in  Mar-
cellus,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  March,  1810 ;  d.  in
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  2  March,  1874.  He  was  the  son  of
a  New  England  shoemaker,  who  emigrated  to  cen-
tral New  York  in  the  early  part  of  the  century.
In  1818  the  family  moved  to  Erie  county,  N.  Y.,
where  young  Hall  worked  on  a  farm  and  occasion-
ally at  his  father's  trade.  He  was  educated  in  the
country  district-schools,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen
became  a  student  in  the  office  of  Millard  Fillmore,
who  was  then  a  practising  attorney  at  Aurora,
N.  Y. In  1832  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  to

ha  copartnership  with  his  preceptor,  who  in  the
mean  time  had  removed  to  Buffalo.  In  1836,
Solomon  G.  Haven  was  admitted  as  a  member  of
the  firm.  Mr.  Hall  was  deputy  clerk  of  Erie  coun-
ty in  1831-'2,  clerk  of  the  board  of  supervisors  in
1832-8,  city  attorney  in  1833-'4,  and  alderman  in
1837.  He  was  appointed  master  in  chancery  by
Gov.  Seward  in  1839,  and  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  in  1841.  In  1845  he  was  elected  to
the  assembly,  and  before  the  expiration  of  his  term
was  chosen  a  representative,  in  congress  as  a  Whig,
serving  in  1847-'9.  He  declined  a  renomination,
preferring  the  practice  of  his  profession  to  public
life.  In  1850  Mr.  Hall  was  appointed  postmaster-
general  by  President  Fillmore,  and  in  1852  he  be-
came U.  S.  judge  for  the  northern  district  of  New
York,  which  office,  he  filled  till  his  death,  making
a  creditable  record  in  judicial  administration.

HALL,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Medford,
Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  21
Oct.,  1875.  He  became  clerk  in  a  store  in  Boston,
and  subsequently  was  secretary  in  an  insurance-
office.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Harvard  divinity-
school  in  1834,  and  in  the  following  year  was  col-
league pastor  with  Dr.  Thaddeus  Mason  Harris  of
the  1st  Unitarian  parish,  Dorchester,  Mass.  He
became  sole  pastor  in  1836,  and  held  this  post
until  his  death.  He  was  an  earnest  philanthropist
and  abolitionist.  About  forty  of  his  sermons  were
published,  including  several  on  slavery  printed  be-
tween 1850  and  1860.

HALL,  Newman,  English  clergyman,  b.  in
Maidstone,  Kent,  22  May,  1816.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  London  in  1841,  and  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  B.  there  in  1855.  He
had  charge  of  the  Albion  Congregational  church
in  Hull  from  1842  till  1854,  when  he  removed  to
London  to  become  pastor  of  Surrey  chapel,  Black-
friar's  road,  known  as  Rowland  Hill's  chapel.  In
1850  he  opposed  the  general  cry  against  papal  ag-

?;ression.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  a  firm
riend  of  the  U.  S.  government,  and  at  its  close
visited  the  United  States  in  the  interest  of  inter-
national good  -  will.  He  opened  congress  with
prayer,  and  delivered  an  oration  on  "  International
Relations  "  in  the  house  of  representatives  in  No-
vember, 1867.  As  a  memorial  of  this  visit,  Lincoln
Tower,  part  of  his  new  church-building  on  West-
minster road,  was  built  by  the  joint  subscriptions
of  Americans  and  Englishmen.  In  1873  he  again
visited  the  United  States,  lecturing  in  the  principal
cities.  His  publications  have  been  widely  circu-
lated and  reprinted  in  the  United  States.  Among
these  are  '-The  Christian  Philosopher"  (London,
1849);  "Italy,  the  Land  of  the  Forum  and  the
Vatican"  (1853):  "Lectures  in  America"  (New
York,  1868); "Sermons  and  History  of  Surrev


Chapel  "  (1868) ;  "  From  Liverpool  to  St.  Louis  "
(London,  1869) ;  "  Pilgrim's  Songs,"  a  volume  of
devotional  poetrv  (1871);  "Praver;  its  Reasonable-
ness and  Efficacy  "  (1875) ;  "  The  Lord's  Prayer  "
(1883);  and  "Songs  of  Earth  and  Heaven  "  (1885).
He  delivered  a  lecture  on  the  assassination  of
President  Lincoln,  in  London,  in  1865.

HALL,  Robert  Bernard,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,
15  April,  1868.  He  entered  the  Boston  public
Latin-school  in  1822,  and  studied  theology  at  New
Haven  in  1833-'4.  He  was  ordained  to  the  minis-
try of  the  orthodox  Congregational  church,  but
afterward  became  an  Episcopalian.  In  1855  he
was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate  and
was  elected  to  congress  in  1855  on  the  Know-
Nothing  ticket,  and  again  in  1857  on  the  Repub-
lican ticket.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Union  con-
vention in  Philadelphia  in  1866.  Mr.  Hall  was
one  of  the  twelve  founders  of  the  New  England
anti-slavery  society  in  Boston  in  January,  1832,
and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  anti-
slavery  society  in  Philadelphia  in  December,  1833.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Iowa  central  college  in  1858.

HALL,  Robert  Newton,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Laprairie.  Quebec,  26  July,  1836.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Burlington  college,  Vt.,  in  1857,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada
in  1861.  He  was  appointed  general  batonnier  of
the  bar  of  the  province  of  Quebec  in  1878,  is  dean
of  the  faculty  of  law  in  Bishop's  college,  Lennox-
ville,  from  which  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1880,  and  became  a  queen's  counsel  the  same
year.  He  was  a  government  director  of  the  Cana-
da Pacjfic  railway  in  1873,  is  president  of  Massa-
wippi  railway,  a  director  of  the  Quebec  central
railway,  and  was  elected  as  a  Liberal  Conservative
to  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1879.

HALL,  Robert  Pleasants,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ches-
ter district,  S.  C,  23  Dec,  1825  :  d."in  Macon,  Ga.,
4  Dec,  1854.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to
Georgia  in  1837,  studied  law  with  his  brother
Samuel  in  Knoxville,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1848.  In  the  following  year  he  removed  to  Ma-
con, where  he  had  a  high  reputation  until  his
death.  His  leisure  was  devoted  to  literature,  and
he  published  a  volume  of  "  Poems  by  a  South  Caro-
linian "  (Charleston,  1848).  He  left  numerous
manuscript  articles  in  prose  and  verse,  which  in-
clude a  contemplative  poem  on  Andre  Chenier ;
"  Winona,"  a  legend  of  the  Dacotahs ;  and  "  The
Cherokee,"  describing  the  scenery  in  upper  Georgia.

HALL,  Samuel,  printer,  b.  in  Medford,  Mass.,
2  Nov.,  1740  ;  d.  in  Boston,  30  Oct.,  1807.  He  was
apprenticed  to  his  uncle,  Daniel  Fowle,  of  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  and  subsequently  went  to  Newport,
R.  I.,  where  in  1761  he  formed  a  partnership  with
Ann,  the  widow  of  James  Franklin,  which  continued
until  1768.  In  that  year  he  published  the  "  Es-
sex Gazette  "  in  Salem.  In  1775  he  removed  to
Cambridge  and  issued  the  "  New  England  Chron-
icle," and  in  the  following  year  resided  in  Boston.
He  again  published  the  "  Salem  Gazette  "  in  1781,
and  in  1785  the  "  Massachusetts  Gazette."  In  1789
he  went  to  Boston  and  opened  a  book-store,  which
he  sold  in  1805  to  Lincoln  and  Edmunds.  His
journals  were  of  much  service  to  the  patriot  cause
during  the  Revolution.

HALL,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Somerset  county,
Md.,  1  June,  1797;  d.  in  Princeton.  Ind.,  about  1855.
He  removed  with  his  family  to  Jefferson  county,
Ky.,  in  1805,  and  received  no  early  education.  In
1815  he  went  to  Princeton,  Gibson  co.,  Ind.,  and  ob-
tained a  situation  in  a  country  store. Subsequently


44


HALL


HALL


he  wrote  in  the  office  of  the  clerk  of  the  circuit
court,  and  devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of  law.
He  was  licensed  in  1820,  and  afterward  made  attor-
ney and  councillor  of  law  in  the  supreme  court  of
Indiana  and  in  the  district  court  of  the  United
States.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1829,
and  re-elected  for  a  second  term,  being  appointed
chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee,  in  which  ca-
pacity he  introduced  many  reforms.  He  was
elected  judge  of  the  4th  judicial  circuit  in  1832,  but
resigned  in  1834.  In  1836  the  state  of  Indiana  en-
gaged in  schemes  of  internal  improvement  which
would  have  cost  $30,000,000.  A  board  of  public
works  was  created  in  1837  by  the  general  assem-
bly, and  Judge  Hall  was  elected  one  of  its  nine
members.  He  endeavored  to  check  the  extrava-
gant appropriations,  but,  failing  in  this  purpose,
resigned  his  office  after  seven  months'  service.  He
was  lieutenant  -  governor  of  the  state  in  1840-'3,
was  appointed  one  of  the  vice-presidents  of  the
Whig  convention  at  Nashville  in  1840,  and  of  the
Baltimore  convention  in  1844,  and  was  a  delegate
to  the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1850.

HALL,  Samuel  Read,  educator,  b.  in  Crovdon,
N.  H.,  27  Oct.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Bennington,  Vt.,  24
June,  1877.  He  began  to  teach  in  Rumford,  Me.,
in  1814,  and  in  1822  was  principal  of  an  academy
in  Fitchburg,  Mass.,  being  also  licensed  as  a  Con-
gregational minister.  He  removed  to  Concord,
Vt.,  in  1823,  and  organized  the  first  school  in  the
United  States  for  the  training  of  teachers,  which  he
conducted  until  1830.  He  was  chosen  in  that  year
principal  of  the  English  department  of  Phillips
Andover  academy,  and  in  1829  he  aided  in  found-
ing the  American  institute  of  instruction.  He
removed  to  Plymouth,  N.  H.,  in  1837,  and  kept  a
teachers'  seminary  there  until  1840,  when  he  went
to  Craftsbury,  Vt.,  and  established  in  connection
with  the  academy  a  teachers'  department,  which
he  taught  until  1846.  He  published  the  "  Instruc-
tor's Manual,  or  Lectures  on  School-Keeping "
(Boston,  1829) ;  "  Lectures  on  Education,  and
"  Geography  for  Children."

HALL,  Sarah,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
30  Oct.,  1761 ;  d.  there,  8  April,  1830.  She  was
a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  John  Ewing,  provost  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1782  mar-
ried John  Hall,  of  Maryland,  whose  father  had
come  to  that  state  with  Lord  Baltimore.  She  re-
moved with  her  husband  to  his  home,  but  in  about
eight  years  they  returned  to  Philadelphia,  where
Mr.  Hall  became  secretary  of  the  land-office  and
U.  S.  marshal  for  the  district  of  Pennsylvania.
They  lived  in  Lamberton,  N.  J.,  in  1801-5,  and
then  in  Maryland  again  until  1811,  when  they
settled  permanently  in  Philadelphia.  In  spite  of
these  changes,  Mrs.  Hall  continued  her  studies
with  diligence.  She  was  one  of  the  chief  contribu-
tors to  the  "Port-Polio,"  established  by  Joseph
Dennie  in  1800,  and  when  that  magazine  was  edit-
ed by  her  son  she  aided  him.  She  was  fond  of
study  on  religious  subjects,  and  learned  Hebrew
for  the  purpose  of  research.  Mrs.  Hall  published
"Conversations  on  the  Bible"  (1818;  2d  ed.,  2
vols.,  1821;  reprinted  in  London).  A  small  vol-
ume, containing  selections  from  her  miscellaneous
writings  and  a  sketch  of  her  life,  was  published  by
her  son,  Harrison  (Philadelphia,  1833).— Her  eldest
son,  John  Elihn,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  27
Dec,  1783 ;  d.  there,  11  June,  1829,  was  educated
at  Princeton,  studied  law,  and  in  1805  began  to
practise  in  Baltimore,  where  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  and  belles-lettres  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Maryland.  He  was  an  active  Federalist,  was
severely  wounded  in  the  Baltimore  riots  of  1812


(see  Hanson,  Alexander  C),  and  was  one  of  the
nine  that  were  thrown  into  a  heap  as  killed.  He
edited  "The  American  Law  Journal"  (1808-'17),
and  removed  to  Philadelphia  and  edited  the  "  Port-
Folio"  there  from  1817  till  1827,  contributing  to
it  the  "  Memoirs  of  Anacreon,"  which  attracted
much  attention.  In  1827  he  edited  "  The  Phila-
delphia Souvenir "  and  published  original  and  se-
lected "  Memoirs  of  Eminent  Persons."  He  also
published  "  The  Practice  and  Jurisdiction  of  the
Court  of  Admiralty "  (Baltimore,  1809) ;  a  "  Life
of  Dr.  John  Shaw,"  prefixed  to  his  collected  poems
(1810) ;  an  English  edition  of  Emerigon's  "  Mari-
time Laws,"  with  other  matter  (1811) ;  "  Tracts  on
Constitutional  Law,  containing  Mr.  Livingston's
Answer  to  Mr.  Jefferson"  (Philadelphia,  1813);
and  an  edition  of  William  Wirt's  "  British  Spy,"
to  which  he  contributed  several  letters. — Another
son,  Harrison,  author,  b.  in  Octorara,  Cecil  co.,
Md.,  5  Nov.,  1785 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  9
March,  1866,  published  the  "Port-Folio"  and
wrote  a  work  on  "  Distillation "  (1815 ;  2d  ed.,
1818 ;  reprinted  in  England),  which  was  com-
mended by  Dr.  Hare  and  other  scientists. — An-
other son,  James,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
19  Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  near  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  5  July,
1868.  studied  law,  but  left  it  in  1812  to  join  the
army  as  a  volunteer  in  the  Washington  giiards.
He  commanded  a  detachment  from  his  company
at  Chippewa  in  1814.  and  was  present  at  the
battle  of  Lundy's  Lane  and  at  the  siege  of  Fort
Erie,  being  commended  officially  for  his  services.
He  was  then  made  a  lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery
and  stationed  at  Fort  Mifflin.  He  went  with  De-
catur in  1815  in  his  expedition  to  Algiers,  serving
on  the  U.  S.  brig  "  Enterprise,"  commanded  by
Lieut.  Lawrence  Kearney.  Returning  in  the  fol-
lowing year,  he  was  stationed  at  Newport,  R.  I.,
and  at  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  on  duty  in  the  ordnance  de-
partment, during  which  time  he  completed  his  law
studies  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818.  In
1820  he  removed  to  Shawneetown,  111.,  where  he
practised  his  profession  and  edited  the  "  Illinois
Gazette,"  a  weekly  newspaper.  He  was  appointed
public  prosecutor,  and  held  this  office  four  years,
when  he  was  made  judge  of  the  circuit  court  till
its  abolition  three  years  later.  He  then  became
state  treasurer  and  removed  to  Vandalia,  where
he  edited  the  "  Illinois  Intelligencer "  and  the
"  Illinois  Monthly  Magazine."  He  removed  to
Cincinnati  in  1833,  became  cashier  of  the  commer-
cial bank  there  in  1836,  and  in  1853  its  president,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  He  devoted
his  time  to  literary  pursuits  and  edited  his  maga-
zine under  the  title  of  the  "Western  Monthly
Magazine."  Besides  numerous  contributions  to
periodicals,  he  published  "  Letters  from  the  West,"
originally  printed  in  the  "  Port-Folio,"  and  after-
ward collected  bv  his  brother  (London.  1829) ;
"  Legends  of  the  West "  (Philadelphia,  1832) ;  "  The
Soldier's  Bride,  and  other  Tales "  (1832) ;  "  The
Harpe's  Head,  a  Legend  of  Kentucky"  (1833);
"  Tales  of  the  Border "  (Philadelphia,  1835) ;
"  Sketches  of  the  West "  (2  vols.,  1835) ;  "  Statistics
of  the  West'"  (1836;  re-issued  with  additions  as
"Notes  on  the  Western  States,"  1839);  "Life  of
Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison  "  (1836) ;  "  History
of  the  Indian  Tribes,"  in  conjunction  with  Thomas
L.  McKenney  (3  vols.,  folio,  1838-'44);  "The  Wil-
derness and  the  War-Path  "  (New  York,  1845) ;
"  Life  of  Thomas  Posey,  Governor  of  Indiana,"  in
Sparks's  "  American  Biography  "  (1846) ;  and  "  Ro-
mance of  Western  History  "  (Cincinnati,  1847).  A
uniform  edition  of  his  works  has  been  published
(4  vols.,  1853-6). — Another  son,  Thomas  Mifflin,


HALL


HALLAM


45


physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  27  Feb.,  1798,  lost,  at
sea  in  1828,  in  a  South  American  ship-of-war,  to
which  he  had  been  appointed  surgeon,  contributed
poetry  and  scientific  articles  to  the  "  Port-Folio."

HALL,  Thomas,  organ-builder,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1791 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1874.
He  was  apprenticed  to  Jchn  Lowe,  an  organ-
builder,  whom  he  succeeded  in  business.  Mr.  Hall
came  to  New  York  in  1813  and  erected  the  organ
in  the  old  Trinity  church,  which  had  been  built  by
Mr.  Lowe,  captured  at  sea  by  the  British  ship
"  Plantagenet,"  and  ransomed  by  the  vestry  of
Trinity  parish.  He  also  built  the  large  organs  in
Trinity  chapel,  St.  Thomas's  church,  and  in  the
Temple  Emmanuel  of  New  York.

HALL,  Willard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Westford,  Mass.,
24  Dec,  1780;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  10  May,
1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1799,
studied  law  with  Samuel  Dana,  of  Groton,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1803.  He  immediately  re-
moved to  Dover,  Del.,  and  practised  there  for
twenty  years.  He  was  secretary  of  the  state  of
Delaware  from  1811  till  1814,  and  again  in  1821,
served  in  congress  in  1817-'21,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  in  1822.  In  1823  he  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Monroe  U.  S.  district  judge
for  Delaware,  which  office  he  held  until  his  resigna-
tion in  1872.  He  revised  the  state  laws,  by  order
of  the  general  assembly  of  Delaware  in  1829,  and
in  1831  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional
convention.  Mr.  Hall  advocated  the  establishment
of  public  schools,  and  suggested  the  plan  that  was
adopted  in  1829.  He  was  also  active  in  religious
matters.  He  published  "  Laws  of  Delaware  to  1829,
Inclusive  "  (Wilmington,  1829).

HALL,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1774 ;
d.  in  Green  Garden,  Sumner  co.,  Tenn.,  in  October,
1856.  He  served  in  the  Indian  wars,  and  com-
manded a  regiment  of  Tennessee  riflemen  under
Gen.  Jackson  in  the  war  of  1812.  For  several
years  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature,  and
was  at  one  time  speaker  of  the  senate.  He  became
governor  of  Tennessee  in  1820  on  the  resignation
of  Samuel  Houston.  Gov.  Hall  was  a  major-gen-
eral of  militia,  and  served  in  congress  from  1831
till  1833,  having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat.

HALL,  William,  publisher,  b.  in  Sparta,  N.  Y.,
13  May,  1796 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3  May,  1874.
He  served  in  the  war  of  1812.  In  his  youth  he
commanded  the  8th  militia  regiment,  and  was
afterward  appointed  brigadier-general.  In  1821  he
engaged  in  the  music-publishing  business  under
the  firm-name  of  Firth,  Hall  and  Pond,  in  which
he  continued  until  his  death.  At  the  Astor  place
riots  he  commanded  a  brigade  of  militia,  which
was  ordered  out  by  the  governor  for  their  suppres-
sion. By  his  courage  and  calmness  he  saved  the
lives  of  many  innocent  spectators  in  ordering  his
troops  to  fire  high  when  they  were  assailed  with
stones  by  the  mob.  He  served  also  in  the  state
senate  during  the  administrations  of  Gov.  Fish  and
Gov.  King. — His  son,  James  Frederick,  soldier,  b.
in  New  York  city,  31  Jan.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Tarrytown,
N.  Y.,  9  Jan.,  1884.  With  a  younger  brother,
Thomas,  he  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  William
Hall  and  Sons.  In  1861  he  assisted  the  commissary-
general  of  ordnance  of  the  state  to  equip  twenty-
eight  regiments  for  the  field.  He  then  set  to
work  to  fit  out  a  regiment  for  himself.  Mr.  Par-
rott,  of  the  West  Point  foundry,  presented  to  Mr.
Hall  a  full  battery  of  field-guns,  which  was  after-
ward permitted  to  act  with  the  1st  regiment  of
engineers,  organized  by  Mr.  Hall  and  Col.  Serrell.
Col.  Hall,  at  the  head  of  these  men,  did  good  work
at  the  taking  of  Port  Royal. He  constructed  the


works  on  Tybee  island,  and  was  present  at  the
capture  of  Fort  Pulaski.  Ga.,  which  followed.  He
received  honorable  mention  for  his  gallantry  on  the
field  at  Pocotaligo  and  Olustee,  Fla.  He  was  pres-
ent at  the  capture  of  Morris  island  and  at  the  two
attacks  on  Fort  Wagner,  and  co-operated  with
Sherman  against  Savannah  and  Charleston.  For
two  years  he  acted  as  provost-marshal-general  of
the  Department  of  the  South.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  24  Feb.,  1865.

HALL,  William  P.,  soldier,  b.  about  1820;  d.
in  New  York  city,  20  Oct.,  1865.  He  enlisted  as  a
private  in  the  regular  army,  and  before  he  was  of
age  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  sergeant-major.
He  took  part  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  it  is  said
that  he  was  the  first  to  place  the  United  States
colors  on  the  heights  of  Chapultepec.  For  this  act
he  was  commissioned  captain  in  the  regular  army,
which  appointment  he  refused  for  private  reasons.
His  claims  were  strongly  urged  by  his  comrades
for  the  snuff-box  that  was  left  by  Andrew  Jackson
as  a  legacy  to  the  bravest  soldier.  The  New  York
common  council,  who  had  the  difficult  task  of
awarding  this  gift,  decided  in  favor  of  another  on
the  ground  that  Lieut.-Col.  Hall  belonged  to  the
regular  army,  which  debarred  him  from  the  list  of
competitors.  He  served  in  the  civil  war,  was  seri-
ously wounded  on  several  occasions,  and  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  Confederates  when  major  of  the
9th  New  York,  or  Ira  Harris  cavalry.  He  was  com-
missioned lieutenant-colonel.  11  Jan.,  1865.  He  con-
tracted a  disease  in  prison  which  caused  his  death.
He  contributed  many  articles  to  periodicals.

HALL,  William  Whittv,  phvsician,  b.  in  Paris,
Ky.,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10  May,  1876.
He  was  graduated  at  Centre  college  in  1830,  and
received  his  medical  degree  from  Transylvania  in
1836.  For  fifteen  years  he  practised  medicine  in
the  south,  after  which  he  removed  to  New  York
and  published  "  Hall's  Journal  of  Health  "  (1854),
which  had  a  large  circulation.  He  was  the  author
of  a  "  Treatise  on  Cholera "  (New  York,  1852) ;
"Bronchitis  and  Kindred  Diseases"  (1852;  new
ed.,  1870);  "Consumption"  (1857);  "Health  and
Disease  "  (1860 ;  5th  ed.,  enlarged,  1864) ;  "  Sleep  "
(4th  ed.,  1864;  new  ed.,  1870);  "Coughs  and
Colds  "  (1870) ;  "  Guide-Board  to  Health  "  (Spring-
field, Mass.,  1870) ;  "  Health  by  Good  Living "
(New  York,  1870) ;  and  "  Fun  Better  than  Physic,
or  Everybody's  Life-Preserver  "  (Springfield,  1871).

HALL,  Willis,  lawver,  b.  in  Granville,  N.  Y.,
1  April,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  July,  1868.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1824,  studied  law  in
New  York,  and  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1827.  practising  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  from
1827  till  1831,  and  in  New  York  from  1831  till
1838.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  assembly
in  1837,  and  again  in  1842.  In  1838  he  was  ap-
pointed attorney-general  of  the  state,  and  filled
this  office  for  one  year.  He  was  for  some  time  a
lecturer  in  the  law-school  of  Saratoga.  In  1848  he
opposed  the  nomination  of  Gen.  Taylor  as  the
Whig  candidate  for  the  presidency  and  supported
Henry  Clay,  and  in  the  same  year  retired  from  pro-
fessional and  political  life.

HALLAM,  Robert  Alexander,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  30  Sept.,  1807 ;  d.  there,
4  Jan.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1827,
and  at  the  General  theological  seminary,  New
York,  in  1832.  He  was  rector  of  St.  Andrew's
church,  Meriden,  Conn.,  for  over  two  years,  and  of
St.  James's  church,  New  London,  Conn.,  from  1835
until  his  death.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general
convention  continuously  from  1850  till  1868,  and
member  of  the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese


46


HALLAM


HALLECK


of  Connecticut  from  1846  till  1872.  In  1853  he
received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Trinity  col-
lege. Dr.  Hallam  was  an  original  thinker  and  an
interesting  writer.  His  specialty  in  the  pulpit  was
the  expounding  of  peculiar  texts.  lie  is  the  au-
thor of  " Lectures  on  the  Morning  Prayer"  (Phila-
delphia, 1850-'l) ;  "  Sketches  of  1  ravel  in  Europe  "
and  "Lectures  on  Moses"  (New  York,  1869);
"Sovereigns  of  Judah"  (1877);  and  "Annals  of
St.  James's,  New  London."

HALLAM,  William,  theatre-manager,  b.  in
England  about  1712;  d.  there  about  1758.  He
was  a  brother  of  Admiral  Hallam,  of  the  British
navy,  and  became  manager  of  the  Goodman's
Fields  theatre,  London.  In  his  competition  with
Garrick,  who  managed  Drury  Lane  theatre,  he  be-
came bankrupt  in  1750,  and  in  the  same  year  or-
ganized a  dramatic  company  that  was  sent,  un-
der the  direction  of  his  brother  Lewis,  to  the
North  American  colonies  and  the  British  West
Indies.  Before  the  actors  sailed  they  studied
twenty-four  plays,  besides  farces  and  medleys,
which  in  suitable  weather  were  rehearsed  on  ship-
board. They  also  took  with  them  costumes  and
scenery.  In  June,  1754,  William  Hallam  sailed
for  the  North  American  colonies,  landing  in  Phila-
delphia. He  remained  with  the  comedians  about
one  year,  but  did  not  perform.  Disposing  of  his
half-interest  to  his  brother  Lewis,  he  returned  to
England  in  1755,  where  he  soon  afterward  died. —
His  brother,  Lewis,  theatre-manager,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1714:  d.  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  in  1756,
had  been  an  actor  under  William's  management.
On  the  failure  of  the  London  establishment,  he
took  charge  of  the  American  enterprise,  and,  on
joint  account  with  William,  conducted  the  actors
across  the  ocean.  They  arrived  at  Yorktown.  Va.,
and  began  their  performances  in  Williamsburg,
then  the  capital  of  the  colony.  Here  they  hired
a  large  wooden  structure,  which  was  roughly  al-
tered to  suit  their  purposes.  It  was  so  near  the
forest  that  the  players  were  able  to  shoot  wild-
fowl from  the  windows  of  the  building.  Their
opening  performance  was  "  The  Merchant  of  Ven-
ice." The  orchestra  was  supplied  by  a  single
player  on  the  harpsichord.  Prom  Williamsburg
the  troupe  travelled  to  Annapolis  and  Philadel-
phia. In  1754  they  performed  in  New  York  city,
under  the  sole  management  of  Lewis  Hallam,  and
in  1756  went  to  the  British  West  Indies,  where
Hallam  died. — His  wife,  b.  in  London  :  d.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  in  1773,  was  an  actress  at  the  Good-
man's Fields  theatre,  and  in  1752  came  to  this
country  with  her  husband.  After  the  death  of
Hallam  she  married  his  successor  in  the  manage-
ment, David  Douglas,  and  retired  from  the  stage
in  1769.— Their  son,  Lewis,  b.  in  England  in  1738;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Nov.,  1808,  was  edu-
cated at  the  grammar-school  in  Cambridge,  to  fol-
low a  profession,  under  the  patronage  of  his
uncle,  the  admiral.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he
came  with  his  parents  to  this  country,  and  made
his  first  appearance  on  any  stage  at  the  theatre  in
Williamsburg,  in  a  subordinate  part.  After  the
death  of  his  father  he  followed  the  fortunes  of  his
step-father,  Douglas,  the  new  manager.  They  faced
the  yellow  fever,  the  Revolution,  and  the  intoler-
ance of  New  England.  In  Newport,  R.  I.,  the
company  was  permitted  only  to  recite  so-called
"Moral  Dialogues."  One  of  these  was  Shake-
speare's "Othello."  The  play-bills  read:  "Mr.
Douglas  will  represent  Othello,  a  noble  and  mag-
nanimous Moor,  who  loves  a  young  lady  named
Desdemona,  and  after  he  has  married  her,  har-
bors (as  in  too  many  cases)  the  dreadful  passion


of  jealousy."  "  Mr.  nallam  will  delineate  Cassio,
a  young  and  thoughtful  officer,  who  is  traduced
by  Mr.  Allen  (Iago),  and,  getting  drunk,  loses  his
situation  and  his  friends."  As  an  actor  Hallam
never  rose  to  eminence ;  but  in  the  negro  char-
acter of  Mungo,  in  the  play  of  the  "  Padlock,"
he  was  seen  to  advantage.  It  is  laid  to  his  charge
that  he  too  frequently  indulged  in  the  habit  of
interpolating  profanity  to  emphasize  his  language.
After  the  retirement  of  Douglas.  Hal  lain  united
with  John  Henry  in  the  management  of  the
"American  company,"  and  continued  playing,
with  varying  success.  During  their  management
it  was  the  custom  to  set  aside  benefit-nights  for
popular  actors.  On  such  occasions  the  public  was
invited  to  purchase  tickets  of  admission  at  the
lodgings  of  the  beneficiaries.  This  was  deemed  a
gala  occasion  by  young  gallants  for  personal  in-
terviews with  popular  actresses.  Favored  patrons
were  also  allowed  to  visit  the  performers  behind
the  scenes  during  the  action  of  the  play.  At  about
the  same  time  the  "  citizens  "  were  requested  "  to
send  their  servants  to  the  theatre  on  the  opening
of  the  doors,  at  4  o'clock,  to  keep  the  places  they
had  secured  for  the  evening's  performance."  In
1797  Hallam  sold  out  his  half-interest  in  the  man-
agement to  William  Dunlap.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hal-
lam then  became  salaried  actors.  Hallam  made
his  final  appearance  in  New  York  city  on  6  June,
1806.  He  married  his  first  wife  in  the  West  In-
dies. She  lived  but  a  short  time.  After  her  death
Hallam  married  Miss  Tuke  in  1791.  In  her  best
days  the  second  Mrs.  Hallam  was  a  comely  woman
and  a  good  comedy  actress.

HALLECK,  Fitz-Greene,  poet,  b.  in  Guil-
ford. Conn.,  8  July,  1790 ;  d.  there,  19  Novem-
ber, 1867.  His  ancestors  were  among  the  earliest
of  the  Pilgrim  fathers.  Some  literary  admixture
was  in  his  blood
from  both  his
paternal  and  ma-
ternal ancestry,
he  beingdescend-
ed  from  Peter
Halleck,  or  Hal-
lock,  who  landed
at  New  Haven  in
1640,  and  with
eleven  other

heads  of  families
settled  at  South-
hold,  on  the  east-
ern shore  of  Long
Island,  and  on
his  mother's  side
from  the  Rev.
John  Eliot,  the
pious  "  Apostle
to  the  Indians."
who  arrived  in  Boston  in  1631.  The  future  poet
was  sent  to  school  when  he  was  six  years  of  age  ;  and
when  he  was  seven  he  took  part  in  one  of  the  public
exhibitions,  or  "  quarter-days."  as  they  were  called
in  Connecticut — an  honor  not  usually  accorded  to
lads  of  his  tender  years.  Said  a  venerable  lady
who  was  present :  "  He  was  the  brightest  and  sweet-
est-looking lad  I  ever  saw,  and  so  intelligent  and
gentle  in  his  manner  that  every  one  loved  him."
He  was  no  sooner  taught  to  write  than  he  took  to
rhyming.  As  one  of  his  school  companions  re-
marked, "  He  couldn't  help  it."  In  an  old  writing-
book,  dated  1802,  on  a  page  opposite  to  some
juvenile  verses,  appears  the  following  title,  show-
ing that  the  schoolboy  indulged  in  dreams  of  lit-
erary distinction,  "The  Poetical  Works  of  Fitz-


HALLECK


HALLECK


47


Greene  Hallock."  Two  years  later,  when  fourteen
years  of  age,  he  changed  the  spelling  of  his  name
from  Hallock  to  Halleck,  and,  having  completed
his  studies  by  passing  through  the  four  depart-
ments which  then  existed  in  New  England  schools,
he  in  1805  entered  the  store  of  his  kinsman,  An-
drew Eliot,  of
Guilford,  with
whom  he  re-
mained as  a  clerk
for  six  years,  re-
siding in  his  fam-
ily, in  accord-
ance with  the
custom  of  that
day.  Here  he
learned  to  keep
accounts  by  dou-
ble -  entry,  and
soon  took  entire
charge  of  the
books.  They

were  kept  in  a  correct  and  business-like  manner,
were  well  written,  for  even  at  that  early  date  Hal-
leck wrote  a  neat  and  dainty  hand ;  and  it  is  re-
lated that  the  only  mistake  ever  discovered  in  the
young  clerk's  book-keeping  at  Andrew  Eliot's  was
in  opening  duplicate  accounts  in  the  ledger  with
the  same  person.

In  the  spring  of  1808  Halleck  made  his  first
visit  to  New  York,  being  sent  on  business  by  Mr.
Eliot.  During  his  three  days'  sojourn  he  attended
the  Park  theatre,  where  he  saw  young  Oliff.  the
actor,  afterward  introduced  by  him  in  two  of  the
"  Croakers,"  and  also  had  pointed  out  by  his  com-

S anion  the  young  banker  Jacob  Barker  and  John
acob  Astor,  little  thinking  at  the  time  that  nearly
all  the  business  portion  of  his  life  would  be  associ-
ated with  these  prominent  men.  During  the  sum-
mer of  the  same  year  Halleck  joined  the  militia,
and  was  soon  made  a  sergeant,  filling  the  position
to  the  satisfaction  of  his  associates.  His  expe-
riences in  the  Connecticut  militia,  as  well  as  his
later  campaign  with

"  Swartwout's  gallant  corps,  the  Iron  Grays,"
was  a  never-failing  source  of  fun  with  him,  both
in  his  conversation  and  in  his  correspondence.
During  the  following  winter  he  opened  an  evening-
school  for  instruction  in  arithmetic,  writing,  and
book-keeping,  and  by  thus  adding  to  his  limited
income  was  enabled  to  indulge  his  passion  for  the
purchase  of  books.  Among  his  earliest  and  most
prized  possessions  of  this  character  were  Campbell's
poems,  a  copy  of  Burns,  and  Addison's  "Specta-
tor." In  May,  1811,  Halleck  left  his  native  town
to  seek  after  fame  and  fortune  in  New  York,
and  in  June  entered  the  counting  -  room  of
Jacob  Barker,  in  whose  service  he  remained  for
twenty  years.  In  the  spring  of  1813  he  became
acquainted  with  Joseph  Rodman  Drake.  The
young  men  immediately  became  attached  friends,
ever  after  maintaining  an  intimacy  severed  only
by  death,  an  event  that  was  mourned  by  the  sur-
vivor in  those  tender  and  touching  lines,  so  uni-
versally admired,  beginning :

"  Green  be  the  turf  above  thee."
In  1819  they  formed  a  literary  partnership,  and
produced  the  humorous  series  of  "  Croaker "  pa-

Sers.  Of  this  satirical  and  quaint  chronicle  of
few  York  life,  Halleck  in  1866  said  that  "  they
were  good-natured  verses,  contributed  anonymous-
ly to  the  columns  of  the  New  York  '  Evening
Post,'  from  March  to  June.  1819,  and  occasionally
afterward."  The  writers  continued,  like  the  au-
thors of  Junius,  the  sole  depositories  of  their  own


secret,  and  apparently  wished,  with  the  minstrel  in
Leyden's  "  Scenes  of  Infancy,"  to

"  Save  others'  names,  but  leave  their  own
unsung."

In  the  latter  part  of  1819  Halleck  wrote  his
longest  poem  of  "  Fanny,"  an  amusing  satire  on
the  fashion,  follies,  and  public  characters  of  the
day,  which  was  the  perpetual  delight  of  John
Randolph.  The  edition  was  soon  exhausted,  and
a  second,  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  fifty  stan-
zas, appeared  early  in  1821.  The  following  year
he  visited  Europe,  and  in  1827  published  anony-
mously an  edition  of  his  poems,  two  of  the  finest
in  the  collection,  "  Alnwick  Castle  "  and  "  Burns,"
having  been  suggested  by  scenes  and  incidents  of
foreign  travel.  This  volume  also  included  his
spirited  lyric  of  "  Marco  Bozzaris."  In  1832  Hal-
leck entered  the  office  of  John  Jacob  Astor,  with
whom  he  remained  until  1849,  when,  the  mil-
lionaire having  died  and  made  him  rich  with  an
annuity  of  "  forty  pounds  a  year,"  the  poet  retired
to  his  native  town,  and  took  up  his  residence  with
his  unmarried  sister  in  an  ancient  house  built  in
1786  on  ground  formerly  belonging  to  the  Shel-
leys,  ancestors  of  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley.  In  this
fine  old  mansion  (see  illustration),  where  Halleck
lived  for  so  many  years,  he  wrote  the  admirable
poem  "Connecticut,"  "Lines  to  Louis  Gaylord
Clark,"  and  his  latest  poetical  composition  of
"Young  America,"  published  in  1864.  These,
with  a  few  translations  from  the  French,  German,
and  Italian,  are  the  only  fruits  of  his  pen  after
his  retirement  to  Guilford.  When  in  1866  a
wealthy  admirer  wrote  to  the  poet  for  a  view  of  his
country-seat,  to  be  engraved  for  a  privately  printed
edition  of  "  Fanny,"  Halleck,  whose  limited  means
did  not  permit  him  to  possess  the  mansion  men-
tioned in  this  notice,  being  merely  a  tenant,  and
who  had  too  much  manliness  of  character  to  al-
low any  glorification  of  his  poverty,  replied  :  "  I  am
gratefully  sensible  of  the  compliment  your  propo-
sition as  to  the  sketch  pays
me :  but  you  must  pardon  me
for  begging  that  it  may  not
be  carried  into  effect,  for,  al-
though born  here  in  Connec-
ticut where,  as  Lord  Byron
says  of  England,  'men  are
proud  to  be,'  I  shall  never
cease  to  '  hail,'  as  the  sailors
say,  from  your  good  city  of
New  York,  of  which  a  resi-
dence of  nearly  fifty  years
made  me  a  citizen.  There  I
always  considered  myself  at
home,  and  elsewhere  but  a
visitor.  If,  therefore,  you
wish  to  embellish  my  poem
with  a  view  of  my  country-
seat  (it  was  literally  mine  for
every  summer  Sunday  for
years),  let  it  be  taken  from
the  top  of  Weehawk  Hill,
overlooking  New  York, to

whose  scenes  and  associations  the  poem  is  almost
exclusively  devoted."

In  October,  1867,  Halleck  visited  New  York  for
the  last  time.  He  remained  a  week,  but  was  too
unwell  to  accept  any  invitations,  which  were  al-
ways numerous  on  his  semi-annual  excursions  to
the  city,  and  only  left  his  hotel  twice,  to  call  upon
his  physician  and  for  a  short  stroll  on  a  sunny
afternoon  with  the  writer,  to  whom  on  parting  he
said  with  prophetic  words:  "If  we  never  meet
again,  come  and  see  me  laid  under  the  sod  of  my


48


HALLECK


HALLECK


native  village." lie  lingered  for  a  few  weeks,  and

Sassed  away,  with  his  attached  sister  by  his  side,
uring  the  following  month.  Three  days  later  he
was  laid  by  the  side  of  his  father's  grave  in  the
Guilford  cemetery.  On  the  eightieth  anniversary
of  I  I.i Heck's  birth,  the  ceremonies  took  place  in  his
native  town  which  dedicated  the  imposing  granite
obelisk  erected  in  his  honor  by  Bryant,  Longfel-
low, Sumner,  Whittier,  and  many  others  of  the
most  eminent  men  of  the  country— the  first  pub-
lic monument  raised  to  an  American  poet.  (See
illustration  on  page  47.)  A  portion  of  the  pro-
gramme was  an  appreciative  address  by  Bayard
Taylor  and  a  lyric  written  for  the  occasion  by  Oli-
ver Wendell  Holmes :

"  He  sleeps ;  he  cannot  die !
As  evening's  long-drawn  sigh,
Lifting  the  rose-leaves  on  his  peaceful  mound,

Spreads  all  their  sweets  around,
So,  laden  with  his  song,  the  breezes  blow
From  where  the  rustling  sedge
Frets  our  rude  ocean's  edge,
To  the  smooth  sea  beyond  the  peaks  of  snow,
His  soul  the  air  enshrines,  and  leaves  but  dust

below ! "
Another  honor  was  paid  to  Halleck's  memory  by
the  erection  in  the  Central  park,  New  York,  of  a
full-length  bronze  statue,  the  first  set  up  in  the
New  World  to  a  poet.  (See  illustration.)  It  was
unveiled  in  May,  1877,  by  the  president  of  the
United  States,  who  with  his  cabinet,  the  general
of  the  army,  and  many  eminent  citizens,  includ-
ing the  poets  Bryant,  Bo-
ker,  and  Bayard  Taylor,
were  escorted  from  the
residence  of  Halleck's  bi-
ographer to  the  Central
park  by  the  7th  regi-
ment. Appropriate  ad-
dresses were  delivered  by
the  venerable  Bryant  and
William  Allen  Butler,  and
a  spirited  poem  read,  writ-
ten by  John  G.  Whittier.
The  following  year  a
sumptuously  printed  "Me-
morial of  Fitz-Greene  Hal-
leck  "  was  issued,  contain-
ing the  addresses  and
poems  delivered  at  the  monument  and  statue  cele-
brations, together  with  numerous  portraits  of  the
poet  and  other  illustrations.

Of  Halleck's  poetical  writings  it  has  been  well
said  that  brilliancy  of  thought,  quaintness  of  fan-
cy, and  polished  energy  of  diction  have  given  them
a  rank  in  American  literature  from  which  they
will  not  soon  be  displaced  even  by  the  many  ad-
mirable productions  of  a  later  date.  In  spicy
pungency  of  satire,  and  a  certain  eloquence  and
grace  of  manner,  without  an  approach  to  stiff-
ness or  formality,  they  have  few  parallels  in  mod-
ern poetry.  Their  tone  is  that  of  a  man  of  the
world,  handling  a  pen  caustic  and  tender  by
turns,  with  inimitable  ease,  leaving  no  trace  of  the
midnight  oil,  though  often  elaborated  with  ex-
quisite skill,  and  entirely  free  from  both  the  rust
and  the  pretension  of  recluse  scholarship.  Mr.
Halleck  was  a  man  of  a  singularly  social  turn  of
mind,  delighting  in  gay  and  cordial  fellowship,
brimming  over  with  anecdote  and  whimsical  con-
ceits, with  remarkable  power  of  narration,  un-
feignedly  fond  of  discussion  and  argument,  and
frequently  carrying  his  ingenuity  to  the  extreme
verge  of  paradox.  His  personal  bearing  was  in  a
high  degree  impressive  and  winning. His  pres-


ence had  a  wonderful  charm  for  almost  all  classes
of  persons.  His  wit,  while  keen  and  biting  at
times,  was  never  ill-natured,  and  only  severe  when
directed  against  ignorant  and  pompous  preten-
sion. The  statements  that  have  been  frequently
made  since  the  poet's  death  in  reference  to  his
having  become  a  convert  to  the  Roman  Catholic
faith  are  erroneous.  He  was  born,  lived,  and
died  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  of  which
he  was  a  member,  having  been  confirmed  in  his
youth,  and  he  was  buried  from  Grace  (Episcopal)
church,  Guilford.  "What  men,"  says  Humboldt,
"  believe  or  disbelieve  is  usually  made  a  subject  of
discussion  only  after  their  death — after  one  has
been  officially  buried,  and  a  funeral  sermon  has
been  read  over  one."  So  it  was  with  Fitz-Greene
Halleck.  Halleck's  portrait  was  painted  by  Jar-
vis,  Morse,  Inman,  Waldo,  Elliott,  and  Hicks.  He
published  "Fanny"  (New  York,  1819;  2d  ed.,
enlarged,  1821);  "Alnwick  Castle,  with  other  Po-
ems "  (1827 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  1836 ;  3d  ed.,  en-
larged, 1845) ;  "Fanny  and  other  Poems  "  (1839) ;
"  The  Poetical  Works  of  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  now
first  Collected,"  illustrated  with  steel  engravings
(8vo,  1847) ;  "  The  Poetical  Works  of  Fitz-Greene
Halleck "  (12mo,  1852 ;  new  ed.,  12mo  and  24mo,
1858);  "The  Croakers,"  by  Halleck  and  Drake,
No.  16,  Bradford  club  series  (1860);  "Young
America,  a  Poem"  (1865).  After  his  death  ap-
peared "  The  Poetical  Writings  of  Fitz-Greene
Halleck,  with  Extracts  from  those  of  Joseph  Rod-
man Drake,"  edited  by  James  Grant  Wilson  (three
editions,  18mo,  12mo,  and  8vo,  1869).  Halleck
edited  "  The  Works  of  Lord  Byron  in  Verse  and
Prose,  including  his  Letters,  Journals,  etc.,  with  a
Sketch  of  his  Life  "  (1834) ;  and  "  Selections  from
the  British  Poets  "  (1840).  See  articles  and  addresses
by  Frederick  S.  Cozzens,  Evert  A.  Duyckinck,
Henry  T.  Tuckerman,  and  William  Cullen  Brvant
(1868-9) ;  " The  Life  and  Letters  of  Fitz-Greene
Halleck,"  by  James  Grant  Wilson  (two  editions,
12mo  and  8vo,  1869) ;  "  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,"  by
Bayard  Taylor  ("  North  American  Review,"  July-
August,  1877) ;  and  Wilson's  "  Bryant  and  his
Friends  "  (1886). — His  sister,  Maria  Halleck,  b.
in  Guilford,  19  July,  1788 ;  d.  there,  21  April,  1870.
She  was  the  poet's  only  sister,  and  the  last  of  her
family.  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  in  lit-
erary biography  than  the  devoted  attachment  that
existed  between  Halleck  and  his  sister — an  attach-
ment and  devotion  not  surpassed  by  that  existing
between  Charles  and  Mary  Lamb.  They  were  con-
stant correspondents  during  the  poet's  career  in
New  York,  and  when  he  left  the  great  city  in
1849  it  was  to  return  to  his  native  place,  and  to
reside  with  his  accomplished  sister  until  they  were
separated  by  death.  She  now  sleeps  by  his  side  in
Alderbrook  cemetery,  with  ivy  brought  from  Ab-
botsford  growing  on  her  grave.  One  of  the  inscrip-
tions on  the  monument,  seen  in  the  illustration  on
a  previous  page,  records  her  name  and  the  year
of  her  birth  and  death.  Miss  Halleck  possessed
those  rare  conversational  powers  that  characterized
the  poet,  and  very  strongly  resembled  him  in  dis-
position as  well  as  in  personal  appearance.

HALLECK,  Henry  Wager,  soldier,  b.  in  West-
ernville,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Jan.,  1815 ;  d.  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  9  Jan.,  1872.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education  at  Hudson  academy,  N.  Y„
passed  through  a  part  of  the  course  at  Union,  and
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1839,
standing  third  in  a  class  of  thirty-one.  Among
his  classmates  were  Gen.  James  B.  Ricketts,  Gen.
Edward  O.  C.  Ord,  and  Gen.  Edward  R.  S.  Can-
by. He  was  made  a  2d  lieutenant  of  engineers  in


HALLECK


HALLECK


49


1839.  In  1845  he  was  on  a  tour  of  examination  of
public  works  in  Europe,  and  during  his  absence
was  promoted  to  a  1st  lieutenancy.  On  his  return
to  the  United  States,  the  committee  of  the  Lowell
institute,  Boston.  Mass.,  attracted  by  Halleck's
able  report  on  "  Coast  Defence  "  (published  by  con-
gress), invited  him  to  deliver  twelve  lectures  on  the
science  of  war.  These  he  published  in  a  volume,
with  an  introductory  chapter  on  the  justifiableness
of  war,  under  the  title  of  "  Elements  of  Military
Art  and  Science  "  (New  York,  1846 ;  2d  ed.,  with
the  addition  of  much  valuable  matter,  including
notes  on  the  Mexican  and  Crimean  wars,  1861).
This  popular  compendium,  then  the  best  in  our
language,  was  much  used  by  students  of  the  mili-
tary profession,
and  during  the
civil  war  became
a  manual  for
officers  of  the
army,  particu-
larly for  volun-
teers. At  the
beginning  of  the
Mexican  war
Lieut.  Halleck
was  detailed  as
engineer  for
military  opera-
tions on  the  Pa-
\a^-»  cific  coast,  and

^7^7  ^z->^  ^  sailed  with  Capt.

//V^y/Xr-&<^-*^  Tompkins's ar-

tillery  command
in  the  transport  "  Lexington,"  which,  after  a  seven-
months'  voyage  around  Cape  Horn,  reached  her
destination  at  Monterey,  Cal.  During  this  long  and
tedious  passage  he  undertook  a  translation  from  the
French  of  Baron  Jomini's  "Vie  politique  et  rnili-
taire  de  Napoleon,"  which,  with  the  aid  of  a  friend,
he  revised  and  published  with  an  atlas  (4  vols.,  8vo,
New  York,  1864).  After  partially  fortifying  Mon-
terey as  a  port  of  refuge  for  our  Pacific  fleet  and  a
base  for  incursions  into  California,  Lieut.  Halleck
took  an  active  part  in  affairs  both  civil  and  military.
As  secretary  of  state  under  the  military  govern-
ments of  Gen.  Richard  B.  Mason  and  Gen.  James  W.
Riley,  he  displayed  great  energy  and  high  admin-
istrative qualities.  As  a  military  engineer  he  ac-
companied several  expeditions,  particularly  that  of
Col.  Burton,  into  Lower  Calif ornia,  and  participated
in  several  actions. Besides  his  engineer  duties,  he

Serformed  those  of  aide-de-camp  to  Com.  Shubriek
uring  the  naval  and  military  operations  on  the
Pacific  coast,  including  the  capture  of  Mazatlan,  of
which  for  a  time  Halleck  was  lieutenant-governor.
For  these  services  he  was  brevetted  captain,  to
date  from  1  May,  1847.  After  the  termination  of
hostilities  and  the  acquisition  of  California  by  the
United  States,  a  substantial  government  became
necessary.  Gen.  Riley,  in  military  command  of
the  territory,  called  a  convention  to  meet  at  Mon-
terey, 1  Sept.,  1849,  to  frame  a  state  constitution.
This  convention,  after  six  weeks'  consideration,
agreed  upon  a  constitution,  which  was  adopted  by
the  people ;  and  by  act  of  congress,  9  Sept.,  1850,
California  was  admitted  to  the  Union.  In  all  of
these  transactions  Halleck  was  the  central  figure,
on  whose  brow  "  deliberation  sat  and  public  care."
As  the  real  head  of  Riley's  military  government.
he  initiated  the  movement  of  state  organization,
pressed  it  with  vigor,  and  was  a  member  of  the
committee  that  drafted  the  constitution,  of  which
instrument  he  was  substantially  the  author.  He
remained  as  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Riley,


and  from  21  Dec..  1852,  was  inspector  and  engineer
of  light-houses,  and  from  11  April,  1853,  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  engineers  for  fortifications  on
the.  Pacific  coast,  being  promoted  captain  of  engi-
neers, 1  July,  1853.  All  these  places  he  held  till
his  resignation  from  the  military  service,  1  Aug.,
1854.  After  leaving  the  army,  Halleck  devoted
himself  to  the  practice  of  law  in  a  firm  of  which
for  some  time  he  had  been  a  member,  and  continued
as  director-general  of  the  New  Almaden  quicksilver
mine,  an  office  he  had  held  since  1850.  Notwith-
standing all  these  duties,  he  found  time  for  study
and  to  prepare  several  works,  including  "  A  Collec-
tion of  Mining  Laws  of  Spain  and  Mexico  "  (1859) ;
a  translation  of  "  De  Fooz  on  the  Law  of  Mines,
with  Introductory  Remarks  "  (1860) ;  and  a  treatise
on  "International  Law,  or  Rules  regulating  the
Intercourse  of  States  in  Peace  and  War "  (1861).
The  last-named  work  he  subsequently  condensed  to
adapt  it  for  the  use  of  schools  and  colleges  (Phila-
delphia, 1866).  He  was  also,  in  1855,  president  of
the  Pacific  and  Atlantic  railroad  from  San  Fran-
cisco to  San  Jose,  Cal.,  and  major-general  of  Cali-
fornia militia  in  1860-'l.  Union  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1843,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in
1862.  In  1848  he  was  appointed  professor  of  en-
gineering in  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Har-
vard university,  but  declined  the  honor.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  at  the  head  of
the  most  prominent  law  firm  in  San  Francisco,
with  large  interests  and  much  valuable  proper-
ty in  California,  and  living  in  affluence;  but  he
at  once  tendered  his  services  in  defence  of  the
Union.  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  knowing  his  worth,
immediately  and  strongly  urged  upon  President
Lincoln  his  being  commissioned  with  the  highest
grade  in  the  regular  army,  and  accordingly  he
was  appointed  a  major-general,  to  date  from  19
Aug.,  1861.  He  went  without  delay  to  Washing-
ton, was  ordered  to  St.  Louis,  and  on  18  Nov.,  1861,
took  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri,
embracing  the  states  of  Iowa,  Minnesota,  Wisconsin,
Illinois,  Arkansas,  and  western  Kentucky.  Around
him  was  a  chaos  of  insubordination,  inefficiency,
and  peculation,  requiring  the  prompt,  energetic,
and  ceaseless  exercise  of  his  iron  will,  military
knowledge,  and  administrative  powers.  The  scat-
tered forces  of  his  command  were  a  medley  of
almost  every  nationality.  Missouri  and  Kentucky
were  practically  but  a  border  screen  to  cover  the
operations  of  the  seceding  south ;  and  even  his
headquarters  at  St.  Louis,  fortified  at  exorbitant
cost  and  in  violation  of  all  true  engineering  prin-
ciples, neither  protected  the  city  from  insurrection
within  nor  from  besiegers  without.  Hardly  had
Halleck  assumed  command  when  he  began  to  crush
out  abuses.  Fraudulent  contracts  were  annulled  :
useless  stipendiaries  were  dismissed ;  a  colossal
staff  hierarchy,  with  more  titles  than  brains,  was
disbanded ;  composite  organizations  were  pruned
to  simple  uniformity  ;  the  construction  of  fantastic
fortifications  was  suspended  :  and  in  a  few  weeks
order  reigned  in  Missouri.  With  like  vigor  he  dealt
blow  after  blow  upon  all  who,  under  the  mask  of
citizens,  abetted  secession.  But  while  from  head-
quarters thus  energetically  dealing  with  the  seces-
sionists at  home,  he  did  not  neglect  those  in  arms,
over  whom,  by  his  admirable  strategic  combina-
tions, he  quickly  secured  success  after  success,  till,
in  less  than  six  weeks,  a  clean  sweep  had  been  made
of  the  entire  country  between  the  Missouri  and
Osage  rivers ;  and  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  cut  off  from
all  supplies  and  recruits  from  northern  Missouri,  to
which  he  had  been  moving,  was  in  full  retreat  for
Arkansas. Halleck  now  turned  his  attention  to


50


HALLECK


HALLECK


the  opening  of  the  Mississippi  river.  Gen.  Scott
had  intended  unbarring  it  by  a  flotilla  and  an  army
descending  it  in  force ;  but  Halleck  was  satisfied
that  this  plan  would  only  scotch  the  serpent  of
secession.  He  held  that  the  Confederacy  must  be
rent  in  twain  by  an  armed  wedge  driven  in  be-
tween this  great  stream  and  the  mountains  on  the
east.  On  27  Jan.,  1862,  the  president  had  ordered
a  general  advance  of  all  the  land  and  naval  forces
of  the  United  States  to  be  made  simultaneously
against  the  insurgents  on  the  22d  of  the  coming
onth.  In  anticipation  of  his  part  of  the  grand
vement,  early  in  February  Halleck  sent  his  chief
taflt  to  Cairo  to  direct  in  his  name,  when  neces-
aEftpperations  auxiliary  to  the  armies  about
ke<Mkfield  on  the  Mississippi,  Tennessee,  and
befraiaji  rivers,-  which  their  respective  com-
fhders  doon  set  in  motion.  The  Confederate  first
e  of  defence  was  screened  behind  Kentucky's
^quasi  neutrality,  with  its  flanks  strongly  protected
by  the  fortifications  of  Columbus  and  Bowling
Green ;  but  its  centre  was  only  feebly  secured  by
Forts  Henry  and  Donelson.  The  second  line  of  de-
fence followed  the  railroad  from  Memphis  on  the
Mississippi  to  Chattanooga — a  most  important  posi-
tion in  the  mountains,  threatening  both  South
Carolina  and  Virginia  by  its  railroad  connections
with  Charleston  and  Richmond.  Still  a  third  line,
with  almost  continuous  communication  by  rail,
extended  from  Vicksburg  through  Meridian,  Selma,
and  Montgomery  to  Atlanta,  with  railroad  branches
reaching  to  the  principal  ports  on  the  Gulf  and
the  South  Atlantic.  In  a  little  more  than  three
months  of  Halleck's  sway  in  the  west,  Gen.  Ulysses
S.  Grant,  aided  by  Com.  Andrew  H.  Foote's  gun-
boats, captured  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson ;  the
strategically  turned  flanks  of  the  enemy's  line,
protected  by  the  powerful  works  of  Bowling  Green
and  Columbus,  were  deserted ;  and  Nashville,  the
objective  of  the  campaign,  was  in  the  possession  of
the  National  forces.  In  the  mean  time  Gen.  Samuel
R.  Curtis  had  been  sent  to  drive  the  Confederates
out  of  Missouri,  and  early  in  March  gained  the
decisive  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  in  Arkansas,  the  ene-
my flying  before  him  to  the  protection  of  White
river ;  and  Gen.  John  Pope,  despatched  to  New
Madrid,  after  taking  that  place,  confronted  the
fugitives  from  Columbus  at  Island  No.  10,  which,
by  the  happy  device  of  Hamilton's  cut-off  canal,
was  taken  in  reverse,  and  this  strong  barrier  of  the
Mississippi  removed  by  the  joint  action  of  the
army  and  navy.  By  these  operations  the  Confed-
erate first  line,  from  Kansas  to  the  Alleghany
mountains,  being  swept  away,  and  the  strongholds
captured  or  evacuated,  the  National  forces  moved
triumphantly  southward,  pressing  back  the  insur-
gents to  their  second  line  of  defence,  which  ex-
tended from  Memphis  to  Chattanooga.  On  11
March,  1862,  to  give  greater  unity  to  military
operations  in  the  west,  the  departments  of  Kansas
and  Ohio  were  merged  into  Halleck's  command,
the  whole  constituting  the  Department  of  the  Mis-
sissippi, which  included  the  vast  territory  between
the  Alleghany  and  Rocky  mountains.  Gen.  Don
Carlos  Buell,  marching  from  Nashville,  was  direct-
ed, on  the  withdrawal  of  the  enemy  from  Murf rees-
boro,  to  unite  with  Gen.  Grant,  proceeding  to  Pitts-
burg Landing  by  the  Tennessee,  and  their  union
secured  the  great  victory  of  Shiloh.  Then  Halleck
took  the  field,  and,  after  reorganizing  and  recruit-
ing his  forces,  moved  on  Corinth,  where  the  enemy
was  strongly  intrenched  on  the  important  strategic
position  at  the  junction  of  the  railroads  connecting
the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  Mississippi  river  with
the  Atlantic  ocean. By  striking  a  vigorous  blow


here  on  the  enemy's  left  centre,  Halleck  proposed
to  repeat  the  strategy  that  had  so  admirably  accom-
plished its  purpose  against  the  Confederate  first
line ;  but  success  was  indispensable,  and  hence  he
made  every  step  of  his  progress  so  secure  that  no
disaster  should  entail  the  loss  of  what  he  had  al-
ready gained.  With  the  National  army  much  shat-
tered by  the  rude  shock  of  Shiloh,  he  cautiously
advanced  upon  his  objective  point  through  a  hos-
tile, rough,  marshy,  and  densely  wooded  region,
where  all  the  roads  and  bridges  were  destroyed,
and  rain  fell  in  torrents.  On  30  May  he  was  in
possession  of  Corinth's  fifteen  miles  of  heavy  in-
trenchments,  strengthened  by  powerful  batteries  or
redoubts  at  every  assailable  point,  the  whole  being
covered  to  the  boggy  stream  in  front  by  a  dense
abatis,  through  which  no  artillery  or  cavalry,  nor
even  infantry  skirmishers,  could  have  passed  under
fire.  When  Halleck  communicated  this  success  to
the  war  department,  the  secretary  replied :  "  Your
"glorious  despatch  has  just  been  received,  and  I  have
sent  it  into  every  state.  The  whole  land  will  soon
ring  with  applause  at  the  achievement  of  your  gal-
lant army  and  its  able  and  victorious  commander."
Immediately  Gen.  Pope  was  sent  in  hot  pursuit  of
the  retreating  enemy ;  soon  afterward  Gen.  Buell
was  despatched  toward  Chattanooga  to  restore  the
railroad  connections ;  Gen.  Sherman  was  put  in
march  for  Memphis,  but  the  navy  had  captured
the  place  when  he  reached  Grand  Junction  ;  with-
out delay,  batteries  were  constructed  on  the  south-
ern approaches  of  the  place  to  guard  against  a
sudden  return  of  the  enemy ;  and,  with  prodigious
energy,  the  destroyed  railroad  to  Columbus  was  re-
built to  maintain  communications  with  the  Missis-
sippi and  Ohio,  in  jeopardy  by  the  sudden  fall  of
the  Tennessee,  by  which  supplies  had  been  received.
It  was  now  more  than  six  months  since  Halleck
assumed  command  at  St.  Louis,  and  from  within
the  limits  of  his  department  the  enemy  had  been
driven  from  Missouri,  the  northern  half  of  Arkan-
sas, Kentucky,  and  most  of  Tennessee,  while  strong
lodgments  were  made  in  Mississippi  and  Alabama.
Sec.  Stanton,  always  chary  of  praise,  had  said  that
Halleck's  "  energy  and  ability  received  the  strong-
est commendations  of  the  war  department,"  and
added,  "  You  have  my  perfect  confidence,  and  you
may  rely  upon  my  utmost  support  in  your  under-
takings." Such,  in  fact,  was  the  very  high  appre-
ciation of  Halleck's  merits  by  both  the  president
and  the  secretary  of  war  that  during  the  general's
occupation  of  Corinth,  while  he  was  organizing  for
new  movements  against  the  enemy's  third  line  of
defence,  two  assistant  secretaries  of  war  and  a  sena-
tor were  sent  there  to  urge  upon  Halleck  the  ac-
ceptance of  the  post  of  general-in-chief;  but  he
declined  the  honor,  and  did  not  go  to  Washing-
ton till  positive  orders  compelled  him  to  do  so.
Reluctantly  leaving  Corinth,  to  which  he  hoped
to  return  and  enter  upon  the  great  work  of  open-
ing the  Mississippi  and  crushing  the  Confederacy
in  the  southwest,  Halleck  reached  Washington,  23
July,  1862,  and  at  once  assumed  command  as  gen-
eral-in-chief of  all  the  armies  of  the  United  States.
The  first  problem  presented  was,  how  safely  to
unite  the  two  eastern  armies  in  the  field  so  as  to
cover  the  capital  and  make  common  head  against
the  enemy,  then  interposed  between  them  and
ready  to  be  thrown  at  will  on  either,  and  able  gen-
erals held  different  opinions  as  to  the  best  meas-
ures to  be  adopted  to  accomplish  the  desired  end.
The  general-in-chief  entered  upon  the  duties  of  his
high  office  with  heart  and  soul  devoted  to  the
preservation  of  the  Union.  Often  compelled  to
assume  responsibilities  that belonged  to  others,


HALLETT


HALLOCK


51


constantly  having  to  thwart  the  purposes  of  selfish
schemers,  and  always  constrained  to  be  reticent
upon  public  affairs,  which  many  desired  to  have
divulged,  Halleck,  like  all  men  in  high  station  in
times  of  trial,  became  a  target  for  the  shafts  of  the
envious,  the  disloyal,  and  the  disappointed.  Doubt-
less, with  scant  time  for  the  most  mature  reflec-
tion, he  made  errors ;  but,  says  Turenne,  the  great
marshal  of  an  age  of  warriors,  "Show  me  the
commander  who  has  never  made  mistakes,  and
you  will  show  me  one  who  has  never  made  war."
Congress,  in  recognition  of  Gen.  Grant's  glorious
campaigns  of  Vicksburg  and  Chattanooga,  revived
the  grade  of  lieutenant-general.  Though  a  desire
was  manifested  in  high  places  in  some  way  to  re-
tain Halleck  in  the  performance  of  his  functions,
he  at  once  insisted  that  compliance  should  be  made
with  the  obvious  intentions  of  the  law,  and  that,
being  senior  in  rank,  Grant  must  necessarily  be  the
general-in-chief.  Halleck,  however,  remained  at
Washington  from  12  March,  1864,  till  19  April,
1865,  as  chief-of-staff  of  the  army,  under  the  or-
ders of  the  secretary  of  war  and  the  general-in-
chief,  performing  much  of  the  same  duties  that
had  before  devolved  upon  him ;  and  from  22  April
till  1  July,  1865,  was  in  command  of  the  military
division  of  the  James,  with  headquarters  at  Rich-
mond. On  the  termination  of  hostilities,  and  the
disbandment  of  the  volunteer  forces,  Halleck  was
ordered  to  the  military  division  of  the  Pacific,  of
which  he  took  command  30  Aug.,  1865,  and  on  16
March,  1869,  was  transferred  to  that  of  the  south,
which  he  retained  while  he  lived.  Since  his  death,
when  he  can  no  longer  defend  himself,  much  un-
just criticism  has  assailed  his  reputation.  The
chief  charge  was  "  Halleck's  injustice  to  Grant,"
which  Gen.  James  B.  Fry,  by  a  forcible  article  in
the  "  Magazine  of  American  History,"  has  proved
to  be  nothing  more  than  "misunderstandings"  be-
tween these  distinguished  soldiers.  A  more  serious
charge,  almost  of  treason,  was  made  by  Gen.  Lew
Wallace,  but  has  been  triumphantly  refuted  by
official  documents.  Halleck,  with  few  advantages
in  early  life,  and  hardly  the  rudiments  of  a  classi-
cal education,  overcame  all  obstacles  by  the  power
of  mind  and  character.  He  took  at  once  a  promi-
nent place  at  the  United  States  military  academy,
was  a  conspicuous  officer  of  engineers,  became  a
youthful  statesman  in  the  creation  of  a  state,  rose
to  the  direction  of  various  public  trusts,  established
an  enviable  reputation  for  authorship,  and  held
command  of  great  armies  in  the  tremendous  strug-
gle for  a  nation's  existence.

HALLETT,  Benjamin,  ship-master,  b.  in  Barn-
stable, Mass.,  18  Jan.,  1760;  d.  there,  31  Dec,  1849.
As  a  young  man  he  served  by  sea  and  land  in  the
Revolutionary  war.  He  established  the  coasting
trade  between  Boston  and  Albany  in  1788.  and  in
1808  had  built  the  sloop  "  Ten  Sisters,"  which  was
long  the  favorite  packet  sailing  between  New  York
and  Boston.  On  her  decks  the  sailors'  meetings
were  held,  which  resulted  in  the  opening  of  the
first  Bethel  chapel  in  New  York,  and  subsequently
in  Boston.  Capt.  Hallett  was  an  earnest  Chris-
tian, but  found  it  difficult  to  engage  the  clergy  in
holding  religious  meetings  on  board  of  ships  in
port,  Dr.  Gardiner  Spring,  of  New  York,  being
*ie  first  to  join.  In  Boston  he  experienced  still
reater  difficulty.  After  several  refusals,  Capt.
lallett  found  a  large  vessel  lying  near  his  own,  the
swner  of  which  consented  to  have  a  meeting  on  her
Seek  the  Sunday  evening  following  his  arrival  in
the  city.  With  the  exception  of  the  owner  of  the
vessel,  there  was  no  professing  Christian  present
besides  Capt.  Hallett,  who  was  obliged  to  lead  the


services.  He  also  sang  his  "  Sailor's  Song,"  which
he  subsequently  found  most  effective  in  attracting
the  attention  of  seafaring  men.  The  Bethel  move-
ment did  not  thrive  as  well  in  Boston  as  in  other
cities,  being  discouraged  by  ship-owners  on  the
ground  that  too  much  religion  would  make  sailors
idle.  When  Capt.  Hallett  retired  from  the  sea  to
reside  on  his  farm,  he  transferred  his  Bethel  flag,
which  he  had  brought  from  New  York,  to  the  Sea-
man's chapel,  Central  Wharf,  Boston,  from  which
it  floated  for  many  years. — His  son,  Benjamin
Franklin,  statesman,  b.  in  Barnstable,  Mass.,  2
Dec,  1797 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  30  Sept.,  1862,  was;  '  '
graduated  at  Brown  in  1816,  studied  law,  and  \w{B_  '.
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  then  became  cqnWctJff  ,
with  the  press  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  but  soon  weac>\
to  Boston,  where,  on  the  organization  of  the  anu?  ;/*  ;.
masonic  party,  he  became  editor-in-chief  of  itisV  ",•'•<
mouth-piece,  "  The  Boston  Advocate."  In  1827  he  ;
transferred  his  services  to  the  "  Boston  Daily  Ad-
vertiser," in  which  journal  he  enunciated  anti-ma-
sonic and  temperance  principles  with  great  ear-
nestness, besides  setting  forth  the  views  of  the
emancipationists.  His  uncompromising  attitude
made  him  many  enemies,  and  finally  the  "  Adver-
tiser" became  so  unpopular  that  he  resigned  the
editorial  chair  in  1831.  Failing  to  obtain  from
Henry  Clay  the  pledges  that  would  have  given  the
latter  the  anti-masonic  vote,  he  became  and  con-
tinued one  of  the  bitterest  opponents  of  that  states-
man. After  the  anti-masonic  excitement  had  sub-
sided, Mr.  Hallett  joined  the  Democratic  party,  on
which,  although  seldom  in  office,  he  exerted  a  pow-
erful influence.  He  was  a  delegate  at  most  of  its
national  conventions,  and  the  chairman  for  many
years  of  its  national  committee.  He  was  instru-
mental in  bringing  about  the  nomination  of  Pierce
and  Buchanan,  and  was  the  author  of  the  Cincin-
nati platform  of  1856.  President  Pierce  appointed
him  IT.  S.  district  attorney  in  1853.

HALLOCK,  Jeremiah,  clergvman,  b.  in  Brook
Haven,  Suffolk  co.,  N.  Y.,  13  March,  1758 ;  d.  in
West  Simsbury,  Conn.,  23  June,  1826.  His  father
removed  to  Goshen,  Mass.,  in  1766,  and  the  son
worked  for  him  on  a  farm  until  he  was  of  age.
He  afterward  at  tended  President  Timothy  D  wight's
school  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  and  in  April,  1784,
was  ordained  to  the  ministry.  In  October  of  the
year  following  he  was  installed  as  pastor  over  the
Congregational  church  at  West  Simsbury,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  During  that  period
his  church  enjoyed  no  less  than  five  distinct  "  re-
vivals." Although  not  a  college  graduate,  Mr.
Hallock  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Yale  in
1788.  His  biographer  speaks  of  him  as  "  a  model
Christian  "  and  "a  model  pastor." See  his  life  by


Rev.  Cyrus Hale  (Hartford,  1838). — His  brother,
Moses,  educator,  b.  in  Brook  Haven,  Suffolk  eo..


52


HALLOCK


HALLOWELL


N.  Y.,  16  Feb.,  1760;  d.  in  Plainfield,  Mass.,  17
July,  1837,  after  serving  several  months  in  the
war  of  the  Revolution  and  working  on  his  father's
farm,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1788.  He  then
studied  theology,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in
August,  1790.  In  1792  he  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  church  in  Plainfield,  where  he  always  remained.
Finding  his  salary  inadequate,  he  received  students
into  his  family,  continuing  to  do  so  until  1824.  (See
illustration,  page  51.)  He  had  under  his  charge  at
various  times  274  young  men  and  30  young  women.
Of  the  former,  fifty  became  clergymen.  One  of
his  pupils  was  the  poet  Bryant,  another  was  John
Brown,  of  Osawatomie.  See  his  life,  by  his  son
William  (New  York,  1854).— William  Allen,  edi-
tor, son  of  Moses,  b.  in  Plainfield,  Hampshire  co.,
Mass.,  2  June,  1794;  d.  in  New  York  city,  2  Oct.,
1880,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1819,  and  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1822.  During
the  latter  year  he  became  the  agent  of  the  New
England  tract  society,  and  in  1825,  when  the  lat-
ter was  merged  into  the  American  tract  society,
he  was  made  the  corresponding  secretary  of  the
new  organization.  He  filled  this  office  until  1870,
when  he  retired  from  its  active  duties.  During
this  period  he  carefully  examined  every  manu-
script, tract,  and  book  offered  for  publication,
and  revised  for  the  press  such  as  were  accepted.
He  also  edited  "  The  American  Messenger  for
forty  years,  and  "  The  Child's  Paper  "  for  twenty-
five  years.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Rutgers  in  1850.  Dr.  Hallock  wrote  lives  of
Harlan  Page  (1835),  Rev.  Moses  Hallock  (1854),
and  Rev.  Justin  Edwards  (1855).  The  first  named
attained  to  a  circulation  of  113,500  copies,  and  was
translated  into  Swedish  and  German.  He  was
also  the  author  of  several  tracts,  among  them  "  The
Mother's  Last  Prayer  "  (circulation,  380,000) ;  "  The
Only  Son"  (370,000);  and  "The  Mountain  Miller"
(260,000).  These,  with  his  books,  were  all  pub-
lished by  the  Tract  society.  See  "Memorial  of
Rev.  William  A.  Hallock,  D.  D.,"  by  Mrs.  H.  C.
Knight  (New  York,  1882).— Mary  Angeline  (La-
throp),  author,  second  wife  of  William  Allen,  b.
in  Rowe,  Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  18  June,  1810,  was
married  to  Dr.  Hallock  in  1868. She  had  been

Sreviously  the  wife  of  a  Mr.  Lathrop,  and  on  the
eath  of  her  first  husband,  in  1854,  began  to  write
as  a  means  of  support  for  her  children.  She  pub-
lished "That  Sweet  Story  of  Old"  (New  York,
1856);  "Bethlehem  and  her  Children"  (1858);
"  Life  of  the  Apostle  Paul "  (1860) ;  "  Life  of  Solo-
mon" (1868);  "Fall  of  Jerusalem"  (1869);  and
"  Life  of  Daniel "  and  "  Beasts  and  Birds  "  (1870).
— Gerard,  journalist,  another  son  of  Moses,  b.  in
Plainfield,  Mass.,  18  March,  1800;  d.  in  New  Ha-
ven, Conn.,  4  Jan.,  1866,  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1819,  and  began  his  connection  with  the
press  in  1824  by  the  establishment  of  the  "  Boston
Telegraph,"  a  weekly,  which  the  year  following  was
merged  into  the  "  Boston  Recorder."  In  1827  he
became  part  owner  of  the  "  New  York  Observer,"
and  in  1828  was  associated  with  David  Hale  in  the
publication  of  the  "Journal  of  Commerce."  In
1828  the  partners  fitted  out  a  schooner  to  cruise
off  Sandy  Hook  and  intercept  European  vessels,
and  in  1833  they  ran  an  express  from  Philadel-
phia to  New  York,  with  eight  relays  of  horses,  and
thus  were  enabled  to  publish  the  proceedings  of
congress  a  day  in  advance  of  their  contemporaries.
When  other  journals  imitated  their  enterprise,
they  extended  their  relays  to  Washington.  This
system  of  news  collection  resulted  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  celebrated  Halifax  express.  Mr.  Hal-
lock was  an  unflinching  supporter  of  a  national


H&nVwtfoX/Avfty


pro-slavery  policy,  yet  he  was  generous  in  his  treat-
ment of  individual  slaves  who  made  appeals  to
his  charity.  He  purchased  and  liberated  not  less
than  one  hundred
of  these,  and  pro-
vided for  their
transportation  to
Liberia.  He  con-
tributed largely  to
the  support  of  the
religious  denom-
ination to  which
he  belonged,  and
spent  about  $119,-
000  in  the  erection
and  maintenance
for  fourteen  years
of  a  church  in  New
Haven.  He  was
a  founder  of  the
Southern  aid  soci-
ety, designed  to
take  the  place  of
the  American  home
missionary  society
in  the  south,  when  the  latter  withdrew  its  support
from  slave-holding  churches.  Mr.  Hallock  was  a
thorough  classical  scholar,  and  early  in  life  gave
lessons  in  Hebrew  to  clergymen.  In  August,  1861,
the  "  Journal  of  Commerce,"  with  four  other  pa-
pers, was  presented  by  the  grand  jury  of  the  U.  S.
circuit  court  for  "  encouraging  rebels  now  in  arms
against  the  Federal  government,  by  expressing
sympathy  and  agreement  with  them,  the  duty
of  acceding  to  their  demands,  and  dissatisfaction
with  the  employment  of  force  to  overcome  them."
This  was  followed  by  the  promulgation  of  an
order  from  the  post-office  department  at  Wash-
ington forbidding  the  use  of  the  mails  by  the  in-
dicted papers.  These  measures  resulted  in  the  re-
tirement of  Mr.  Hallock  from  journalism.  He
sold  his  interest  in  his  paper,  and  thenceforth  re-
frained from  contributing  a  line  to  the  public
press.  This  abrupt  change  of  all  his  habits  of
life,  action,  and  thought  brought  with  it  the  seeds
of  disease,  and  he  only  survived  the  loss  of  his
cherished  occupation  a  little  more  than  four  years.
See  "  Life  of  Gerard  Hallock  "  (New  York,  1869).

HALLOWELL,  Richard  Price,  merchant,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  Dec,  1835.  He  studied
for  two  years  at  Haverford  college,  in  1859  re-
moved to  West  Medford,  Mass.,  and  during  the
same  year  began  business  in  Boston  as  a  wool-mer-
chant. He  was  identified  with  the  abolition  move-
ment led  by  Wendell  Phillips  and  William  Lloyd
Garrison,  and  during  the  civil  war  was  made  a
special  agent  by  Gov.  John  A.  Andrew,  of  Massa-
chusetts, to  recruit  for  the  negro  regiments.  Mr.
Hallowell  is  treasurer  of  the  Free  religious  associa-
tion, and  vice-president  of  the  New  England  woman
suffrage  association.  He  has  contributed  many
articles  to  the  "  Index,"  and  has  published  "  The
Quaker  Invasion  of  Massachusetts  (Boston,  1883)
and  "  The  Pioneer  Quakers  "  (1887).— His  brother,
Edward  Needles,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
3  Nov.,  1837 ;  d.  at  West  Medford,  Mass.,  26  July,
1871,  became  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  John  C.  Fre-
mont soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and
in  January,  1862,  was  made  2d  lieutenant  in  the
20th  Massachusetts  volunteers.  He  was  engaged
in  the  principal  battles  of  the  peninsular  campaign,
and  at  Antietam  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Ka-
poleon  J.  T.  Dana.  In  March,  1863,  he  was  made
captain  in  the  54th  (colored)  Massachusetts  volun-
teers, major  in  April,  and lieutenant-colonel  in


HALPINE


HALSEY


53


May.  He  was  wounded  at  the  assault  on  Fort
Wagner,  18  July,  1863,  and  given  command  of  his
regiment,  succeeding  Col.  Robert  G.  Shaw,  who
was  killed  in  that  action.  At  the  battle  of  Olus-
tee,  in  February,  1864,  he  brought  his  regiment
into  action  at  the  crisis,  checked  the  advance  of  a
victorious  army,  and  made  it  possible  for  the  Na-
tional column  to  retire  upon  Jacksonville.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general,  27  July,  1865.

HALPINE,  Charles  Graham,  writer,  b.  in
Oldcastle,  County  Meath,  Ireland,  20  Nov.,  1829  ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  3  Aug.,  1868.  His  father,
Rev.  Nicholas  J.  Halpine,  was  for  many  years  edi-
tor of  the  "  Evening  Mail,"  the  chief  Protestant
paper  of  Dublin.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Trin-
ity college,  Dublin,  in  1846.  It  was  his  original
intention  to  study  medicine,  but  he  preferred  the
law,  meanwhile  writing  for  the  press.  The  sudden
death  of  his  father  and  his  own  early  marriage
compelled  him  to  adopt  journalism  as  a  profession,
and  his  versatile  talents  soon  gained  for  him  a  repu-
tation even  in  England.  In  1852  he  came  to  New
York  city  with  his  family,  secured  employment  on
the  "  Herald,"  and  in  a  few  months  had  established
relations  with  several  periodicals.  His  remarkable
talents  made  it  possible  for  him  to  undertake  a
great  variety  of  literary  work,  most  of  which  was
entirely  ephemeral.  He  had  previously  resided  in
Boston,  where  he  was  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Post,"
and  also  established  with  Benjamin  P.  Shillaber
(Mrs.  Partington)  a  humorous  journal  called  the
"  Carpet  Bag,"  which  was  unsuccessful.  Later  he
was  associate  editor  of  the  "  New  York  Times,"  of
which  he  had  been  Washington  correspondent,  and
the  celebrated  Nicaragua  correspondence  at  the
time  of  Walker's  expedition  was  written  by  him  for
that  journal.  He  also  continued  his  relations  with
the  Boston  "  Post,"  and  in  1856  became  principal
editor  and  part  proprietor  of  the  New  York  "  Lead-
er," which  under  his  management  rapidly  increased
in  circulation.  He  also  contributed  poetry  to  the
New  York  "  Tribune,"  including  his  lyric
"Tear  down  the  flaunting  lie!
Half-mast  the  starry  flag ! "
which  was  attributed  to  Horace  Greeley.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  69th
New  York  infantry,  in  which  he  was  soon  elected
a  lieutenant  and  served  faithfully  during  the  three
months  for  which  he  volunteered.  When  the  regi-
ment was  ordered  to  return  home,  he  was  trans-
ferred to  Gen.  David  Hunter's  staff  as  assistant
adjutant -general,  with  the  rank  of  major,  and
soon  afterward  accompanied  that  officer  to  Mis-
souri to  relieve  Gen.  Fremont.  Maj.  Halpine  re-
ceived the  commendation  of  officers  that  had  been
educated  at  the  (J.  S.  military  academy  as  one  of
the  best  executive  officers  of  his  grade  in  the  army.
He  accompanied  Gen.  Hunter  to  Hilton  Head,  and
while  there  wrote  a  series  of  burlesque  poems  in  the
assumed  character  of  an  Irish  private.  Several  of
these  were  contributed  to  the  New  York  "  Herald  "
over  the  pen-name  of  "  Miles  O'Reilly,"  and  with
additional  articles  were  issued  as  "  Life  and  Ad-
ventures, Songs,  Services,  and  Speeches  of  Private
Miles  O'Reilly,  47th  Regiment,  New  York  Volun-
teers" (New  York,  1864),  and  "Baked  Meats  of  the
Funeral :  A  Collection  of  Essays,  Poems,  Speeches,
and  Banquets,  by  Private  Miles  O'Reilly,  late  of  the
47th  Regiment,  New  York  Volunteer  Infantry,  10th
Army  Corps.  Collected,  Revised,  and  Edited,  with
the  Requisite  Corrections  of  Punctuation,  Spelling,
and  Grammar,  by  an  Ex-Colonel  of  the  Adjutant-
General's  Department,  with  whom  the  Private  for-
merly served  as  Lance  Corporal  of  Orderlies  "  (1866).
He  was  subsequently  assistant  adjutant-general  on


Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck's  staff,  with  the  rank  of
colonel,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Hunter  on  his  ex-
pedition to  the  Shenandoah  valley  in  the  spring  of
1864.  This  proved  unsuccessful,  and  he  returned
to  Washington,  but  soon  afterward  resigned,  re-
ceiving the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers. He  then  made  New  York  his  home,  and,  re-
suming his  literary  work,  became  editor  and  later
proprietor  of  "  The  Citizen,"  a  newspaper  issued  by
the  Citizens'  association  to  advocate  reforms  in  the
civil  administration  of  New  York  city.  In  1867
he  was  elected  register  of  the  county  by  a  coalition
of  Republicans  and  Democrats.  Incessant  labor
brought  on  insomnia  with  the  use  of  opiates,  and
his  death  was  the  result  of  an  undiluted  dose  of
chloroform.  Besides  the  books  mentioned  above,  he
was  the  author  of  "  Lyrics  by  the  Letter  H  "  (New
York,  1854) ;  and  after  his  death  Robert  B.  Roose-
velt collected  "  The  Poetical  Works  of  Charles  G.
Halpine  (Miles  O'Keilly),"  with  a  biographical
sketch  and  explanatory  notes  (New  York,  1869).

HALSALL,  William  Formby,  artist,  b.  in
Kirkdale,  England,  20  March,  1844.  He  early  set-
tled in  Boston,  where  he  received  his  education.
Subsequently  he  went  to  sea  and  for  seven  years
followed  the  life  of  a  sailor.  In  1860  he  began  the
study  of  fresco-painting  with  William  E.  Norton,
in  Boston,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  en-
listed in  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  served  for  two  years.
He  then  returned  to  fresco-work,  but  soon  aban-
doned it  for  marine-painting,  which  he  has  since
followed  in  Boston,  studying  for  eight  years  in  the
Lowell  institute.  Among  his  works  are  the  "  Chas-
ing a  Blockade-Runner  in  a  Fog,"  "  Rendezvous
of  the  Fishermen,"  "  The  Mayflower,"  "  Arrival  of
the  Winthrop  Colony,"  and  "  Niagara  Falls."  His
"  First  Battle  of  the  Iron-Clads  "  was  purchased
by  the  U.  S.  government  in  1887,  and  is  to  be  hung
in  the  capitol  at  Washington.

HALSEY.  George  Armstrong,  manufacturer,
b.  in  Springfield,  N.  J.,  7  Dec,  1827.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  schools  of  his  native  town,  and  on  the
removal  of  his  father's  family  to  Newark,  N.  J.,  be-
came voluntarily  apprentice  to  a  leather-manufac-
turer. A  few  years  later  he  entered  the  wholesale
clothing  business.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
general  assembly  of  New  Jersey  in  1860  and  1861,
and  in  1862  was  appointed  assessor  for  the  5th  dis-
trict of  New  Jersey,  from  which  office  President
Johnson  sought  to  remove  him  in  1866,  but  with-
out success.  This  attack  on  him  by  the  president
resulted  in  his  nomination  for  congress,  and  his
election  by  a  very  large  majority.  As  a  member
of  the  joint  select  committee  on  retrenchment,  he
was  instrumental  in  securing  important  reforms  in
the  treasury  department.  In  1868  he  was  defeated,
but  was  again  elected  in  1870  by  over  3,000  ma-
jority. The  nomination  was  again  tendered  to  him
in  1872,  but  declined.  In  connection  with  Gov.
Randolph  he  was  active  in  preserving  Washing-
ton's headquarters  at  Morristown,  and  is  now  (1887)
president  of  the  association  formed  for  that  pur-
pose. In  1874  he  was  the  unsuccessful  Republican
candidate  for  governor  of  New  Jersey.  Since  that
time  he  has  been  chiefly  engaged  in  the  manage-
ment of  his  manufactory  at  Newark.  N.  J.,  but
gives  much  time  and  attention  to  the  affairs  of  the
New  Jersey  historical  society  and  to  those  of  the
Newark  library  association.

HALSEY,  Lerov  Jones,  clergyman,  b.  in
Goochland  county,  Va.,  28  Jan.,  1812.  His  family
removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.,  when  he  was  six  years
of  age.  He  was  graduated  in  1834  at  Nashville
university,  where  he  was  tutor  of  ancient  lan-
guages for  two years. He  studied theology  at


54


HALSEY


HALSTED


Princeton,  was  licensed  in  1840,  and  preached  in
Dallas  county,  Ala.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  Jackson,  Miss.,  from  1843  till
1848,  when  he  removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  for
ten  years  was  pastor  of  the  Chestnut  street  Pres-
byterian church.  In  1859  he  was  elected  to  the
chair  of  pastoral  theology,  horailetics,  and  church
government  in  the  Theological  seminary  of  the
northwest,  Chicago,  111.  His  published  works  are
"The  Literary  Attractions  of  the  Bible"  (New
York,  1859);  "The  Life  and  Pictures  of  the
Bible"  (Philadelphia,  1860);  "The  Beauty  of  Em-
manuel" (1861):  "The  Life  and  Works  of  Philip
Lindley"  (3  vols.,  1866);  "Memoir  of  the  Rev.
Lewis  W.  Green,  D.  D."  (New  York,  1871) ;  "  Liv-
ing Christianity  "  (Philadelphia,  1881) ;  and  "  Scot-
land's Place  in  Civilization  "  (1885).

HALSEY,  Lather,  clergyman,  b.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y.,  1  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in  Norristown,  Pa.,
29  Oct.,  1880.  From  1829  till  1837  he  was  profes-
sor of  theology  in  the  Western  theological  seminary,
Alleghany,  Pa.,  after  which  he  held  the  chair  of
ecclesiastical  history  and  church  polity  in  Auburn,
N.  Y.,  theological  seminary,  resigning  in  1844.
From  1847  till  1850  he-  was  professor  of  church
history  in  Union  theological  seminary,  New  York
city.  For  several  years  previous  to  his  death  he
lived  in  retirement. — His  brother,  Job  Foster,
clergyman,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  12  July,  1800 ;
d.  in  Norristown,  Pa.,  7  March,  1881,  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  in  1819,  studied  theology  with  his
brother,  and  spent  the  years  from  1823  till  1826  at
Princeton  seminary.  From  1826  till  1828  he  held
charge  of  the  Old  Tennent  church  in  Freehold,
N.  J.  He  was  agent  for  the  American  Bible  society
in  New  Jersey  in  1828-'9,  for  the  American  tract
society  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1829-'30,  and  for  the
Sunday-school  union  in  Pittsburg  in  1830-'l.
From  1831  till  1836  he  was  pastor  of  the  First
church  in  Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  and  in  1835-'6  a
professor  in  Marion  manual-labor  college,  Mis-
souri. He  was  principal  of  Raritan  seminary  for
young  ladies  in  Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.,  from  1836  till
1848,  pastor  at  West  Bloomfield  (now  Montclair),
N.  J.,  from  1852  till  1856,  and  pastor  of  the  1st
Presbyterian  church  in  Norristown,  Pa.,  from  1856
till  he  resigned  in  1881.

HALSTEAD,  M unit,  journalist,  b.  in  Paddy's
Run,  Butler  co.,  Ohio,  2  Sept.,  1829.  He  spent
the  summers  on  his  father's  farm  and  the  winters
in  school  until  he  was  nineteen  years  old,  and,  after
teaching  for  a  few  months,  entered  Farmer's  col-
lege, near  Cincinnati,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1851.  He  had  already  contributed  to  the  pressf
and  after  leaving  college  became  connected  with
the  Cincinnati  "  Atlas,"  and  then  with  the  "  En-
quirer." He  afterward  established  a  Sunday  news-
paper in  that  city,  and  in  1852-3  worked  on  the
"Columbian  and  Great  West,"  a  weekly.  He
began  work  on  the  "  Commercial "  on  8  March,
1853,  as  a  local  reporter,  and  soon  became  news
editor.  In  1854  the  "  Commercial "  was  reorgan-
ized, and  Halstead  purchased  an  interest  in  the
paper.  In  1867  its  control  passed  into  his  hands.
After  pursuing  for  a  time  a  course  of  independent
journalism,  he  allied  himself  with  the  Republican
party,  which  he  has  since  supported.  The  Cincin-
nati "  Gazette  "  was  consolidated  with  his  paper  in
1883,  and  he  became  president  of  the  company  that
publishes  the  combined  journal  under  the  name  of
the  "  Commercial  Gazette."

HALSTEAD,  Schureman,  philanthropist,  b.
in  1805 ;  d.  in  Mamaroneck,  N.  Y.,  5  Oct.,  1868.
He  entered  a  dry-goods  house  at  the  age  of  fifteen,
and  by  the  time  he  had  reached  manhood  had  ac-


quired a  competence.  Through  all  his  life  he  de-
voted himseli  to  the  promotion  of  religious  and
benevolent  enterprises.  It  was  due  to  his  personal
efforts  that  the  legislature  passed  the  act  creating
the  board  of  "  ten  governors,"  and,  having  been  ap-
pointed one  of  the  original  governors,  he  devoted
much  time  to  securing  the  successful  working  of
the  system.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  Ameri-
can Bible  society,  president  of  the  Westchester
county  Bible  society,  manager  of  the  Parent  mis-
sionary society  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
founder,  and  for  many  years  president,  of  the
Broadway  insurance  company,  and  held  many
other  responsible  offices.

HALSTED,  Byron  David,  agriculturist,  b.  in
Venice,  N.  Y.,  7  June,  1852.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Michigan  agricultural  college  in  1871,  and
subsequently  studied  at  Harvard,  where  in  1878  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  Sc.  In  1873-4  he  was
instructor  in '  history  and  algebra  at  the  Agricul-
tural college,  and  in  1874-'5  instructor  in  botany
in  Harvard.  In  1875-'9  he  taught  in  the  Chigaco
high-school,  and  then  became  editor  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Agriculturist,"  which  office  he  held  until  1884.
He  was  then  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  botany  in
the  Iowa  agricultural  college.  Dr.  Halsted  is  a
fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  and  a  member  of  other  so-
cieties. He  has  contributed  largely  to  all  the  agri-
cultural and  botanical  journals  in  the  United
States,  and  published  "  The  Vegetable  Garden "
(Chicago,  1882) ;  " Farm  Conveniences"  (New  York,
1883) ;  and  "  Household  Conveniences  "  (1883).

HALSTED,  Nathaniel  Norris,  merchant,  b.
in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  13  Aug.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.
J.,  6  May,  1884.  At  a  very  early  age  he  was  adopt-
ed by  his  uncle,  Caleb  O.  Halsted,  a  merchant  of
New  York,  who  educated  him  in  the  schools  of
that  city  and  in  the  Boys'  seminary  at  Woodbridge,
N.  J.  Entering  the  dry-goods  establishment  of  his
uncle,  he  became  at  the  age  of  twenty-nine  years
a  partner  in  the  house,  and  so  continued  until
1855,  when  he  retired  with  a  fortune.  Soon  after-
ward he  removed  to  Newark,  N.  J.,  having  pur-
chased stock  in  the  New  Jersey  rubber  company,  of
which  he  became  a  director  and  finally  president.
In  the  early  part  of  the  civil  war  he  received  an
appointment  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Olden,  of  New
Jersey,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  and
when  recruiting  camps  were  established  at  Trenton
he  was  bre vetted  brigadier-general  and  placed  in
command.  Princeton  is  indebted  to  him  for  the
astronomical  observatory  which  bears  his  name,
and  in  the  erection  of  which  he  expended  $55,000.
He  had  been  a  trustee  of  this  institution  for  many
years  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  also  gave  largely
for  the  establishment  and  successful  conduct  of
the  New  Jersey  state  agricultural  society,  of  which
he  was  the  first  president.  The  New  Jersey  his-
torical society,  in  its  "  Proceedings,"  makes  mention
of  him  not  only  as  one  of  its  benefactors,  but  as
an  earnest  laborer  in  every  worthy  cause.

HALSTED,  Oliver  Spencer,  jurist,  b.  in  Eliza-
beth, N.  J.,  22  Sept.,  1792;  d.  in  Lyons  Farms,
N.  J.,  29  Aug.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1810,  studied  law  in  the  Litchfield  law-
school  and  in  his  native  town,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1814,  and  settled  in  Newark,  N.  J.  In  1820
he  removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  devoted  two
years  and  a  half  to  the  practice  of  law.  He  re-
turned to  Elizabeth  in  1823,  and  in  1827  was  elect-
ed to  the  legislature.  He  was  appointed  surrogate
of  Essex  county  in  1828,  was  again  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1834,  and  in  1840  became  mayor  of
Newark. In  1844  he  was  a  member  of  the  conven-


HAMBLIN


HAMER


55


tion  for  the  revision  of  the  constitution  of  the
state.  In  February,  1845,  he  was  appointed  chan-
cellor under  the  new  constitution,  and  became  ex-
officio  president  of  the  court  of  errors  and  appeals.
His  terra  of  office  expired  in  February,  1852,  and
he  then  gave  all  his  time  to  the  pursuit  and  appli-
cation of  his  life-long  studies  m  philology.  He
published,  beside  several  legal  works,  "The  The-
ologv  of  the  Bible"  (Newark,  1866):  and  "The
Book  called  Job  "  (1875).— His  son,  Oliver  Spen-
cer, lawyer,  b.  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  in  1827 ;  a.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  9  July,  1871,  was  known  as  "  Pet "
Halsted.  He  was  active  in  politics  during  the  war,
and  was  a  warm  friend  of  Gen.  Philip  Kearny  and
President  Lincoln.  His  address,  persistency,  and
assurance  made  him  potent  in  Washington  during
the  war  and  for  a  year  or  two  afterward  in  regard
to  appointments  and  removals,  especially  in  New
Jersey. — His  son,  George  Bruce,  mathematician,
b.  in  "Newark.  N.  J.,  25  Nov.,  1853,  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1875,  held  fellowships  there  and
in  Johns  Hopkins,  where  he  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  in  1879,  and  then  studied  in  Berlin,
Germany.  He  became  instructor  in  post-gradu-
ate mathematics  in  Princeton,  and  afterward  ac-
cepted the  chair  of  mathematics  in  the  University
of  Texas,  which  he  still  holds  (1887).  He  was  the
first  to  give  the  received  treatment  of  solid  angles,
originated  "  Halsted's  prismoidal  formula,"  and
has  published  "  Metrical  Geometry  "  (3d  ed.,  Bos-
ton, 1883) ;  "  Elements  of  Geometry  "  (New  York,
1885) ;  and  a  "  Bibliography  of  Hyper-Space  and
Non-Euclidean  Geometry  "  (Baltimore),  besides  pa-
pers in  scientific  journals.

HAMBLIN,  Joseph  Eldridge,  soldier,  b.  in
Yarmouth,  Mass.,  in  1828 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3
July,  1870.  For  many  years  prior  to  1861  he  was
a  member  of  the  7th  militia  regiment,  and  soon
after  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war  became  adju-
tant of  the  5th  New  York  regiment.  In  Novem-
ber, 1861,  shortly  after  the  formation  of  the  65th
New  York,  he  was  transferred  to  that  regiment.
He  rapidly  rose  to  the  command,  and  participated
in  Grant's  campaign  of  1864  from  the  Wilderness
to  Petersburg.  In  July,  1864,  his  regiment  was
transferred  to  the  Shenandoah  valley,  to  resist  the
demonstration  of  Breckinridge  and  Early  against
Washington  and  Maryland.  Col.  Hamblin  par-
ticipated in  each  of  Sheridan's  brilliant  successes
in  the  valley,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Cedar
Creek.  For  gallantry  in  this  action  he  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general,  and  placed  in  command
of  the  brigade.  Upon  the  return  of  the  corps  to
Petersburg  he  was,  in  the  spring  of  1865,  promoted
to  full  rank,  and  participated  in  all  the  subsequent
engagements  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  the
surrender  at  Appomattox.  For  distinguished  bra-
very at  Sailor's  Creek,  6  April,  1865,  the  last  en-
gagement between  the  Confederates  and  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  he  was  brevetted  major-general,
and  was  mustered  out  with  that  rank  at  Washing-
ton, 15  Jan.,  1866.  After  the  war  he  entered  upon
civil  pursuits  in  New  York.

HAMBLIN,  Thomas  Sowerby,  actor,  b.  in  Pen-
ton  ville,  near  London,  England,  14  May,  1800;  d.
in  New  York  city,  8  Jan.,  1853.  His  parents  in-
tended him  for  a  business  career,  but  he  became  a
supernumerary  and  occasional  dancer  in  the  Adel-
phi  theatre  in  London.  At  the  age  of  nineteen
Hamblin  joined  the  corps  of  Sadlers  Wells  theatre,
and  at  twenty  became  engaged  at  Drury  Lane.  On
the  termination  of  his  London  engagement  he  per-
formed as  a  leading  tragedian  in  Bath,  ~
and  Dublin.  At  this  time  he  marriej"
Blanchard,  and  soon afterward,


far  f/#cc~«Jk^


came  to  the  United  States.  They  appeared  at  the
New  York  Park  theatre  in  "  Hamlet,"  followed  by
"The  Stranger,"  "Macbeth,"  and  "The  Honey-
moon," and  afterward  visited  the  principal  cities
of  the  Union.  In  1830  Hamblin,  in  connection
with  James  H.  Hackett,  leased  the  first  Bowery
theatre,  and,  after  brief  joint  management,  ac-
quired the  entire  control.  At  that  time  the  Bow-
ery was  the  largest  and  handsomest  structure  of
the  kind  in  this  country.  After  a  prosperous
career  it  was  de-
stroyed by  fire  on  16
Sept.,  1836.  Hamblin
was  only  partly  in-
sured, and  a  heavy
loser.  He  then  visited
London,  and  appeared
as  Hamlet,  Othello,
Coriolanus,  Rolla.and
Virginius,  but  with-
out success.  He
leased  the  newly
erected  second  Bow-
ery theatre  in  1837,
and  conducted  it  on
the  old  plan  with  his
former  success  until
1845,  when  it  was
again  burned.  He  accepted  the  management  of
the  third  Bowery  theatre  in  1847,  and  in  1848  leased
the  Park  theatre,  and  for  several  months  conducted
it  in  connection  with  the  Bowery.  On  16  Dec.  of
the  same  year  this  house  also  was  destroyed  by  fire,
making  the  fourth  theatre  burned  under  his  man-
agement. His  loss  on  this  occasion  amounted  to
about  $17,000.  Thereafter  he  conducted  the  Bow-
ery theatre  alone  until  the  day  of  his  death.  With
him  the  historic  career  of  the  New  York  Bowery
theatre  began  and  ended.  Hamblin  was  prompt,
liberal,  and  popular,  and  noted  as  a  helper  of
worthy  aspirants.  An  important  feature  of  his
management  was  the  frequent  representation  of
tragedies  and  standard  dramas.  The  elder  Booth,
Forrest,  Cooper,  and  himself  were  occasionally  cast
for  characters  in  the  same  play.  Sudden  attacks
of  asthma  rendered  his  performances  unequal,  but
in  his  best  days  he  fell  little  short  of  the  popularity
of  Forrest  and  the  elder  Booth.  He  was  tall  and
strikingly  majestic,  and  the  public  knew  him  fa-
miliarly as  "  handsome  Tom  Hamblin." — Ham-
blin's  fourth  wife  came  to  the  United  States  with
her  first  husband,  a  physician  named  Shaw,  and
appeared  at  the  New  York  Park  theatre,  28  Feb.,
1836,  in  "  The  Wife."  In  1839  she  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Bowery  theatre  company,  and  ten  years
later  was  married  to  the  manager.  As  Mrs.  Shaw
she  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  actresses  of  her
day.  In  forcible  roles,  like  Lady  Macbeth  and
Queen  Katharine,  she  was  excelled  by  Miss  Kem-
ble  and  Miss  Cushman,  but  as  Desdemona  and
Ophelia  it  was  generally  admitted  that  Mrs.
Hamblin  was  superior  to  all  other  performers.

HAMER,  Thomas  L.,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania; d.  in  Monterey,  Mexico,  2  Dec,  1846.  He
emigrated  to  Ohio  when  quite  young,  studied  law
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1821,  and  began
practice  at  Georgetown-  in  that  state.  He  served
for  several  years  in  the  Ohio  house  of  representa-
tives, where  he  was  once  speaker,  and  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec,
1833,  to  3  March,  1839.  While  he  was  a  representa-
tive in  congress  he  nominated  Ulysses  S.  Grant,
the  son  of  a  constituent,  to  be  a  cadet  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy.  He  served  in  the  Mexican  war,
olunteering  as  a  private,  and  receiving  the  next


56


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


day,  1  July,  1846,  the  commission  of  brigadier-
general.  He  distinguished  himself  at  Monterey,
and  commanded  his  division  after  Gen.  William  O.
Butler  was  wounded.  He  died  shortly  afterward,
and  congress,  in  recognition  of  his  gallantry,  pre-
sented a  sword  to  his  nearest  male  relative.

HAMILTON,  Alexander,  statesman,  b.  in  the
island  of  Nevis,  West  Indies,  11  Jan.,  1757;  d.  in
New  York  city,  12  July,  1804.  A  curious  mystery
and  uncertainty  overhang  his  birth  and  parentage,
and  even  the  accounts  of  his  son  and  biographer
vary  with  and  contradict  each  other.  The  ac-
cepted version  is,  that  he  was  the  son  of  James
Hamilton,  a  Scottish
merchant,  and  his
wife,  a  French  lady
named  Faucette,  the
divorced  wife  of  a
Dane  named  Lavine.
According  to  another
story,  his  mother  was
a  Miss  Lytton,  and
her  sister  came  subse-
quently to  this  coun-
try, where  she  was
watched  over  and
supported  by  Hamil-
ton and  his  wife.  A
similar  doubt  is  also
connected  with  his
paternity,  which  now
cannot  be  solved,  even
were  it  desirable.  His
jd ,  *  father  became  bank-

ton's  own  words,  and
the  child  was  thus  thrown  upon  the  care  of  his
mother's  relatives.  His  education  seems  to  have
been  brief  and  desultory,  and  chiefly  due  to  the  Rev.
Hugh  Knox,  a  Presbyterian  clergyman  of  Nevis,
who  took  a  great  interest  in  the  boy  and  kept  up  an
affectionate  correspondence  with  him  in  after-days
when  his  former  pupil  was  on  the  way  to  great-
ness. In  1777  his  old  tutor  wrote  to  Hamilton  that
he  must  be  the  annalist  and  biographer,  as  well  as
the  aide-de-camp,  of  Gen.  Washington,  and  the
historiographer  of  the  American  war  of  independ-
ence. Before  Hamilton  was  thirteen  years  of  age
it  was  apparently  necessary  that  he  should  earn  his
living,  and  he  was  therefore  placed  in  the  office  of
Nicholas  Cruger,  a  West  Indian  merchant.  His  pre-
cocity was  extraordinary,  owing,  perhaps  in  some
measure,  to  his  early  isolation  and  self-dependence,
and  at  an  age  when  most  boys  are  thinking  of
marbles  and  hockey  he  was  writing  to  a  friend  and
playmate  of  his  ambition  and  his  plans  for  the  fu-
ture. Most  boys  have  day-dreams ;  but  there  is  a
definiteness  and  precision  about  Hamilton's  that
make  them  seem  more  like  the  reveries  of  twenty
than  of  thirteen.  Even  more  remarkable  was  the
business  capacity  that  he  displayed  at  this  time.
His  business  letters,  many  of  which  have  been  pre-
served, would  have  done  credit  to  a  trained  clerk
of  any  age,  and  his  employer  was  apparently  in  the
habit  of  going  away  and  leaving  this  mere  child
in  charge  of  all  the  affairs  of  his  counting-house.
The  boy  also  wrote  for  the  local  press,  contribut-
ing at  one  time  an  account  of  a  severe  hurricane
that  had  devastated  the  islands,  which  was1  so  vivid
and  strong  a  bit  of  writing  that  it  attracted  gen-
eral attention.  This  literary  success,  joined  prob-
ably to  the  friendly  advocacy  of  Dr.  Knox,  led  to
the  conviction  that  something  ought  to  be  done
for  a  boy  who  was  clearly  fitted  for  a  higher


position  than  a  West  Indian  counting-house.
Funds  were  accordingly  provided  by  undefined  rel-
atives and  more  distinct  friends,  and  thus  equipped,
Hamilton  sailed  for  Boston,  Mass.,  where  he  ar-
rived in  October,  1772,  and  whence  he  proceeded
to  New  York.  Furnished  by  Dr.  Knox  with  good
letters,  he  speedily  found  friends  and  counsellors,
and  by  their  advice  went  to  a  school  in  Elizabeth-
town,  N.  J.,  where  he  studied  with  energy  to  pre-
pare for  college,  and  employed  his  pen  in  much
writing,  of  both  prose  and  poetry.  He  entered
King's  college,  New  York,  now  Columbia,  and  there
with  the  aid  of  a  tutor  made  remarkable  progress.
While  he  was  thus  engaged,  our  difficulties  with
England  were  rapidly  ripening.  Hamilton's  nat-
ural inclinations  were  then,  as  always,  toward  the
side  of  order  and  established  government,  but  a
visit  to  Boston  in  the  spring  of  1774,  and  a  close
examination  of  the  questions  in  dispute,  convinced
him  of  the  justice  of  the  cause  of  the  colonies.
His  opportunity  soon  came.  A  great  meeting  was
held  in  the  fields,  6  July,  1774,  to  force  the  lagging
Tory  assembly  of  New  York  into  line.  Hamilton
was  among  the  crowd,  and  as  he  listened  he  be-
came more  and  more  impressed,  not  by  what  was
said,  but  by  what  the  speakers  omitted  to  say.
Pushing  his  way  to  the  front,  he  mounted  the
platform,  and  while  the  crowd  cried  "  A  collegian  1
A  collegian  ! "  this  stripling  of  seventeen  began  to
pour  out  an  eloquent  and  fervid  speech  in  behalf
of  colonial  rights.

Once  engaged,  Hamilton  threw  himself  into  the
struggle  with  all  the  intense  energy  of  his  nature.
He  left  the  platform  to  take  up  the  pen,  and  his
two  pamphlets — "  A  Full  Vindication  "  and  "  The
Farmer  Refuted  *  —attracted  immediate  and  gen-
eral attention.  Indeed,  these  productions  were  so
remarkable,  at  a  time  when  controversial  writings
of  great  ability  abounded,  that  they  were  gener-
ally attributed  to  Jay  and  other  well-known  pa-
triots. The  discovery  of  their  authorship  raised
Hamilton  to  the  position  of  a  leader  in  New
York.  Events  now  moved  rapidly,  the  war  for
which  he  had  sighed  in  his  first  boyish  letter
came,  and  he  of  course  was  quick  to  take  part  in
it.  Early  in  1776  he  was  given  the  command  of
a  company  of  artillery  by  the  New  York  conven-
tion, and  by  his  skill  in  organization,  and  his  tal-
ent for  command,  he  soon  had  a  body  of  men  that
furnished  a  model  of  appearance  and  discipline  at
a  time  when  those  qualities  were  as  uncommon  as
they  were  needful.  At  Long  Island  and  at  White
Plains  the  company  distinguished  itself,  and  the
gallantry  of  the  commander,  as  well  as  the  appear-
ance of  the  men,  which  had  already  attracted  the
notice  of  Gen.  Greene,  led  to  an  offer  from  Wash-
ington of  a  place  on  his  staff.  This  offer  Hamil-
ton accepted,  and  thus  began  the  long  and  inti-
mate connection  with  Washington  which  suffered
but  one  momentary  interruption.  Hamilton  filled
an  important  place  on  Washington's  staff,  and
his  ready  pen  made  him  almost  indispensable  to
the  commander-in-chief.  Beside  his  immediate
duties,  the  most  important  task  that  fell  to  him
was  when  he  was  sent  to  obtain  troops  from  Gen.
Gates,  after  the  Burgoyne  campaign.  This  was
a  difficult  and  delicate  business;  but  Hamilton
conducted  it  with  success,  and,  by  a  wise  admix-
ture of  firmness  and  tact,  carried  his  point.  He
also  took  such  part  as  was  possible  for  a  staff  offi-
cer in  all  the  battles  fought  by  Washington,  and  in
the  Andre  affair  he  was  brought  into  close  contact
both  with  Andre  and  Mrs.  Arnold,  of  whom  he  has
left  a  most  pathetic  and  picturesque  description.
On  16  Feb.,  1781,  Hamilton  took  hasty  offence  at.


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


5?


a  reproof  given  him  by  Washington,  and  resigned
from  the  staff,  but  he  remained  in  the  army,  and
at  Yorktown  commanded  a  storming  party,  which
took  one  of  the  British  redoubts.  This  dashing
exploit  practically  closed  Hamilton's  military  ser-
vice in  the  Revolution,  which  had  been  highly
creditable  to  him  both  as  a  staff  and  field  officer.

In  the  midst  of  his  duties  as  a  soldier,  however,
Hamilton  had  found  time  for  much  else.  On  his
mission  to  Gates  he  met  at  Albany  Miss  Elizabeth
Schuyler,  whom  he  married  on  14  Dec,  1780,  and  so
became  connected  with  a  rich  and  powerful  New
York  family,  which  was  of  marked  advantage  to
him  in  many  ways.  During  the  Revolution,  too,  he
had  found  leisure  to  study  finance  and  government,
and  his  letters  on  these  topics  to  Robert  Morris
and  James  Duane  display  a  remarkable  grasp  of
both  subjects.  He  showed  in  these  letters  how  to
amend  the  confederation  and  how  to  establish  a
national  bank,  and  his  plans  thus  set  forth  were
not  only  practicable,  but  evince  his  peculiar  fitness
for  the  great  work  before  him.  His  letters  on  the
bank,  indeed,  so  impressed  Morris  that  when
Hamilton  left  the  army  and  was  studying  law,
Morris  offered  him  the  place  of  continental  receiver
of  taxes  for  New  York,  which  he  at  once  accepted.
At  the  same  time  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  he
threw  himself  into  the  work  of  his  profession  and
of  his  office  with  his  wonted  zeal.  The  exclusion  of
the  Tories  from  the  practice  of  the  law  gave  a  fine
opening  to  their  young  rivals  on  the  patriot  side ;
but  the  business  of  collecting  taxes  was  a  thankless
task,  which  only  served  to  bring  home  to  Hamilton
more  than  ever  the  fatal  defects  of  the  confedera-
tion. From  these  uncongenial  labors  he  was  re-
lieved by  an  election  to  congress,  where  he  took  his
seat  in  November,  1782.  The  most  important  busi-
ness then  before  congress  was  the  ratification  of
peace ;  but  the  radical  difficulties  of  the  situation

(arose  from  the  shattered  finances  and  from  the
helplessness  and  imbecility  of  the  confederation.
Hamilton  flung  himself  into  these  troubles  with
the  enthusiasm  of  youth  and  genius,  but  all  in
vain.  The  ease  was  hopeless.  He  extended  his
reputation  for  statesmanlike  ability  and  brilliant
eloquence,  but  effected  nothing,  and  withdrew  to
the  practice  of  his  profession  in  1783,  more  than
ever  convinced  that  the  worthless  fabric  of  the  con-
federation must  be  swept  away,  and  something
better  and  stronger  put  in  its  place.  This  great
object  was  never  absent  from  his  mind,  and  as  he
rapidly  rose  at  the  bar  he  watched  with  a  keen  eye
the  course  of  public  affairs,  and  awaited  an  open-
ing. Matters  went  rapidly  from  bad  to  worse.
The  states  were  bankrupt,  and  disintegration
threatened  them.  Internecine  commercial  regula-
tions destroyed  prosperity,  and  riot  and  insurrec-
tion menaced  society.  At  last  Virginia,  in  Janu-
ary, 1786,  proposed  a  convention  at  Annapolis,
Md.,  to  endeavor  to  make  some  common  commer-
cial regulations.  Hamilton's  opportunity  had
come,  and,  slender  as  it  was,  he  seized  it  with  a
firm  grasp.  He  secured  the  election  of  delegates
from  New  York,  and  in  company  with  Egbert  Ben-
son betook  himself  to  Annapolis  in  September,
1786.  After  the  fashion  of  the  time,  only  five
states  responded  to  the  call ;  but  the  meagre  gath-
ering at  least  furnished  a  stepping-stone  to  better
things.  The  convention  agreed  upon  an  address,
which  was  drawn  by  Hamilton,  and  toned  down  to
suit  the  susceptibilities  of  Edmund  Randolph.  This
address  set  forth  the  evil  condition  of  public  af-
fairs, and  called  a  new  convention,  with  enlarged
powers,  to  meet  in  Philadelphia,  2  May,  1787.  This
done,  the  next  business  was  to  make  the  coming


convention  a  success,  and  Hamilton  returned  to
New  York  to  devote  himself  to  that  object.  He
obtained  an  election  to  the  legislature,  and  there
fought  the  hopeless  battles  of  the  general  govern-
ment against  the  Clintonian  forces,  and  made  him-
self felt  in  all  the  legislation  of  the  year :  but  he
never  lost  sight  of  his  main  purpose,  the  appoint-
ment of  delegates  to  Philadelphia.  This  he  finally
accomplished,  and  was  chosen  with  two  leaders  of
the  opposition,  Yates  and  Lansing,  to  represent
New  York  in  the  coming  convention.  Hamil-
ton's own  position  despite  his  victory  in  obtaining
delegates  was  trying;  for  in  the  convention  the
vote  of  the  state,  on  every  question,  was  cast
against  him  by  his  colleagues.  He,  however,  did
the  best  that  was  possible.  At  an  early  day,  when
a  relaxing  and  feeble  tendency  appeared  in  the
convention,  he  introduced  his  own  scheme  of  gov-
ernment, and  supported  it  in  a  speech  of  five
hours.  His  plan  was  much  higher  in  tone,  and
much  stronger,  than  any  other,  since  it  called  for
a  president  and  senators  for  life,  and  for  the  ap-
pointment of  the  governors  of  states  by  the  na-
tional executive.  It  aimed,  in  fact,  at  the  forma-
tion of  an  aristocratic  instead  of  a  Democratic
republic.  Such  a  scheme  had  no  chance  of  adop-
tion, and  of  course  Hamilton  was  well  aware  of
this,  but  it  served  its  purpose  by  clearing  the  at-
mosphere and  giv-
ing the  convention
a  more  vigorous
tone.  After  deliv-
ering his  speech,
Hamilton  with-
drew from  the
convention,  where
his  colleagues  ren-
dered him  hope-
lessly inactive,  and
only  returned  to-
ward the  end  to
take  part  in  the
closing  debates,
and  to  affix  his
name  to  the  con-
stitution. It  was
when  the  labors
of  the  convention  were  completed  and  laid  before
the  people  that  Hamilton's  great  work  for  the  con-
stitution really  began.  He  conceived  and  started
"  The  Federalist,"  and  wrote  most  of  those  famous
essays  which  rivetted  the  attention  of  the  country,
furnished  the  weapons  of  argument  and  exposition
to  those  who  "thought  continentally "  in  all  the
states,  and  did  more  than  any  thing  else  toward
the  adoption  of  the  constitution.  In  almost  all  the
states  the  popular  majority  was  adverse  to  the  con-
stitution, and  in  the  New  York  ratifying  conven-
tion the  vote  stood  at  the  outset  two  to  one  against
adoption.  In  a  brilliant  contest,  Hamilton,  by  argu-
ments rarely  equalled  in  the  history  of  debate,
either  in  form  or  eloquence,  by  skiiful  manage-
ment, and  by  wise  delay,  finally  succeeded  in  con-
verting enough  votes,  and  carried  ratification  tri-
umphantly. It  was  a  great  victory,  and  in  the
Federal  procession  in  New  York  the  Federal  ship
bore  the  name  of  "Hamilton."  From  the  con-
vention the  struggle  was  transferred  to  the  polls.
George  Clinton  was  strong  enough  to  prevent  the
choice  of  senators,  but  at  the  election  he  only  re-
tained his  own  office  by  a  narrow  majority:  his
power  was  broken,  and  the  Federalists  elected  four
of  the  six  representatives  in  congress.  In  this  fight
Hamilton  led,  and  when  the  choice  of  senators  was
finally  made  he  insisted,  in  his  imperious  fashion.


58


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


on  the  choice  of  Rufus  King  and  Gen.  Schuyler,
thus  ignoring  the  Livingstons,  a  political  blunder
that  soon  cost  the  Federalists  control  of  the  state
of  New  York.

In  April,  1789,  Washington  was  inaugurated,
and  when  the  treasury  department  was  at  last  or-
ganized, in  September,  he  at  once  placed  Hamilton
at  the  head  of  it.  In  the  five  years  that  ensued
Hamilton  did  the  work  that  lies  at  the  foundation
of  our  system  of  administration,  gave  life  and
meaning  to  the  constitution,  and  by  his  policy  de-
veloped two  great  political  parties.  To  give  in  any
detail  an  account  of  what  he  did  would  be  little
less  than  to  write  the  history  of  the  republic  dur-
ing those  eventful  years.  On  14  Jan.,  1790,  he
sent  to  congress  the  first  "  Report  on  the  Public
Credit,"  which  is  one  of  the  great  state  papers  of
our  history,  and  which  marks  the  beginning  and
foundation  of  our  government.  In  that  wonderful
document,  and  with  a  master's  hand,  he  reduced  our
confused  finances  to  order,  provided  for  a  funding
system  and  for  taxes  to  meet  it,  and  displayed  a  plan
for  the  assumption  of  the  state  debts.  The  finan-
cial policy  thus  set  forth  was  put  into  execution,
and  by  it  our  credit  was  redeemed,  our  union  ce-
mented, and  our  business  and  commercial  pros-
perity restored.  Yet  outside  of  this  great  work
and  within  one  year  Hamilton  was  asked  to  report,
and  did  report  fully,  on  the  raising  and  collection
of  the  revenue,  and  on  a  scheme  for  revenue  cut-
ters ;  as  to  estimates  of  income  and  expenditure ;
as  to  the  temporary  regulation  of  the  currency ;  as
to  navigation-laws  and  the  coasting-trade;  as  to
the  post-office ;  as  to  the  purchase  of  West  Point ;
as  to  the  management  of  the  public  lands,  and
upon  a  great  mass  of  claims,  public  and  private.
Rapidly,  effectively,  and  successfully  were  all  these
varied  matters  dealt  with  and  settled,  and  then  in
the  succeeding  years  came  from  the  treasury  a  re-
port on  the  establishment  of  a  mint,  with  an  able
discussion  of  coins  and  coinage ;  a  report  on  a  na-
tional bank,  followed  by  a  great  legal  argument  in
the  cabinet,  which  evoked  the  implied  powers  of
the  constitution  ;  a  report  on  manufactures,  which
discussed  with  profound  ability  the  problems  of
political  economy  and  formed  the  basis  of  the  pro-
tective policy  of  the  United  States ;  a  plan  for  an
excise ;  numerous  schemes  for  improved  taxation ;
and  finally  a  last  great  report  on  the  public  credit,
setting  forth  the  best  methods  for  managing  the
revenue  and  for  the  speedy  extinction  of  the  debt.
In  the  midst  of  these  labors  Hamilton  was  as-
sailed in  congress  by  his  enemies,  who  were  stimu-
lated by  Jefferson,  led  by  James  Madison  and  Will-
iam B.  Giles,  and  in  an  incredibly  short  time,  in
a  series  of  reports  on  loans,  he  laid  bare  every
operation  of  the  treasury  for  three  years,  and  there-
after could  not  get  his  foes,  even  by  renewed  in-
vitations, to  investigate  him  further.

Outside  of  his  own  department,  Hamilton  was
hardly  less  active,  and  in  the  difficult  and  troubled
times  brought  on  by  the  French  revolution  he  took
a  leading  part  in  the  determination  of  our  foreign
policy.  He  believed  in  a  strict  neutrality,  and
had  no  leaning  to  France.  He  sustained  the  neu-
trality proclamation  in  the  cabinet,  and  defended
it  in  the  press  under  the  signature  of  "  Pacificus."
He  strenuously  supported  Washington  in  his
course  toward  France,  and  constantly  urged  more
vigorous  measures  toward  Edmond  Charles  Genet
(q.  v.)  than  the  cabinet  as  a  whole  would  adopt.
During  this  period,  too,  his  quarrel  with  Jefferson,
which  really  typified  the  growth  of  two  great  po-
litical parties,  came  to  a  head.  Jefferson  sustained
and  abetted  Freneau  in  his  attacks  upon  the  ad-


ministration and  the  financial  policy,  and  upon
the  secretary  of  the  treasury  most  especially.
Hamilton,  too,  forgetful  of  the  dignity  of  his  of-
fice, took  up  his  pen  and  in  a  series  of  letters  to
the  newspapers  lashed  Jefferson  until  he  writhed
beneath  the  blows.  At  last  Washington  inter-
fered, and  a  peace  was  patched  up  between  the
warring  secretaries;  but  the  relation  was  too
strained  to  endure,  and  Jefferson  soon  resigned  and
retired  to  Virginia.  Hamilton  was  contemplating
a  similar  step,  but  postponed  taking  it  because  he
wished  to  complete  certain  financial  arrangements,
and  he  also  felt  unwilling  to  leave  his  office  until
the  troubles  arising  in  Pennsylvania  from  the  ex-
cise were  settled.  These  disturbances  culminated
in  open  riot  and  insurrection ;  but  Washington
and  Hamilton  were  fully  prepared  to  deal  with  the
emergency.  A  vigorous  proclamation  was  issued,
an  overwhelming  force,  which  Hamilton  accom-
panied, was  marched  into  the  insurgent  counties,
and  the  so-called  rebellion  faded  away.

Hamilton  now  felt  free  to  withdraw  from  the
cabinet,  a  step  that  he  was  compelled  to  take  from
a  lack  of  resources  sufficient  to  support  a  growing
family,  and  he  accordingly  resigned  on  31  Jan.,

1795.  His  neglected  practice  at  once  revived,  and
he  soon  stood  at  the  head  of  the  New  York  bar.
But  even  his  incessant  professional  duties  could
not  keep  him  from  public  affairs.  The  Jay  nego-
tiation, which  he  had  done  much  to  set  on  foot,
came  to  an  end,  and  the  treaty  that  resulted  from
it  produced  a  fierce  outburst  of  popular  rage,
which  threatened  to  overwhelm  Washington  him-
self. Hamilton  defended  the  treaty  with  voice
and  pen,  writing  a  famous  series  of  essays  signed
"  Camillus,"  which  had  a  powerful  influence  in
changing  public  opinion.  He  was  also  consulted
constantly  by  Washington,  almost  as  much  as  if
he  had  continued  in  the  cabinet,  and  he  furnished
drafts  and  suggestions  for  messages  and  speeches,
besides  taking  a  large  share  in  the  preparation  of
the  "  Farewell  Address."

Hamilton  not  only  corresponded  with  and  ad-
vised the  president,  but  maintained  the  same  rela-
tion with  the  members  of  the  cabinet,  and  this
fact  was  one  fruitful  source  of  the  dissensions  that
arose  in  the  Federalist  party  after  the  retirement
of  Washington.  Hamilton  supported  John  Adams
loyally,  if  not  very  cordially,  at  the  election  of

1796,  and  intended  to  give  him  an  equally  loyal
support  when  he  assumed  office,  but  the  situation
was  an  impossible  one.  Adams  was  the  leader  of
the  party  de  jure,  Hamilton  de  facto,  and  at  least
three  members  of  the  cabinet  looked  from  the  first
beyond  their  nominal  and  official  chief  to  their
real  chief  in  New  York.  If  Adams  had  possessed
political  tact,  he  might  have  managed  Hamilton ;
but  he  neither  could  nor  would  attempt  it,  and
Hamilton,  on  his  side,  was  equally  imperious  and
equally  determined  to  have  his  own  way.  The  two
leaders  agreed  as  to  the  special  commission  to
France,  and  the  commission  went.  They  agreed
as  to  the  attitude  to  be  assumed  after  the  expo-
sure of  the  "  X.  Y.  Z."  correspondence,  and  all
went  well.  But,  when  it  came  to  the  provisional
army,  Adams's  jealousy  led  him  to  resist  Hamil-
ton's appointment  to  the  command,  and  a  serious
breach  ensued.  The  influence  of  Washington  pre-
vailed, however,  and  Hamilton  was  given  the  post
of  inspector-general.  For  two  years  he  was  ab-
sorbed in  the  military  duties  thus  imposed  upon
him,  and  his  genius  for  organization  comes  out
strongly  in  his  correspondence  relating  to  the  for-
mation, distribution,  and  discipline  of  the  army.  In
the  mean  time  the  affairs  of  the  party  went  from


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


59


bad  to  worse.  Mr.  Adams  reopened  negotiations
with  France,  which  disgusted  the  war-Federalists,
and  then  expelled  Timothy  Pickering  and  James
McHenry  from  the  cabinet,  12  May,  1800.  He  also
gave  loud  utterance  to  his  hatred  of  Hamilton,
which  speedily  reached  the  latter's  ears,  and  the
Federalist  party  found  themselves  face  to  face
with  an  election  and  torn  by  bitter  quarrels.  The
Federalists  were  beaten  by  their  opponents  under
the  leadership  of  Burr  in  the  New  York  elections,
and  Hamilton,  smarting  from  defeat,  proposed  to
Jay  to  call  together  the  old  legislature  and  refer
the  choice  of  electors  to  the  people  in  districts.
The  proposition  was  wrong  and  desperate,  and
wholly  unworthy  of  Hamilton,  who  seems  to  have
been  beside  himself  at  the  prospect  of  his  party's
impending  ruin  and  the  consequent  triumph  of
Jefferson.  He  also  made  the  fatal  mistake  of  openly
attacking  Adams,  and  the  famous  pamphlet  that
he  wrote  against  the  president,  after  depicting
Adams  as  wholly  unfit  for  his  high  trust,  lamely
concluded  by  advising  all  the  Federalists  to  vote
for  him.  Such  proceedings  could  have  but  one  re-
sult, and  the  Federalists  were  beaten.  The  victors,
however,  were  left  in  serious  difficulties,  for  Burr

and  Jefferson
received  an
equal  number
of  votes,  and
the  election
was  thrown  in-
to the  house
of  representa-
tives. The  Fed-
eralists, eager
for  revenge  on
Jefferson,  be-
gan to  turn  to
Burr,  and  now
Hamilton,  re-
covered from
his  fit  of  anger,  threw  himself  into  the  breach,  and,
using  all  his  great  influence,  was  chiefly  instru-
mental in  securing  the  election  of  Jefferson,  there-
by fulfilling  the  popular  will  and  excluding  Burr,
a  great  and  high-minded  service,  which  was  a  fit
close  to  his  public  life.

After  the  election  of  Jefferson,  Hamilton  re-
sumed the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  withdrew
more  and  more  into  private  life.  But  he  could
not  separate  himself  entirely  from  politics,  and
continued  to  write  upon  them,  and  strove  to  influ-
ence and  strengthen  his  party.  As  time  wore  on,
and  the  breach  widened  between  Jefferson  and
Burr,  the  latter  renewed  his  intrigues  with  the
Federalists,-  but  through  Hamilton's  influence  was
constantly  thwarted,  and  was  finally  beaten  for  the
governorship  of  New  York.  Burr  then  apparently
determined  to  fix  a  quarrel  upon  his  life-long
enemy,  which  was  no  difficult  matter,  for  Hamilton
had  used  the  severest  language  about  Burr — not
once,  but  a  hundred  times — and  it  was  easy  enough
to  bring  it  home  to  him.  Hamilton  had  no  wish
to  go  out  with  Burr,  but  he  was  a  fighting  man,
and,  moreover,  he  was  haunted  by  the  belief  that
democracy  was  going  to  culminate  in  the  horrors  of
the  French  revolution,  that  a  strong  man  would  be
needed,  and  that  society  would  turn  to  him  for  sal-
vation— a  work  for  which  he  would  be  disqualified
by  the  popular  prejudice  if  he  declined  to  fight  a
duel.  He  therefore  accepted  the  challenge,  met
Burr  on  11  July,  1804,  on  the  bank  of  the  Hudson
at  Weehawken,  and  fell  mortally  wounded  at  the
first  fire.  His  tragic  fate  called  forth  a  universal
burst  of  grief,  and  drove  Burr  into  exile,  an  out-


cast and  a  conspirator.  The  accompanying  illus-
tration represents  the  tomb  that  marks  his  grave
in  Trinity  churchyard,  New  York.  The  preceding
one,  on  page  57,  is  a  picture  of  "The  Grange,"
Hamilton's  country  residence  on  the  upper  part
of  Manhattan  island.  The  thirteen  trees  that  he
planted  to  symbolize  the  original  states  of  the
Union  survive  in  majestic  proportions,  and  the
mansion  is  still  standing  on  the  bluff  overlooking
the  Hudson  on  one  side  and  Long  Island  sound  on
the  other,  not  far  from  145th  Street,

As  time  has  gone  on  Hamilton's  fame  has  grown,
and  he  stands  to-day  as  the  most  brilliant  states-
man we  have  produced.  His  constructive  mind
and  far-reaching  intellect  are  visible  in  every  part
of  our  system  of  government,  which  is  the  best
and  noblest  monument  of  his  genius.  His  writ-
ings abound  in  ideas  which  there  and  then  found
their  first  expression,  and  which  he  impressed  upon
our  institutions  until  they  have  become  so  univer-
sally accepted  and  so  very  commonplace  that  their
origin  is  forgotten.  He  was  a  brave  and  good  sol-
dier, and  might  well  have  been  a  great  one  had  the
opportunity  ever  come.  He  was  the  first  political
writer  of  his  time,  with  an  unrivalled  power  of
statement  and  a  clear,  forcible  style,  which  carried
conviction  in  every  line.  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  was  second  to  no  man  at  the  American  bar,  and
was  a  master  in  debate  and  in  oratory.  In  his
family  and  among  his  friends  he  was  deeply  be-
loved and  almost  blindly  followed.  His  errors  and
faults  came  from  his  strong,  passionate  nature,
and  his  masterful  will  impatient  of  resistance  or
control.  Yet  these  were  the  very  qualities  that
carried  him  forward  to  his  triumphs,  and  enabled
him  to  perform  services  to  the  American  people
which  can  never  be  forgotten.

There  are  several  portraits  of  the  statesman  by
John  Trumbull,  and  one  by  Wiemar ;  also  a  marble
bust,  modelled  from  life,  by  Ceracchi  in  1794,  of
which  the  accompanying  illustration,  on  page  56,
is  a  copy.  A  full-length  statue  of  Hamilton  stands
in  the  Central  Park  of  New  York.

Hamilton  was  the  principal  author  of  the  series
of  essays  called  the  "  Federalist,"  written  in  advo-
cacy of  a  powerful  and  influential  national  govern-
ment, which  were  published  in  a  New  York  jour-
nal under  the  signature  of  "Publius"  in  1787-'8,
before  the  adoption  of  the  Federal  constitution.
There  were  eighty-five  papers  in  all,  of  which
Hamilton  wrote  fifty-one,  James  Madison  four-
teen, John  Jay  five,  and  Madison  and  Hamilton
jointly  three,  while  the  authorship  of  the  remain-
ing twelve  have  been  claimed  by  both  Hamilton
and  Madison.  As  secretary  of  the  treasury,  he
presented  to  congress  an  elaborate  report  on  the
public  debt  in  1789,  and  one  on  protective  duties
on  imports  in  1791.  In  the  "Gazette  of  the
United  States,"  under  the  signature  "  An  Ameri-
can," he  assailed  Jefferson's  financial  views,  while
both  were  members  of  Washington's  cabinet  (1792);
under  that  of  "  Pacificus,"  defended  in  print  the
policy  of  neutrality  between  France  and  England
(1793) ;  and  in  a  series  of  essays,  signed  "  Camillus,"
sustained  the  policy  of  ratifying  Jay's  treaty  (1795).
Other  signatures  used  by  him  in  his  newspaper
controversies  were  "  Cato,"  "  Lucius  Crassus,"  "  Pho-
cion,"  and  "  Scipio."  In  answer  to  the  charges  of
corruption  made  by  Monroe,  he  published  a  pam-
phlet, containing  his  correspondence  with  Monroe  on
the  subject  and  the  supposed  incriminating  letters
on  which  the  charges  were  based  (1797).  His  "Ob-
servations on  Certain  Documents"  (Philadelphia,
1797)  was  republished  in  New  York  in  1865.  In
1798  he  defended  in  the  newspapers  the  policy  of


60


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


increasing  the  army.  His  "Works,"  comprising
the  "Federalist,"  his  most  important  official  re-
ports, and  other  writings,  were  published  in  three
volumes  (New  York,  1810).  "  His  Official  and
other  Papers,"  edited  by  Francis  L.  Hawks,  ap-
peared in  1842.  In  1851  his  son,  John  C,  issued
a  carefully  prepared  edition  of  his  "  Works,"  com-
prising his  correspondence  and  his  political  and
official  writings,  civil  and  military,  in  seven  vol-
umes. A  still  larger  collection  of  his  "  Complete
Works,"  including  the  "Federalist,"  his  private
correspondence,  and  many  hitherto  unpublished
documents,  was  edited,  with  an  introduction  and
notes,  by  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  (9  vols.,  1885).  In
1804  appeared  a  "Collection  of  Facts  and  Docu-
ments relative  to  the  Death  of  Major-General
Alexander  Hamilton,"  by  William  Coleman.  The
same  year  his  "Life"  was  published  in  Boston
by  John  Williams,  under  the  pen-name  "Anthony
Pasquin,"  a  reprint  of  which  has  been  issued  by
the  Hamilton  club  (New  York,  1865).  A  "Life
of  Alexander  Hamilton"  (2  vols.,  1834-'40)  was
published  by  his  son,  John  Church,  who  also  com-
piled an  elaborate  work  entitled  "History  of  the
Republic  of  the  United  States,  as  traced  in  the
Writings  of  Alexander  Hamilton  and  his  Con-
temporaries," the  first  volume  of  which  contains
a  sketch  of  his  father's  career  (1850-'8).  See
also  his  "Life"  by  Henry  B.  Renwick  (1841);
"Life  and  Times  of  Alexander  Hamilton,"  by
Samuel  M.  Smucker  (Boston,  1856);  "Hamilton
and  his  Contemporaries,"  by  Christopher  J.  Rieth-
mueller  (1864);  "Life  of  Hamilton,"  by  John
T.  Morse,  Jr.  (1876) ;  "  Hamilton,  a  Historical
Study,"  by  George  Shea  (New  York,  1877) ;  "  Life
and  Epoch  of  Alexander  Hamilton,"  by  the  same
author  (Boston,  1879);  and  "Life  of  Hamilton,"
by  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  (American  statesmen  se-
ries, 1882).  A  list  of  the  books  written  by  or
relating  to  Hamilton  has  been  published  under
the  title  of  "  Bibliotheca  Hamiltonia  "  by  Paul  L.
Ford  (New  York,  1886).  — His  wife,  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler,  b.  in  Albany,

N.  Y,  9  Aug.,  1757;
d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  9  Nov.,  1854.
At  the  time  of  their
marriage  Hamilton
was  one  of  Gen.
Washington's  aides,
with  the  rank  of
lieutenant  -  colonel.
She  rendered  assist-
ance to  her  husband
in  his  labors,  coun-
selled him  in  his
affairs,  and  kept  his
papers  in  order  for
aim,  preserving  the
large  collection  of
manuscripts,  which
was  acquired  by  the
U.  S.  government  in
1849,  and  has  been
utilized  by  the  bi-
ographers of  Alexan-
der Hamilton  and  by  historians,  who  have  traced
by  their  light  the  secret  and  personal  influences
that  decided  many  public  events  between  1775  and
1804.  The  accompanying  portrait  of  Mrs.  Ham-
ilton, painted  by  James  Earle,  represents  her  at
the  age  of  twenty  -  seven.  —  Their  son,  Philip,
b.  22  Jan.,  1782,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1800,  and  died  of  a  wound  received  in  a  duel  24
Nov.,  1801,  on  the  same  spot  where  his  father  fell


v? \  yl/a-  *n  l/fa


~<rr\—


three  years  later.  The  young  man,  who  showed
much  promise,  became  involved  in  a  political  quar-
rel, and  was  challenged  by  his  antagonist,  whose
name  was  Eckert.  After  the  affair  the  father  re-
garded with  abhorrence  the  practice  of  duelling.
He  recorded  his  condemnation  in  a  paper,  written
before  going  to  the  fatal  meeting  with  Burr. — An-
other son,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city,  16  May,  1786;  d.  there,  2  Aug.,  1875,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1804,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  practice.  He  went  abroad,  and  was
with  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  army  in  Portugal
in  1811,  but  returned  on  hearing  rumors  of  impend-
ing war  with  Great  Britain.  He  was  appointed
captain  of  U.  S.  infantry  in  August,  1813,  and  acted
as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Morgan  Lewis  in  1814.  In
1822  he  was  appointed  IT.  S.  district  attorney  in
Florida,  and  in  1823  one  of  the  three  Florida  land-
commissioners.  His  last  years  were  passed  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  and  in  New  York  city,  where  he
engaged  in  real-estate  speculations. — Another  son,
James  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,
14  April,  1788 ;  d.  in  Irvington,  N.  Y,  24  Sept.,
1878,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1805.  He
served  in  the  war  of  1812— '15  as  brigade  major  and
inspector  in  the  New  York  state  militia,  and  after-
ward practised  law.  He  was  acting  secretary  of
state  under  President  Jackson  in  1829,  being*  ap-
pointed ad  interim  on  4  March,  but  surrendering
the  office  on  the  regular  appointment  of  Martin
Van  Buren,  two  days  later.  On  3  April  he  was
nominated  tj.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  southern
district  of  New  York.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was
conferred  upon  him  by  Hamilton  college.  He
published  "  Reminiscences  of  Hamilton,  or  Men
and  Events,  at  Home  and  Abroad,  during  Three
Quarters  of  a  Century"  (New  York,  1869). — An-
other son,  John  Church,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel-
Shia,  Pa.,  22  Aug.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Long  Branch,
C  J.,  25  July,  1882,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1809.  He  studied  law,  and  practised  in  New
York  city.  He  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant  in
the  U.  S.  army  in  March,  1814,  and  served  as  aide-
de-camp  to  Gen.  Harrison,  but  resigned  on  11
June,  1814.  He  spent  many  years  in  preparing  me-
moirs of  his  father,  and  editing  the  latter's  works
(see  above).— Another  son,  William  Steven,  b.
in  New  York  city,  4  Aug.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Sacramento,
Cal.,  7  Aug.,  1850,  entered  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1814,  but  left  before  his  graduation.  He
was  appointed  U.  S.  surveyor  of  public  lands  in
Illinois,  and  served  as  a  colonel  of  Illinois  volunteers
in  the  Black  Hawk  war,  commanding  a  reconnoi-
tring party  under  Gen.  Atkinson  in  1832.  He  held
various  offices,  removed  to  Wisconsin,  and  thence
to  California. — The  youngest  son,  Philip,  jurist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  1  June,  1802 ;  d.  in  Poughkeep-
sie,  N.  Y.,  9  July,  1884,  married  a  daughter  of
Louis  McLane.  He  was  assistant  district  attorney
in  New  York  city,  and  for  some  time  judge-advo-
cate of  the  naval  retiring  board  in  Brooklyn. —
Schuyler,  soldier,  son  of  John  Church,  b.  in  New
York  city,  25  July,  1822,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1841,  entered  the  1st  infantry,
and  was  on  duty  on  the  plains  and  as  assistant  in-
structor of  tactics  at  West  Point.  He  served  with
honor  in  the  Mexican  war,  being  brevetted  for
gallantry  at  Monterey,  and  again  for  his  brave
conduct  in  an  affair  at  Mil  Flores,  where  he  was
attacked  by  a  superior  force  of  Mexican  lancers,
and  was  severely  wounded  in  a  desperate  hand-
to-hand  combat.  From  1847  till  1854  he  served
as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  volunteered  as  a
private  in  the  7th  New  York  regiment,  and  was


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


61


attached  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  But-
ler, and  then  acted  as  military  secretary  to  Gen.
Scott  until  the  retirement  of  the  latter.  He
next  served  as  assistant  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.
Henry  W.  Halleck,  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  with  the
rank  of  colonel.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  12  Nov.,  1861,  and  ordered
to  command  the  department  of  St.  Louis.  He
participated  in  the  important  operations  of  the
armies  of  the  Tennessee  and  of  the  Cumberland,
was  the  first  to  suggest  the  cutting  of  a  canal  to
turn  the  enemy's  position  at  Island  No.  10,  and
commanded  a  division  in  the  operations  against
that  island  and  New  Madrid,  for  which  he  was
made  a  major-general  on  17  Sept.,  1862.  At  the
battle  of  Farmington  he  commanded  the  reserve.
On  27  Feb.,  1863,  he  was  compelled  by  feeble
health  to  resign.  From  1871  till  1875  he  filled  the
post  of  hydrographic  engineer  for  the  department
of  docks  in  New  York  city.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"History  of  the  National  Flag  of  the  United
States "  (New  York,  1852),  and  on  14  June,  1877,
the  centennial  anniversary  of  its  adoption,  deliv-
ered an  address  on  "  Our  National  Flag." — Allan
McLane,  physician,  son  of  Philip,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  6  Oct.,  1848,  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  New  York  city  in  1870,
and  practised  in  that  city,  devoting  his  attention
to  nervous  diseases.  He  invented  a  dynamometer
in  1874,  and  was  one  of  the  first  to  practise  galvano-
cautery  in  the  United  States,  and  the  first  to  em-
ploy monobromate  of  camphor  in  treating  delirium
tremens  and  nitro-glycerine  in  epilepsy.  He  had
charge  in  1872-'3  of  the  New  York  state  hospital
for  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  afterward  be-
came visiting  physician  to  the  epileptic  and  para-
lytic hospital  on  Blackwell's  island,  New  YTork  city,
and  lectured  on  nervous  diseases  in  the  Long  Isl-
and college  hospital.  In  the  trial  of  President
Garfield's  assassin  he  testified  as  an  expert  in  be-
half of  the  government.  He  edited  in  1875  the
"American  Psychological  Journal,"  is  the  author
of  a  work  on  "  Clinical  Electro-Therapeutics"  (New
York,  1873),  and  also  of  text-books  on  "  Nervous
Diseases"  (1878-'81),  and  "Medical  Jurisprudence"
(1887),  and  has  published  in  professional  journals
articles  on  epilepsy,  sensory  epilepsy,  ascending  gen-
eral paresis,  tremors,  and  inco-ordination.

HAMILTON,  Andrew,  lawyer,  b.  in  Scotland
about  1676 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  4  Aug.,  1741. His

Earentage  and  career  in  the  Oid  World  he  seems  to
ave  kept  secret,  as  well  as  his  real  name.  At  one
time  he  was  called  Trent,  nor  is  it  known  exactly  at
what  date  he  began  to  use  the  name  of  Hamilton.
In  his  address  to  the  Pennsylvania  assembly  in
1739  he  speaks  of  "  liberty,  the  love  of  which  as  it
first  drew  me  to.  so  it  constantly  prevailed  on
me  to  reside  in  this  Province,  tho'  to  the  manifest
prejudice  of  my  fortune."  Probably  Hamilton  was
his  real  name,  but  for  private  reasons  he  saw  fit  to
discard  it  for  a  time.  About  1697  he  came  to  Ac-
comac  county,  Va.,  where  he  obtained  employment
as  steward  of  a  plantation,  and  for  a  time  kept
a  classical  school.  His  marriage,  while  steward,
with  the  widow  of  the  owner  of  the  estate  is
said  to  have  brought  him  influential  connections,
and  he  began  the  practice  of  the  law.  Previous
to  1716  Hamilton  removed  to  Philadelphia,  and
in  1717  was  made  attorney-general  of  Penn-
sylvania. In  March,  1721,  he  was  called  to  the
provincial  council,  and  accepted  on  condition
that  his  duties  should  not  interfere  with  his  prac-
tice. He  resigned  the  office  in  1724,  and  in  1727
was  appointed  prothonotary  of  the  supreme  court
and  recorder  of  Philadelphia. He  was  elected  to


oflU$m^


the  assembly  from  Bucks  county  in  the  same
year,  chosen  speaker  in  1729,  ana  re-elected  an-
nually until  his  retirement  in  1739,  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  single  year.  Hamilton,  in  company
with  his  son-in-law,  Allen,  purchased  the  ground
now  comprised  within  Independence  square,  Phila-
delphia, whereon  to  erect  "  a  suitable  building  "  to
be  used  as  a  legislative  hall,  the  assembly,  prior  to
1729,  having  met  in  a  private  residence.  The
state-house,  afterward  Independence  Hall,  was  not
completed  un-
til subsequent
to  Hamilton's
death,  the  con-
veyance to  the
province  being
madebyhisson.
The  crowning
glory  of  Ham-
ilton's profes-
sional career
was  his  defence
of  John  Peter
Zenger  in  1735,
which  he  un-
dertook with-
out fee  or  re-
ward. Zenger
was  a  printer
in  New  York
city,  and  in  his
newspaper  had
asserted  that  judges  were  arbitrarily  displaced,  and
new  courts  erected  without  consent  of  the  legisla-
ture, by  which  trials  by  jury  were  taken  away  when
a  governor  was  so  disposed.  The  attorney-general
charged  him  with  libel,  and  Zenger's  lawyers,  on  ob-
jecting to  the  legality  of  the  judge's  commissions,
were  stricken  from  the  list  of  attorneys.  Fearing
that  the  advocate,  who  had  subsequently  been  ap-
pointed by  the  court,  might  be  overawed  by  the
bench,  at  the  head  of  which  was  Chief-Justice  De
Lancey,  a  member  of  the  governor's  council,  Ham-
ilton voluntarily  went  to  New  York,  and  appeared
in  the  case.  He  admitted  the  printing  and  publish-
ing of  the  article,  but  advanced  the  doctrine,  novel
at  that,  time,  that  the  truth  of  the  facts  in  the  alleged
libel  could  be  set  up  as  a  defence,  and  that  in  this
proceeding  the  jury  were  judges  of  both  the  law
and  the  facts.  The  offer  of  evidence  to  prove  the
truth  of  Zenger's  statements  was  rejected,  but
Hamilton  then  appealed  to  the  jury  to  say  from
the  evidence  that  they  had  met  with  in  their  daily
lives  that  the  contents  of  the  defendant's  article  were
not  false.  His  eloquence  secured  a  verdict  of  "  not
guilty."  The  people  of  New  YTork  and  the  other
colonies  hailed  the  result  with  delight,  since  it  in-
sured free  discussion  of  the  conduct  of  public  men.
Gouverneur  Morris  referred  to  Hamilton  as  "the
day-star  of  the  American  Revolution,"  and  the
common  council  of  New  York  passed  a  resolution
thanking  him  for  his  services,  and  presented  him
with  the  freedom  of  the  city.  His  fame  spread  to
England,  an  account  of  the  trial  passing  through
four  editions  there  within  three  months.  Hamil-
ton was  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  the  general
loan-office,  the  province's  agency  for  issuing  paper
money,  and  in  1737  was  appointed  judge  of  the
vice-admiralty  court,  the  only  office  he  held  at  the
time  of  his  death. — His  son,  James,  governor  of
Pennsylvania,  b.  probablv  in  Accomac  county,  Va.,
about  "1710;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  Aug.,  1783,
was  made  prothonotary  of  the  supreme  court  of
Pennsylvania  when  his  father  resigned  that  office.
He  was  elected  to  the  provincial  assembly  in  1734,


62


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


and  re-elected  five  times.  He  was  mayor  of  Phila-
delphia for  a  year  from  October,  1745,  and  on  re-
tiring from  office  departed  from  a  custom  that
compelled  the  entertainment  of  the  corporation  at
a  banquet.  Instead  of  this,  Mayor  Hamilton  gave
£150  toward  the  erection  of  a  public  building.  His
example  was  followed  by  succeeding  mayors,  until,
in  1775,  the  sum  was  devoted  to  the  erection  of  a
city-hall  and  court-house.  Hamilton  became  a
member  of  the  provincial  council  in  1746.  He  was
residing  in  London  in  1748,  when  he  was  commis-
sioned by  the  sons  of  William  Penn  as  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  province  and  territories.  He  re-
signed in  1754,  and  when  the  news  of  Indian  out-
rages reached  Philadelphia  in  the  autumn  of  1755,
entered  actively  on  the  work  of  defence,  and  re-
ported to  the  assembly  that  a  chain  of  garrisoned
forts  and  block-houses  was  nearly  completed  from
Delaware  river  to  the  Maryland  line.  Hamilton
was  again  deputy-governor  in  1759-'63,  and  on
the  departure  of  John  Penn  he  administered  the
government  as  president  of  the  council  until  the
arrival  of  Richard  Penn,  in  October,  1771.  Subse-
quently he  was  acting  governor  for  the  fourth
time  from  19  July  till  30  Aug.,  1773.  He  was
made  a  prisoner  on  parole  in  1777,  and  lived  at
Northampton  during  the  occupation  of  Philadel-
phia by  the  British.  Gov.  Hamilton  took  an  active
part  in  founding  several  public  institutions  of  Phila-
delphia. He  was  for  several  years  president  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  the  College  of  Philadelphia,
and  was  also  at  the  head  of  the  Philosophical  so-
ciety, when  it  united  with  the  Society  for  promot-
ing useful  knowledge.  At  the  first  election  for
president  of  the  new  organization,  Hamilton  and
Beniamin  Franklin  were  placed  in  nomination,  and
the  latter  was  chosen.

HAMILTON,  Andrew,  governor  of  New  Jersey,
b.  in  Scotland;  d.  probably  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,
20  April,  1703.  He  was  engaged  in  business  as  a
merchant  in  Edinburgh,  and  was  sent  to  East  Jer-
sey as  a  special  agent  for  the  proprietaries.  Hav-
ing discharged  that  mission  satisfactorily,  he  was
recommended  as  a  man  of  intelligence  and  judg-
ment to  Lord  Neil  Campbell,  who  was  sent  to  that
province  in  1686  as  deputy-governor  for  two  years.
He  was  made  a  member  of  the  council  in  conse-
quence, and  in  March,  1687,  became  acting  gov-
ernor on  the  departure  of  Lord  Neil  for  England,
who  was  called  there  on  business  and  did  not
return.  In  1688,  East  and  West  Jersey  having
surrendered  their  patents,  those  provinces  came
under  the  control  of  Gov.  Edmund  Andros,  and
were  annexed  to  New  York  and  New  England.
Andros,  then  residing  in  Boston,  visited  New  York
and  the  Jerseys,  continuing  all  officers  in  their
places,  and  making  but  slight  changes  in  the  govern-
ment. In  consequence  of  the  revolution  of  1688  in
England,  Gov.  Hamilton  visited  the  mayor  of  New
York  as  the  representative  of  Andros,  that  official
having  been  seized  by  the  New-Englanders  in  April,

1689.  He  finally  sailed  for  England,  in  order  to
consult  with  the  proprietaries,  but  was  captured  by
the  French,  and  did  not  reach  London  until  May,

1690.  He  was  still  residing  there  in  March,  1692,
when  he  was  appointed  governor  of  P^ast  Jersey,
and  also  given  charge  of  West  Jersey.  Although
he  administered  the  affairs  of  the  province  to  the
satisfaction  of  both  the  colonists  and  the  pro-
prietaries, he  was  deposed  in  1697,  "  much  against
the  inclination  "  of  the  latter,  in  obedience  to  an  act
of  parliament  which  provided  that  "no  other  than
a  natural-born  subject  of  England  could  serve  in
any  public  post  of  trust  or  profit."  Hamilton  re-
turned to  England  in  1698,  but  so  great  was  the


disorder  and  maladministration  under  his  succes-
sor, Jeremiah  Basse,  that  he  was  reappointed,  19
Aug.,  1699.  He  could  not,  however,  right  the
wrong  that  had  been  already  done,  or  repair  the
abuses  that  had  crept  in.  Officers  were  insulted
in  the  discharge  of  their  duties,  and  the  growth  of
the  province  was  seriously  interfered  with.  In  1701
he  was  appointed  by  William  Penn  deputy-gov-
ernor of  Pennsylvania,  the  latter  having  been
called  to  England  to  oppose  the  machinations  of
those  who  were  plotting  to  deprive  him  of  his
American  possessions.  On  Penn  s  arrival  in  Lon-
don everything  was  done  to  harass  him,  factious
opposition  being  made  to  the  confirmation  of  Gov.
Hamilton,  who  was  wrongfully  charged  with  hav-
ing been  engaged  in  illicit  trade.  The  appoint-
ment finally  received  the  royal  sanction.  In  the
session  of  the  provincial  assembly  in  Oct.,  1702,
the  representatives  of .  the  territories  refused  to
meet  those  of  the  province,  claiming  the  privilege
of  separation  under  a  new  charter,  and  expressing
their  firm  determination  to  remain  apart.  Hamil-
ton strongly  urged  the  advantages  of  union,  and
used  all  his  influence  to  secure  this  result,  but
without  effect.  He  also  made  preparations  for  the
defence  of  the  colony  by  organizing  a  military
force.  He  died  while  on  a  visit  to  his  family  in
New  Jersey  the  year  following.  It  was  to  Andrew
Hamilton  that  the  colonies  were  indebted  for  the
first  organization  of  a  postal  service,  he  having
obtained  a  patent  from  the  crown  for  the  purpose
in  1694. — His  son,  John,  acting  governor  of  New
Jersey,  d.  in  Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.,  in  1746.  It  is
not  known  whether  he  was  born  in  East  Jersey  or
in  Scotland.  He  is  first  heard  of  in  public  life  as
a  member  of  Gov.  Hunter's  council  in  1713.  He
retained  his  seat  under  Gov.  Burnet,  Gov.  Mont-
gomerie,  and  Gov.  Cosby.  In  1735  he  was  ap-
pointed associate  judge  of  the  provincial  supreme
court,  but  probably  did  not  serve,  as  he  became
acting  governor  on  the  death  of  Gov.  Cosby,  only
three  weeks  after  the  latter's  accession  to  office,  31
March,  1736.  He  continued  at  the  head  of  affairs
until  the  summer  of  1738,  when  Lewis  Morris  was
appointed  governor  of  New  Jersey,  "  apart  from
New  York.  Hamilton  again  became  acting  gov-
ernor on  the  death  of  the  latter  in  1746,  but  he  was
then  quite  infirm  and  died  a  few  months  afterward.
He  is  usually  credited  with  having  established  the
first  colonial  postal  service,  but  the  weight  of  au-
thority seems  to  favor  the  belief  that  it  was  his
father  who  obtained  the  patent.

HAMILTON,  Charles,  Canadian  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  Hawkesbury,  Ont.,  6  Jan.,  1834.  He
was  educated  at  University  college,  Toronto,  and  at
Oxford,  England,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1856.
He  was  incumbent  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Quebec,
in  1857-'64,  and  rector  of  St.  Matthew's,  Quebec,
in  1868-'85.  He  was  clerical  secretary  of  the  pro-
vincial synod  in  1861-79,  prolocutor  of  the  synod
of  the  Church  of  England  in  Canada  in  1879-85,
and  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Niagara  on  1  Jan.,
1885.  He  has  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Bishop's  college,  Lennoxville.

HAMILTON,  Charles  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in
New  York,  16  Nov.,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843.  and  assigned
to  the  infantry.  He  served  with  honor  in  the  war
with  Mexico,  was  brevetted  captain  for  gallantry
in  the  battles  of  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and
was  severely  wounded  at  Molino  del  Rey.  He  was
afterward  on  frontier  duty  till  April,  1853,  when
he  resigned  and  engaged  in  farming  in  Fond  du
Lac,  Wisconsin.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  appointed,  11  May,  1861,  colonel  of


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


63


the  3d  Wisconsin  regiment,  and  was  promoted  to
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  six  days  later.  He
served  in  Virginia  during  the  siege  of  Yorktown
in  May,  1862,  and  on  19  Sept.  of  that  year  was
promoted  to  major-general  of  volunteers.  After
the  siege  of  Yorktown  he  was  transferred  to  ,the
Army  of  the  Mississippi,  commanded  a  division  at
Corinth,  and  won  the  battle  of  Iuka.  Afterward
he  commanded  the  left  wing  of  the  Army  of  the
Tennessee,  and  the  16th  corps.  He  resigned  his
military  commission  in  April,  1863,  and  engaged
in  manufacturing  at  Fond  du  Lac,  Wis.,  but  sub-
sequently removed  to  Milwaukee.  Gen.  Hamil-
ton was  president  of  the  board  of  regents  of  the
University  of  Wisconsin  from  1866  till  1875,  and
United  States  marshal  for  the  district  of  Wiscon-
sin from  the  year  1869  till  1877.

HAMILTON,  Frank  Hastings,  surgeon,  b.  in
Wilmington,  Vt.,  10  Sept.,  1813 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  11  Aug.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1830,  after  which  he  entered  the  office  of  Dr.
John  G.  Morgan,  and  in  1831  attended  a  full  course
of  lectures  in  the  Western  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  Fairfield,  N.  Y.  In  1833  he  was
licensed  to  practise  by  the  Cayuga  county  medical
censors,  and  two  years  later  received  his  medical
degree  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Soon
afterward  he  began  to  give  a  course  of  lectures  in
anatomy  and  surgery  in  his  office  in  Auburn,  which
he  continued  until  1838.  In  1839  he  was  appoint-
ed professor  of  surgery  in  the  Western  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  a  year  later  was  called
to  the  medical  college  of  Geneva.  During  1843-'4
he  visited  Europe,  and  contributed  a  record  of  his
experiences  to  the  "  Buffalo  Medical  Journal."  In
1846  he  became  professor  of  surgery  in  the  Buffalo
medical  college,  subsequently  becoming  dean,  and
also  surgeon  to  the  Buffalo  charity  hospital.  Two
years  later  he  left  his  chair  in  Geneva  and  removed
to  Buffalo,  in  order  to  attend  to  his  practice,  which
was  rapidly  increasing.  On  the  organization  of
the  Long  Island  college  hospital  in  1859  he  was
called  to  fill  the  chair  of  principles  and  practice  of
surgery,  and  was  also  chosen  surgeon-in-chief  of
the  hospital.  In  May,  1861,  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  military  surgery,  a  chair  which  at  that
time  existed  in  no  other  college  in  the  United
States.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  ac-
companied the  31st  New  York  regiment  to  the
front,  and  had  charge  of  the  general  field  hospital
in  Centreville  during  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run.
In  July,  1861,  he  was  made  brigade  surgeon,  and
later  medical  director,  and  in  1862  organized  the
U.  S.  general  hospital  in  Central  park,  New  York.
In  February,  1863,  he  was  appointed  a  medical  in-
spector in  the  U.  S.  army,  ranking  as  lieutenant-
colonel,  but  resigned  in  September  and  returned
to  his  duties  in  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college,
where  in  1861  he  had  been  appointed  professor  of
military  surgery  and  attending  surgeon  to  the
hospital.  In  l*868-'75  he  was  professor  of  the
principles  and  practice  of  surgery  in  the  college,
and  remained  surgeon  to  the  hospital  until  his
death.  He  was  also  consulting  surgeon  to  other
hospitals  and  to  various  city  dispensaries,  and  in
that  capacity  Dr.  Hamilton  had  few  equals.  On
the  assassination  of  President  Garfield  he  was
called  in  consultation,  and  remained  associated
with  the  case  until  the  death  of  the  president.
His  notable  operations  were  many,  and  his  de-
scriptions of  improved  processes  are  numerous.
He  invented  a  bone-drill  and  an  apparatus  for
broken  jaw,  and  invented  or  modified  appliances
for  nearly  every  fracture  of  long  bones,  with  vari-
ous instruments  in  military  and  general  surgery.


He  was  the  first  to  introduce  the  use  of  gutta-
percha as  a  splint  where  irregular  joint  surfaces
require  support,  and  the  closing  of  old  ulcers  by
the  transplanting  of  new  skin  has  been  repeatedly
attributed  to  him  by  French  and  German  physi-
cians. He  was  a  member  of  various  medical  asso-
ciations, and  was  president  of  the  New  York  state
medical  society  in  1855,  of  the  New  York  patho-
logical society  in  1866,  of  the  New  York  medico-
legal society  in  1875-'6,  of  the  American  academy
of  medicine  in  1878,  and  of  the  New  York  society
of  medical  jurisprudence  in  1878  and  1885.  In
1869  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Union
college.  Dr.  Hamilton  was  a  large  contributor  to
medical  journals,  and  many  of  his  special  memoirs
are  accepted  as  authorities.  His  works  in  book-
form  include  "  Treatise  on  Strabismus  "  (Buffalo,
1844);  "Treatise  on  Fractures  and  Dislocations"
(Philadelphia,  1860;  7th  ed.,  1884.  French  and  Ger-
man translations) ;  "  Practical  Treatise  on  Military
Surgerv  "  (New  York,  1861) ;  and  "  The  Principles
and  Practice  of  Surgery  "  (1872  ;  2d  ed.,  1873).  He
edited  a  translation  of  Amussat  on  the  "  Use  of
Water  in  Surgery "  (1861),  and  "  The  Surgical
Memoirs  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,"  published
under  the  direction  of  the  United  States  sanitary
commission  (Washington,  1871).

HAMILTON,  Hamilton,  artist,  b.  in  England,
1  April,  1847.  He  was  brought  by  his  parents  to
Cowlesville,  N.  Y.,  in  childhood,  and  is  practically
self-taught  in  art.  beginning  his  career  as  a  por-
trait-painter in  1872  at  Buffalo.  He  visited  the
Rockv  mountains  in  1875.  passed  a  vear  in  France
in  1878-'9,  and  settled  in  New  York  in  1881.  He
was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy
in  1886,  and  is  a  member  of  the  American  water-
color  society  and  the  New  York  etching  club.  Mr.
Hamilton  is  distinguished  in  landscape  and  genre,
both  in  oil-  and  water-colors,  and  also  as  an  etcher.
Among  his  chief  works  are  "  The  Sisters  "  (1882) ;
"  Little  Sunbeam  "  ;  and  "  The  Messenger  "  (1886).

HAMILTON,  Henry,  British  soldier,  d.  in  An-
tigua, 29  Sept.,  1796.  During  the  war  of  the  Revo-
lution he  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Detroit,  and
in  1778  was  actively  engaged  in  urging  the  west-
ern Indians  to  join  the  British.  In  the  early  part
of  January,  1779,  he  recaptured  Vincennes,  but  in
the  following  February  was,  with  the  entire  garri-
son, surprised  by  Gen.  George  Rogers  Clarke,  and
carried  prisoner  to  Williamsburg,  Va.,  where  he
was  imprisoned.  He  retired  from  the  army  in  1783,
and  on  16  Nov..  1784.  was  appointed  lieutenant-
governor  of  Canada.  He  was  succeeded  in  this  of-
fice by  Henry  Hope  on  2  Nov.,  1785,  and  was  gov-
ernor of  Bermuda  from  1790  till  1794.

HAMILTON,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  8  May,  1786;  d.  at  sea  near  the  coast  of
Texas.  15  Nov.,  1857.  His  father.  Maj.  James
Hamilton,  was  a  favorite  aide  of  Washington.  The
son  received  a  liberal  education,  and,  adopting  the
legal  profession,  began  practice  in  Charleston.  He
served  in  the  war  of  1812,  on  the  Canadian  frontier,
as  a  major,  but  resumed  his  practice  at  Charleston,
and  was  for  several  years  mayor  of  that  city.  The
formidable  negro  conspiracy  in  1822.  led  by  Den-
mark Vesey,  was  detected  by  his  vigilance.  He
was  often  a  member  of  the  legislature,  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1822-'9,  and  an  extreme  advo-
cate of  free-trade,  state  rights,  and  direct  taxation.
He  was  an  active  supporter  of  Andrew  Jackson,
who,  in  1828,  offered  him  the  portfolio  of  secretary
of  war,  and  the  mission  to  Mexico,  both  of  which
he  declined.  He  recommended  armed  resistance
to  the  tariff  act  of  1828,  and,  while  governor  of
South  Carolina,  in  1830-'2,  advised  the  legislature


64


HAMILTON


HAMILTON


to  pass  the  nullification  act,  which  placed  the  state
in  collision  with  the  Federal  government.  He  was
appointed  by  Gov.  Hayne,  his  successor,  to  the
command  of  the  troops  raised  for  the  defence  of
the  state  under  the  nullification  act.  He  subse-
quently removed  to  Texas,  and  took  an  active  part
in  securing  the  recognition  of  that  republic  by
Great  Britain  and  France,  where  he  acted  as  its
representative  in  1841.  and  was  also  instrumental
in  securing  its  admission  into  the  Union.  He  was
a  U.  S.  senator-elect  from  Texas  at  the  time  of  his
death,  which  was  the  result  of  a  collision  between
the  steamships  "  Galveston  "  and  "  Opelousas,"  in
the  latter  of  which  he  was  a  passenger.  Mr.
Hamilton  could  have  been  saved  had  he  not  yielded
his  place  to  a  lady  among  the  passengers.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  "  Southern  Quarterly
Review,"  and  of  the  Bank  of  Charleston,  and  took
an  active  part  in  promoting  railroad  enterprises,
and  in  the  extension  of  southern  commerce.

HAMILTON,  James,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  16  Oct.,  1793 ;  d.  there,  23  Jan.,  1873.  He
was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1812,  and,
having  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1816.  He  labored  assiduously  in  the  cause  of  edu-
cation and  was  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  Dickin-
son college.  He  was  possessed  of  ample  means,
gave  largely  to  charitable  and  religious  organiza-
tions, and  was  throughout  his  life  a  friend  and
helper  of  the  poor.  Besides  several  tracts  and
small  books,  Mr.  Hamilton  was  the  author  of
"  Notes  on  Prophecy,"  which  appeared  anonymous-
ly (1859),  and  "The  Two  Pilgrims"  (1871).

HAMILTON,  James,  artist,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1819;  d.  10  March,  1878.  While  he  was  a  boy  his
parents  emigrated  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  be-
came a  teacher  of  drawing,  at  the  same  time  study-
ing painting.  He  went,  to  London  in  1754,  and
after  his  return  to  Philadelphia,  two  years  later,
was  employed  in  the  illustration  of  books.  He
furnished  illustrations  for  Dr.  Kane's  "  Arctic  Ex-
plorations," the  "Arabian  Nights,"  Coleridge's
"  Ancient  Mariner,"  and  other  popular  works.  His
best  pictures  are  "Capture  of  the  Serapis,"  "Old
Ironsides,"  "  Wrecked  Hopes,"  "  Egyptian  Sunset,"
"Morning  off  Atlantic  City,"  and  "Moonlight
Scene  near  Venice."  He  was  particularly  success-
ful in  his  marine  views.

HAMILTON,  John,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
ijueenston,  Ontario,  in  1802  ;  d.  10  Oct.,  1882.  He
was  the  son  of  Robert  Hamilton,  a  native  of  Scot-
land, who  had  been  active  in  public  affairs  in
Canada.  The  son  was  educated  at  Queenston  and
in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen
entered  a  mercantile  house  in  Montreal  as  a  clerk.
He  afterward  returned  to  Queenston,  and  became
a  builder  and  owner  of  steamboats.  He  owned  the
"  Frontenac,"  the  first  steamer  that  sailed  on  Lake
Ontario,  and  built  the  "  Lord  Sydenham."  the  first
large  boat  that  ever  ran  the  rapids  of  the  St.  Law-
rence. For  years  he  made  a  determined  resistance
to  the  Grand  Trunk  railway  in  its  efforts  to  secure
the  carrying-trade  of  Upper  Canada.  He  retired
from  business  in  1862.  In  January,  1831,  he  be-
came a  member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Canada,
and  remained  in  public  life  for  over  half  a  century
afterward.  On  29  Jan.,  1881,  the  fiftieth  anniver-
sary of  his  elevation  to  the  council,  he  was  presented
by  his  colleagues  with  an  address,  in  which  his
services  to  Canada  were  referred  to  with  apprecia-
tion. He  was  chairman  of  the  trustees  of  Queen's
college  from  1841  till  his  death.

HAMILTON,  John,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  near
Quebec,  Canada,  in  1827;  d.  in  Montreal,  3  April,
1887. He  was  educated  in  Montreal,  and  became  a


member  of  the  firm  of  Hamilton  Brothers,  lumber-
merchants.  Mr.  Hamilton  was  warden  of  the
counties  of  Prescott  and  Russell  for  three  years.
He  represented  Inkerman  in  the  legislative* council
of  Canada  from  1860  until  the  union,  when  he  was
called  to  the  senate.

HAMILTON,  John  McLure,  artist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1853.  He  studied  in  the  Royal
academy  at  Antwerp  under  Van  Lerins,  and  in
the  Ecole  des  beaux-arts,  Paris.  He  began  his
professional  life  in  1875  in  his  native  city.  Asso-
ciated with  others,  he  published  in  1878  "  L'acade-
mie  pour  rire,"  founded  on  the  French  publication
of  the  same  title,  which  attracted  some  attention,
being  the  first  work  of  its  kind  issued  in  America.
His  most  important  painting  is  "Le  rire,"  which
was  exhibited  in  the  National  academy  in  New
York  in  1877,  and  at  the  Paris  exposition  in  1878.

HAMILTON,  John  William,  clergyman,  b.  in
Weston,  W.  Va..  18  March,  1845.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Mount  Union  college,  Ohio,  in  1865,  and  at
Boston  university  in  1871.  He  entered  the  minis-
try of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  in  1871
founded  the  "  People's  church  "  in  Boston.  Mr.
Hamilton  is  the  author  of  "  Memorial  of  Jesse
Lee"  (1875);  "Lives  of  the  Methodist  Bishops"
(1883);  and  "  People's  Church  Pulpit"  (1884).

HAMILTON,  Kate,  author,  b.  in  Schenectady,
N.  Y.  She  resided  for  a  time  in  New  Jersey,  after-
ward in  Massachusetts,  but  was  educated  in  Steu-
benville,  Ohio.  She  has  written  for  various  papers
and  magazines,  often  under  the  pen-name  of
"  Fleeta,"  and  has  published  many  Sunday-school
books,  including  "Chinks  of  Clannvford,"  "Grey-
cliffe,"  "Brave  Heart,"  "Blue  Umbrella,"  "Old
Brown  House,"  "  The  Shadow  of  the  Rock,"
"  Norah  Neil,"  and  "  Frederick  Gordon."

HAMILTON,  Morgan  Calvin,  senator,  b.  near
Huntsville,  Ala.,  25  Feb.,  1809.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  and  removed  to  the  re-
public of  Texas  in  1837,  where  he  was  a  clerk  in
the  war  department  in  1839-'45,  and  during  the
greater  part  of  the  last  three  years  was  acting  sec-
retary of  war.  He  was  appointed  comptroller  of
the  state  treasury  in  September,  1867,  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  constitutional  convention  of  1868,  and
on  the  reconstruction  of  the  state  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  and  was  re-
elected, serving  from  1870  till  1877. — His  brother,
Andrew  Jackson,  politician,  b.  in  Madison  county,
Ala.,  28  Jan.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Austin,  Texas,  10  April,
1875.  He  was  educated  at  a  common  school,  and
subsequently  worked  for  a  time  on  his  father's
farm.  He  afterward  engaged  in  business,  but  was
for  some  years  clerk  of  the  circuit  court  of  his  na-
tive county,  and  then  became  a  lawyer.  He  settled
in  Texas  in  1846,  practised  law  many  years  in  Aus-
tin, was  attorney-general  of  the  state,  and  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Buchanan  ticket  in  1856.
He  subsequently  became  a  Republican,  and  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  in  1859-'61.  He  op-
posed the  secession  of  Texas,  and  during  the  early
part  of  the  war  lived  in  the  north.  On  14  Nov.,
1862,  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volun-
teers, and  in  the  same  year  appointed  military  gov-
ernor of  Texas.  He  was  sent  to  command  troops
at  Matamoras.  President  Johnson  made  him  pro-
visional governor  in  1865,  and  in  1866  he  became  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court.  He  was  an  independ-
ent candidate  for  governor  of  Texas  in  1869,  but
was  defeated.

HAMILTON,  Paul,  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Paul's
parish.  S.  C,  16  Oct.,  1762 ;  d.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,
30  June,  1816.  He  rendered  important  services
during  the  Revolution ;  was  comptroller  of  South


HAMILTON


HAMLIN


65


Carolina  from  1799  to  1804,  improving  the  finan-
cial system  of  the  state;  was  governor  of  South
Carolina  in  1804-'6,  and  secretary  of  the  U.  S.
navy  in  1809-13,  in  the  first  administration  of
James  Madison.  His  policy  was  to  keep  our  frig-
ates in  port  to  prevent  their  capture  in  the  war
of  1812-'14,  and  the  first  of  our  great  victories,
gained  by  Hull  in  the  "  Constitution,"  was  won
in  spite  of  Hamilton's  mandate,  "to  remain  in
Boston  until  further  orders ! "

HAMILTON,  Thomas,  English  author,  b.  in
1789 ;  d.  in  Pisa,  Italy,  7  Dec,  1842.  He  entered
the  English  army  and  became  captain  of  the  29th
regiment,  but,  after  serving  through  the  peninsu-
lar and  American  wars,  devoted  himself  to  litera-
ture and  became  a  contributor  to  "  Blackwood's
Magazine."  Besides  a  few  other  works,  he  wrote
"  Men  and  Manners  in  America  "  (2  vols.,  London,
1833 ;  Boston,  1834 ;  enlarged  ed.,  London,  1843).
This  work  was  highly  commended  by  English  crit-
ics for  its  impartiality  and  value  as  an  authority,
but  it  was  condemned  in  this  country  for  its
"spirit  of  unjust  depreciation."

HAMILTON,  William  Tiffany,  senator,  b.  in
Washington  county,  Md.,  8  Sept.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Ha-

ferstown,  Md.,  26  Oct.,  1888.  He  was  educated  at
efferson  college,  Pa.,  studied  law,  and  began  to  prac-
tise in  Hagerstown,  Md.  He  was  a  representative
in  congress  from  1849  till  1855,  having  been  chosen
as  a  Democrat,  and  from  1869  till  1875  was  U.  S.
senator.  He  was  governor  of  Maryland  in  1880-'4.
HAMLIN,  Hannibal,  statesman,  b.  in  Paris,
Oxford  co.,  Me.,  27  Aug.,  1809.  He  was  prepared
for  a  collegiate  education,  but  was  compelled  by
the  death  of  his  father  to  take  charge  of  the  home-
farm  until  he  was  of  age.  He  learned  printing,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833,  and
practised  in  Hampden,  Penobscot  co.,  until  1848.
He  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  from
1836  till  1840,  and
again  in  1847,  and
was  speaker  of  the
lower  branch  in
1837-'9  and  1840.  In
1840  he  received  the
Democratic  nomina-
tion for  member  of
congress,  and,  dur-
ing the  exciting  Har-
rison campaign,  held
joint  discussions  with
his  competitor,  being
the  first  to  introduce
that  practice  into
Maine.  In  1842  he
was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  and  re-
elected in  1844.  He  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate
for  four  years  in  1848,  to  fill  the  vacancy  occasioned
by  the  death  of  John  Fairfield,  and  was  re-elected
in  1851,  but  resigned  in  1857  to  be  inaugurated  gov-
ernor, having  been  elected  to  that  office  as  a  Re-
Eublican.  Less  than  a  month  afterward,  on  20  Feb.,
e  resigned  the  governorship,  as  he  had  again  been
chosen  U.  S.  senator  for  the  full  term  of  six  years.
He  served  until  January,  1861,  when  he  resigned,
having  been  elected  vice-president  on  the  ticket
with  Abraham  Lincoln.  He  presided  over  the  sen-
ate from  4  March,  1861,  till  3  March,  1865.  In  the
latter  year  he  was  appointed  collector  of  the  port
of  Boston,  but  resigned  in  1866.  From  1861  till
1865  he  had  also  acted  as  regent  of  the  Smithsoni-
an institution,  and  was  reappointed  in  1870,  con-
tinuing to  act  for  the  following  twelve  years,  dur-
ing which  time  he  became  dean  of  the  board. He


£Cj?. /&> ^<£2-z-»-'W^-c-**_


was  again  elected  and  re-elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
serving  from  4  March,  1869,  till  3  March,  1881.  In
June  of  that  year  he  was  named  minister  to  Spain,
but  gave  up  the  office  the  year  following  and
returned  to  this  country.  He  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Colby  university,  then  Waterville
college,  of  which  institution  he  was  trustee  for
over  twenty  years.  Senator  Hamlin,  although  a
Democrat,  was  an  original  anti-slavery  man,  and
so  strong  were  his  convictions  that  they  finally
led  to  his  separation  from  that  party.  Among
the  significant  incidents  of  his  long  career  of  nearly
fifty  years  may  be  mentioned  the  fact  that,  in  the
temporary  and  involuntary  absence  of  David  Wil-
mot  from  the  house  of  representatives,  during  the
session  of  the  29th  congress,  at  the  critical  moment
when  the  measure,  since  known  as  "  the  Wilmot
proviso,"  had  to  be  presented  or  the  opportunity
irrevocably  lost,  Mr.  Hamlin,  while  his  anti-slavery
friends  were  in  the  greatest  confusion  and  per-
plexity, seeing  that  only  a  second's  delay  would  be
fatal,  offered  the  bill  and  secured  its  passage  by  a
vote  of  115  to  106.  In  common,  however,  with
Abraham  Lincoln,  Mr.  Hamlin  strove  simply  to  pre-
vent the  extension  of  slavery  into  new  territory,
and  did  not  seek  to  secure  its  abolition.  In  a  speech
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  12  June,  1856,  in  which  he
gave  his  reasons  for  changing  his  party  allegiance,
he  thus  referred  to  the  Democratic  convention  then
recently  held  at  Cincinnati :  "  The  convention  has
actually  incorporated  into  the  platform  of  the
Democratic  party  that  doctrine  which,  only  a  few
years  ago,  met  with  nothing  but  ridicule  and  con-
tempt here  and  elsewhere,  namely,  that  the  flag  of
the  Federal  Union,  under  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  carries  slavery  wherever  it  floats.
If  this  baleful  principle  be  true,  then  that  national
ode,  which  inspires  us  always  as  on  a  battle-field,
should  be  re-written  by  Drake,  and  should  read :

'  Forever  float  that  standard  sheet !

Where  breathes  the  foe  but  falls  before  us,

With  slavery's  soil  beneath  our  feet,

And  slavery's  banner  streaming  o'er  us.'"
When  he  had  been  elected  vice-president  on  the
ticket  with  Mr.  Lincoln,  he  accepted  an  invitation
to  meet  the  latter  at  Chicago,  and,  calling  on  the
president-elect,  found  him  in  a  room  alone.  Mr.
Lincoln  arose,  and,  coming  toward  his  guest,  said
abruptly :  "  Have  we  ever  been  introduced  to  each
other,  Mr.  Hamlin  ?  "  "  No,  sir,  I  think  not,"  was
the  reply.  "  That  also  is  my  impression,"  con-
tinued Mr.  Lincoln ;  "  but  I  remember  distinctly
while  I  was  in  congress  to  have  heard  you  make  a
speech  in  the  senate.  I  was  very  much  struck  with
that  speech,  senator — particularly  struck  with  it —
and  for  the  reason  that  it  was  filled,  chock  up,  with
the  very  best  kind  of  anti-slavery  doctrine."  "  Well,
now,"  replied  Hamlin,  laughing,  "  that  is  very  sin-
gular, for  my  one  and  first  recollection  of  yourself
is  of  having  heard  you  make  a  speech  in  the  house —
a  speech  that  was  so  full  of  good  humor  and  sharp
points  that  I,  together  with  others  of  your  audi-
tors, was  convulsed  with  laughter."  The  acquaint-
ance, thus  cordially  begun,  ripened  into  a  close
friendship,  and  it  is  affirmed  that  during  all  the
years  of  trial,  war,  and  bloodshed  that  followed,
Abraham  Lincoln  continued  to  repose  the  utmost
confidence  in  his  friend  and  official  associate. —
Hannibal's  cousin,  Cyrus,  educator,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  Me.,  5  Jan..  1811,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1834,  and  at  the  Congregational  theological  semi-
nary, Bangor,  Me.,  in  1837.  He  was  a  missionary
oi  the  American  board  in  Turkey  in  1837-'60,  and
in  the  latter  year  became  president  of  Robert  col-
lege, Constantinople,  which  he  succeeded  in  organ-


66


HAMLIN


HAMMOND


izing  after  a  seven  years'  contest  with  the  Turkish
authorities,  finally  obtaining  an  imperial  edict  that
committed  the  college  to  the  United  States.  He
introduced  into  Constantinople  the  making  of
bread  with  hop  yeast,  in  order  to  give  employment
to  persecuted  Armenians  who  had  been  expelled
from  their  guilds.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Cri-
mean war  there  arose  a  great  demand  for  this
bread,  and  at  its  close  Dr.  Hamlin  had  made  $25,-
000,  which  he  devoted  to  building  churches  and
school-houses.  He  resigned  the  presidency  of
Robert  college  in  1876,  was  professor  of  dogmatic
theology  in  Bangor  seminary  in  1877-80,  presi-
dent of  Middlebury  college  in  1880-'5,  and  since
then  has  resided  in  Lexington,  Mass.  Harvard
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1861,  and  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1870.  His  writings,  which  are  mostly  in  Arme-
nian and  published  in  Constantinople,  include  a
translation  of  Upham's  "Mental  Philosophy,"
"  Papists  and  Protestants  "  (1847) ;  an  "  Arithmetic
for  Armenians"  (1848;  Turkish  translation,  1870);
and  a  critique  on  the  writings  of  Archbishop
Matteos  (1863).  He  has  published  in  English  a
letter  on  "  Cholera  and  its  Treatment,"  which  was
several  times  reprinted  and  widely  circulated  (Bos-
ton, 1865),  and  "  Among  the  Turks  "  (New  York,
1877),  besides  numerous  articles  in  reviews  and
lectures  on  "Free-Trade  and  Protection." — Han-
nibal's son,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hampden,  Me.,
13  Sept.,  1837,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1857,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858.
He  became  major  of  the  18th  Maine  regiment  in
August,  1862,  was  appointed  assistant  adjutant-
general  of  volunteers,  26  April,  1863,  and  served
in  the  field  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from
Chancellorsville  through  the  Gettysburg  campaign
to  that  of  the  Wilderness,  after  which  he  was
put  on  duty  as  inspector  of  artillery,  and  also
served  at  Harper's  Perry  in  1864.  He  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  13  March,
1865.  G-en.  Hamlin  was  city  solicitor  of  Bangor  in
1867,  has  been  register  in  bankruptcy  since  that  year,
and  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1883  and
1885,  serving  in  the  latter  year  as  speaker.  He  has
published  "  The  Insolvent  Laws  of  Maine  "  (Port-
land, Me.,  1878). — Another  son.  Cyrus,  soldier,  b.
in  Hampden,  Me.,  26  April,  1839 ;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  28  Aug.,  1867,  was  educated  at  Hamp-
den academy  and  Waterville  college  (now  Colby
university),  but  was  not  graduated,  fie  entered
the  army  as  captain  and  aide-de-camp  in  1862,  and
served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Fremont,  whose  favor-
able notice  he  attracted  by  his  conduct  at  Cross
Keys.  He  afterward  became  colonel  of  the  80th
regiment  of  colored  troops,  serving  in  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Gulf,  and  on  3  Dec,  1864,  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  commanded
the  military  district  of  Port  Hudson  in  1864-'5,
and  on  13  March,  1865,  was  brevetted  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers.  Gen.  Hamlin  was  among  the
first  to  advocate  raising  colored  troops  and  the  first
that  was  appointed  from  Maine  to  command  a  col-
ored regiment.  After  the  war  he  practised  law  in
New  Orleans,  where  he  took  an  active  part  in  the
movements  of  the  reconstruction  period.  His  death
was  caused  by  disease  contracted  in  the  army. —
Hannibal's  nephew,  Augustus  Choate,  physician,
b.  in  Columbia,  Me.,  28  Aug.,  1828,  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1851,  and  studied  medicine  in  Paris
and  at  Harvard,  where  he  received  his  degree  in
1854.  He  was  surgeon  in  the  army  in  1861-'5,  be-
came medical  director  of  the  11th  corps,  and  was
medical  inspector  during  the  campaign  at  Fort
Wagner,  at  Nashville,  and  elsewhere. In  1865  he


removed  to  Bangor,  Me.,  and  engaged  in  general
practice.  He  has  contributed  articles  on  "  Ali-
mentation," ''  Transfusion,"  "  Transmission  of  Dis-
eases," "  Tetanus,"  and  other  subjects  to  the  medical
journals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  History  of  Ander-
sonville  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  The  Tourmaline  "  (1873) ;
and  "  Leisure  Hours  Among  the  Gems  "  (1884).

HAMLINE,  Leouidas  Lent,  M.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Burlington,  Conn.,  10  May,  1797 ;  d.  in  Mount
Pleasant,  Iowa,  23  March,  1865.  His  education
was  at  first  directed  with  a  view  to  the  Congrega-
tional ministry,  but  that  purpose  was  afterward
abandoned,  and  the  law  was  chosen  instead.  Hav-
ing removed  to  Ohio,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar
at  Lancaster,  and  for  several  years  he  pursued  a
successful  practice.  In  1828  he  became  a  member
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  was  soon  after-
ward licensed  to  preach,  and  before  many  months
he  was  received  into  the  travelling  ministry  in
connection  with  the  Ohio  conference,  and  for  about
eight  years  he  labored  on  circuits  and  stations  in
eastern  Ohio  and  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  became
known  as  a  preacher  of  unusual  eloquence  and
abilities.  He  became  assistant  editor  of  the  "  West-
ern Christian  Advocate "  at  Cincinnati  in  1836,
and  in  1840,  when  the  "  Ladies'  Repository,"  a
monthly  magazine,  was  projected,  he  became  its
editor.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general  con-
ference in  New  York  in  May  and  June,  1844.  at
which  began  the  rupture  between  the  northern
and  southern  parts  of  the  Methodist  body.  He
took  a  lively  interest  in  the  questions  involved  in
that  controversy,  but  less  as  it  involved  the  rela-
tions of  the  church  to  slavery  than  in  respect  to
the  rights  and  powers  of  the  general  conference
over  the  episcopacy.  A  speech  delivered  by  him
in  the  course  of  the  debates,  it  was  believed,  con-
tributed effectually  to  the  result  that  was  finally
reached.  Later,  during  the  same  session,  he  was
elected  and  ordained  a  bishop.  He  discharged
the  duties  of  that  office  with  fidelity  for  six  years,
but  in  1850  was  compelled  by  his  health  to  desist
from  all  labor.  Acting  upon  his  declared  concep-
tion of  the  nature  of  the  episcopal  office — that  it
was  only  an  allotment  of  service — and  because  he
found  himself  permanently  disabled,  he  requested
the  general  conference  of  1852  to  release  him  from
the  duties  of  that  office,  and  to  permit  him  to
take  the  place  of  a  retired  minister  in  the  Cincin-
nati conference,  which  request  was  granted.  See
"  Life  and  Letters  of  Bishop  Hamline,"  by  Dr.
Walter  C.  Palmer  (New  York,  1867).

HAMMETT,  Samuel  A.,  author,  b.  in  Jewett
City,  Conn.,  in  1816;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y,  24
Dec,  1865.  After  his  graduation  at  the  University
of  the  city  of  New  York,  he  passed  some  years  in
the  southwest  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  and
was  clerk  of  the  district  court  of  Montgomery
county,  Texas.  In  1848  he  removed  to  New  York
city  and  became  a  contributor  to  various  journals.
He  published  in  book-form,  under  the  pen-name
of  "  Philip  Paxton,"  "  A  Stray  Yankee  in  Texas  "
(New  York,  1853);  "The  Wonderful  Adventures
of  Captain  Priest "  (1855),  and  other  works.

HAMMOND,  Charles,  lawyer  and  journalist,
b.  in  Baltimore  county,  Md.,  in  September,  1779 ;
d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  3  April,  1840.  When  he
was  six  years  of  age  his  father  removed  to  Ohio
county,  Va.,  where  the  son  worked  for  a  time  on  a
farm.  He  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1801,  and  practised  in  Wellsburg,  Va.  He
became  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  newspapers,
first  obtaining  a  favorable  notice  by  a  series  of  ar-
ticles in  the  "  Scioto  Gazette  "  in  defence  of  Gen.
St. Clair, published the  "  Ohio Federalist " at


HAMMOND


HAMMOND


67


St.  Clairsville  from  August,  1813,  to  1817,  and  in
1822  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  edited  the
"Gazette"  from  1825  till  his  death.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Ohio  legislature  in  1816-'18  and
1820.  and  was  reporter  of  the  Ohio  supreme  court
in  1823-'38.  He  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  a  sys-
tem of  internal  improvements,  and  of  a  thorough
common-school  system.  He  published  "  Reports
of  Cases  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Ohio,  1821-39 "
(9  vols.,  Cincinnati,  1833-40).

HAMMOND,  Dudley  Whitlock,  surgeon,  b.
in  Pickens  county,  S.  C.  12  May,  1809.  He  stud-
ied medicine  in  Charleston,  and  settled  first  at
Ruchersville,  Elbert  co.,  and  then  at  Culloden,
Monroe  co.,  Ga.,  where  he  remained  for  more  than
twenty  years.  In  1853  he  removed  to  Macon,
where  he  still  (1887)  resides.  Although  his  prac-
tice is  general,  he  has  performed  most  of  the  capi-
tal operations,  among  them  that  of  lithotomy
twenty-three  times  without  the  loss  of  a  patient.
He  is  the  author  of  a  paper  on  "  An  Improved
Plan  for  extracting  Urethral  Calculi,"  which  was
published  in  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  Georgia
medical  association  for  1870.

HAMMOND,  Edward  Payson,  evangelist,  b.  in
Ellington,  Conn.,  1  Sept.,  1831.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1858,  studied  two  years  in  the  Union
theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  and  in  1860-'l
completed  his  studies  in  the  theological  seminary
of  the  Free  Church,  Edinburgh,  Scotland.  He  was
ordained  as  an  evangelist  by  the  presbytery  of  New
York,  2  Jan.,  1863,  and  in  the  spring  of  1864  began
laboring  in  Chicago  with  Dwight  L.  Moody.  In
1866-'8  Mr.  Hammond  made  an  extended  tour
through  Great  Britain,  France,  Italy,  Egypt,  and
Palestine,  and  in  1867  held  services  for  six  weeks
in  London,  where  he  was  instrumental  in  establish-
ing the  "  Children's  Special  Service  Mission."  His
labors  in  St.  Louis  in  1874  resulted  in  the  addition
of  over  5,000  members  to  the  different  churches  and
in  the  organization  of  the  "  Evangelical  Alliance  of
St.  Louis,"  comprising  clergymen  of  all  denomina-
tions, who  united  to  prosecute  evangelistic  work.
In  1874  he  also  made  a  missionary  tour  as  far  north
as  Alaska,  reaching  that  territory  before  any  other
missionary.  Mr.  Hammond  has  preached  with
great  success  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States  and
in  Canada,  and  has  spent  in  all  six  and  a  half  years
in  work  in  the  Old  World.  In  1886  he  conducted
a  series  of  meetings  in  London,  extending  over
seven  months.  Mr.  Hammond  was  the  first  to  in-
troduce the  "  service  of  song,"  and  to  use  the  kind
of  hymns  that  have  since  become  popular  -for
such  meetings.  He  is  the  author  of  about  one
hundred  books  and  tracts,  besides  many  hymns.
The  former  include  "  The  Conversion  of  Children  "
(reprinted  in  many  countries,  and  in  lands  as  far
distant  as  southern  India),  "  Gathered  Lambs,"
"The  Child's  Guide  to  Heaven,"  "Sketches  of
Palestine,"  "  Jesus  the  Lamb  of  God,"  "  Little
Ones  in  the  Fold,"  and  "  The  Better  Life."  One
of  Mr.  Hammond's  hymn-books  has  been  trans-
lated into  Norwegian  and  Swedish.  His  history
and  methods  of  work  are  described  in  "  Reaper
and  Harvest,"  by  the  Rev.  Phineas  C.  Headley
(New  York,  1884).

HAMMOND,  Elisha,  educator,  b.  in  New  Bed-
ford, Mass.,  10  Oct.,  1774;  d.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  27
July,  1829.  He  was  descended  from  Benjamin
Hammond,  who  came  from  England  to  Massachu-
setts in  1634.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1802,  and  became  principal  of  the  Mount  Bethel
academy,  Newberry  county,  S.  C,  in  1803.  In
April,  1806,  he  was  chosen  professor  of  languages
in  South  Carolina  college,  but  resigned  at  the  end


kJkA.kJ*.


&/>w»t-  cr\  CC^


of  the  following  year  to  resume  his  connection
with  the  school  at  Mount  Bethel.  There  he  re-
mained until  1815,  when  he  removed  to  Columbia.
Prof.  Hammond  ranked  high  as  a  teacher,  and
from  his  academy  were  graduated  many  well-known
citizens. — His  son,  James  Henry,  statesman,  b.
in  Newberry  district,  15  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  Beech
Island,  Aiken  co.,  S.  C.,  13  Nov.,  1864,  was  gradu-
ated at  South  Carolina  college  in  1825,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828.  In  1830  he  became
the  editor  of  the  "Southern  Times,"  published  at
Columbia,  in  which  he  advocated  nullification.
He  was  throughout
his  life  a  supporter
of  John  C.  Calhoun's
views.  During  the
nullification  excite-
ment he  was  on  the
staff  of  Gov.  Ham-
ilton, and  subse-
quently on  that  of
Gov.  Hayne.  He
was  elected  to  con-
gress, serving  from
7  Dec,  1835,  till  16
Feb.,  1836,  when  he
resigned,  on  account
of  impaired  health,
and  visited  Europe,
remaining  abroad
for  nearly  two  years.
From  1842  till  1844

he  was  governor  of  South  Carolina.  During  his
term  of  office  he  gave  especial  attention  to  the
improvement  of  military  education  in  the  state,
and  established  the  State  geological  and  agricul-
tural survey.  For  the  next  thirteen  years  Mr.
Hammond,  who  had  given  up  the  active  practice
of  his  profession  on  his  marriage  to  a  lady  of  large
fortune,  devoted  his  attention  to  the  development
of  his  estates  and  the  reclaiming  of  waste  land.  He
was  then  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  An-
drew P.  Butler,  and  served  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  11
Nov.,  1860.  In  March,  1858,  he  delivered  a  speech
on  the  admission  of  Kansas,  which  gave  much
offence  at  the  north,  and  won  for  him  the  title  of
"  Mudsill  Hammond."  The  following  is  the  para-
graph to  which  most  exception  was  taken :  "  In
all  social  systems  there  must  be  a  class  to  do  the
mean  duties,  to  perform  the  drudgery  of  life ;  that
is,  a  class  requiring  but  a  low  order  of  intellect
and  but  little  skill.  Its  requisites  are  vigor,  do-
cility, fidelity.  Such  a  class  you  must  have,  or  you
would  not  have  that  other  class  which  leads  prog-
ress, refinement,  and  civilization.  It  constitutes
the  very  mudsills  of  society  and  of  political  gov-
ernment; and  you  might  as  well  attempt  to  build
a  house  in  the  air  as  to  build  either  the  one  or  the
other  except  on  the  mudsills.  Fortunately  for  the
south,  she  found  a  race  adapted  to  that  purpose  to
her  hand — a  race  inferior  to  herself,  but  eminently
qualified  in  temper,  in  vigor,  in  docility,  in  capa-
city to  stand  the  climate,  to  answer  all  her  pur-
poses. We  use  them  for  the  purpose  and  call  them
slaves.  We  are  old-fashioned  at  the  south  yet ;  it
is  a  word  discarded  now  by  ears  polite ;  but  1  will
not  characterize  that  class  at  the  north  with  that
term ;  but  you  have  it ;  it  is  there ;  it  is  every-
where ;  it  is  eternal."  In  a  recent  letter  the  speak-
er's son,  Harry,  thus  explains  the  reference  to
"  mudsills  "  in  the  foregoing  extract :  "  It  is  a  very
great  mistake  to  suppose  that  my  father  could  ever
have  made  a  speech  against  the  working-classes.
...  As  to  '  mudsills,'  a  totally  perverted  meaning
has  been  fastened  to  the  expression. My  father


68


HAMMOND


HAMMOND


had  built  a  mill,  and  four  times  it  had  to  be  taken
down  on  account  of  trouble  with  the  mudsills,
which  had  to  be  placed  in  a  sort  of  quicksand  hard
to  control.  Thus  'mudsills,'  instead  of  meaning
something  low  and  insignificant,  were,  as  I  well
remember,  a  matter  of  paramount  interest  and
importance  to  him.  It  was  just  when  he  had  at
last  placed  his  mudsills  securely  that  he  had  occa-
sion to  use  this  expression."  In  the  same  speech
occurs  the  passage :  "  No,  sir,  you  dare  not  make
war  on  cotton.  No  power  on  earth  dares  make
war  upon  it.  Cotton  is  king.  Until  lately  the
Bank  of  England  was  king,  but  she  tried  to  put
her  screws  as  usual,  the  fall  before  last,  upon  the
cotton-crop,  and  was  utterly  vanquished.  The  last
power  has  been  conquered."  On  the  secession  of
South  Carolina  he  retired  from  the  senate,  and
after  hostilities  began  returned  to  the  superintend-
ence of  his  estates,  being  prevented  by  failing
health  from  active  participation  in  the  war.  While
governor  he  published  a  letter  to  the  Free  church
of  Glasgow,  and  two  others  in  reply  to  an  anti-
slavery  circular  written  by  Thomas  Clarkson,  of
England.  These  letters  called  forth  severe  replies
from  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed,  and,
with  other  essays  on  the  same  subject,  were  issued
in  book-form  under  the  title  "The  Pro-Slavery
Argument "  (Charleston,  1853).  He  was  also  the
author  of  papers  on  agriculture,  manufactures,
banks,  railroads,  and  literary  topics,  and  an  elabo-
rate review  of  the  life,  character,  and  services  of
John  C.  Calhoun,  contained  in  an  address  delivered
in  Charleston  in  November,  1850,  on  the  invitation
of  the  city  council.  This  is  considered  by  many
the  best  effort  of  his  life. — Another  son,  Marcus
Claudius  Marcellus,  soldier,  b.  in  Newberry  dis-
trict, S.  C,  12  Dec,  1814 ;  d.  in  Beech  Island,  Aiken
co.,  S.  C,  23  Jan.,  1876,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1836,  and  assigned  to  the  4th
infantry.  He  was  made  1st  lieutenant,  7  Nov.,
1839,  and  resigned,  31  Dec,  1842,  on  account  of
severe  illness.  From  1842  till  1846  he  was  a  planter
in  Georgia,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican
war  he  was  appointed  additional  paymaster,  and
served  until  15  April,  1847,  when  he  was  again
compelled  to  resign  on  account  of  impaired  health.
He  then  retired  to  a  plantation  at  Hamburg,  S.  C,
whence  he  removed  to  Athens,  Ga.,  in  1860,  and  to
Beech  Island,  S.  C,  in  1863.  He  held  various  com-
missions in  the  state  militia  between  1849  and  1853,
and  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives in  1856-'7.  He  is  the  author  of  various  essays
on  agricultural,  political,  and  military  subjects
published  between  1843  and  1849,  and  of  "  A  Criti-
cal History  of  the  Mexican  War,"  which  appeared
in  the  "  Southern  Quarterly  Review  "  between  1849
and  1853. — Another  son,  John  Fox,  physician,  b.
in  Columbia,  S.  C,  7  Dec,  1821 ;  d.  in  Poughkeep-
sie,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1886,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  the  Medical  college  at  Au-
gusta, Ga.,  and  in  1841  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  appointed
assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  16  Feb.,  1847 ;
major  and  surgeon,  26  Feb.,  1861 :  brevet  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 13  March,  1865,  "  for  faithful  and
meritorious  service  during  the  war";  and  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 26  June,  1876.  In  1849  he  had  medical
charge  of  troops  infected  with  cholera  on  the  west-
ern frontier,  and  served  in  Florida  from  November,
1852,  till  October,  1853,  during  an  epidemic  of
yellow  fever.  In  1862  he  was  medical  director  of
the  2d  army  corps  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  pres-
ent at  the  siege  of  Yorktown  and  the  principal
battles  of  the  peninsula.  After  the  close  of  the
war  he  served  on  various  medical  boards.


HAMMOND,  Jabez  D.,  author,  b.  in  New  Bed-
ford, Mass.,  2  Aug.,  1778;  d.  in  Cherry  Valley,
N.  Y.,  18  Aug.,  1855.  With  a  limited  education
he  taught  at  fifteen,  studied  and  practised  medi-
cine in  Reading,  Vt.,  in  1799,  and  in  1805  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  and  settled  at  Cherry  Valley,
N.  Y.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  4  Dec,  1815,  till  3  March,  1817,  was
state  senator  from  1817  till  1821,  and  in  1822  re-
moved to  Albany,  where  he  practised  his  profes-
sion until  1830.  From  1825  till  1826  he  served  as
a  commissioner  to  settle  the  claims  of  New  York
on  the  Federal  government.  In  1831  he  visited
Europe  for  his  health,  and  on  his  return  again  set-
tled in  Cherry  Valley.  He  was  chosen  county
judge  in  1838,  and  was  one  of  the  regents  of  the
University  of  New  York  from  1845  until  his  death.
Although  he  was  a  Democrat,  he  supported  John
Quincy  Adams  for  the  presidency.  In  1845  Ham-
ilton college  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Political  His-
tory of  New  York  to  December,  1840 "  (2  vols.,
vUbany,  1843  ;  vol.  iii.,  Syracuse)  ;  "  Life  and
Opinions  of  Julius  Melbourn "  (Syracuse,  N.  Y.,
1847);  "Life  of  Silas  Wright"  (1848);  and  "Evi-
dence, Independent  of  Written  Revelation,  of  the
Immortality  of  the  Soul "  (Albany,  1851).

HAMMOND,  Le  Roy,  soldier,  b.  in  Richmond
county,  Va.,  about  1740;  d.  about  1800.  In  1765
he  removed  to  Georgia,  and  thence  to  South  Caro-
lina, where  he  became  a  dealer  in  tobacco.  He
was  commissioned  a  colonel  early  in  the  Revolu-
tionary war,  served  in  the  "  Snow  "  campaign,  and
in  that  of  1776  against  the  Cherokees,  in  which  he
distinguished  himself.  He  was  subsequently  often
employed  both  by  congress  and  the  state  of  South
Carolina  as  Indian  agent.  In  1779  he  took  the
field  with  his  regiment  and  played  an  important
part  in  the  battle  of  Stono  Ferry.  After  the  fall  of
Charleston  he  adopted,  like  Marion  and  others,  a  des-
ultory mode  of  warfare,  and  was  constantly  engaged
in  fighting  the  loyalists,  British,  and  Indians.  In
1781  he  was  at  the  siege  of  Augusta,  afterward  at
that  of  Ninety-Six,  serving  under  Greene,  and,
later,  under  Gen.  Pickens.  After  the  battle  of  Eu-
taw  he  was  active  in  guerilla  warfare.  Col.  Ham-
mond ranked  high  as  a  partisan  leader.

HAMMOND,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Richmond
county,  Va.,  21  Sept.,  1757;  d.  near  Augusta,  Ga.,
11  Sept.,  1842.  He  volunteered  in  an  expedition
against  the  Indians  under  Gov.  Dunmore,  distin-
guishing himself  at  the  battle  of  the  Kanawha.
In  1775  he  raised  a  company  and  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Longbridge.  In  1779  he  was  at  the  bat-
tle of  Stono  Ferry,  S.  C,  under  Gen.  Lincoln.  At
the  siege  of  Savannah  he  was  made  assistant  quar-
termaster, and  at  Blackstocks  he  had  three  horses
shot  under  him  and  was  wounded.  He  was  a
member  of  the  "  council  of  capitulation "  at
Charleston,  and  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Au-
gusta and  the  battles  of  King's  Mountain,  Cow-
pens,  Eutaw,  where  he  was  again  badly  wounded,
and  many  other  engagements.  On  17  Sept.,  1781,
he  was  commissioned  colonel  of  cavalry,  and-
served  under  Gen.  Greene  until  the  end  of  the
war.  He  then  settled  in  Savannah,  and  was  ap-
pointed surveyor-general  of  Georgia.  He  was  also
elected  to  the  legislature  and  fought  in  the  Creek
war  of  1793.  He  was  then  elected  to  congress  as
a  Democrat,  serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3
March,  1805.  He  was  appointed  by  President
Jefferson  military  and  civil  commandant  of  upper
Louisiana,  holding  the  office  from  1805  till  1824,
and  during  the  latter  part  of  the  time  was  receiver
of  public  moneys  in  Missouri. In  the  last-named


HAMMOND


HAMPTON


69


year  he  returned  to  South  Carolina,  and  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  legislature.  He  was  surveyor-
general  in  1825,  and  secretary  of  state  from  1831
till  1835,  when  he  retired  from  public  life.

HAMMOND,  William  Alexander,  physician,
b.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  28  Aug.,  1828.  He  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city
of  New  York,  and
entered  the  U.  S.
army  in  1849  as
assistant  surgeon,
with  the  rank  of
1st  lieutenant.  In
October,  1860,  he
resigned  to  accept
the  professorship  of
anatomy  and  phy-
siology in  the  Uni-
versity of  Maryland,
but  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war
he  again  entered  the

rL \L^fr  _/ army  and  was  as-

Pi  ^>^^t^u^*^w£.  signed  t0  the  or_

ganization  of  gen-
eral hospitals  in  Hagerstown,  Frederick,  and  Bal-
timore. Afterward  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission
urged  his  appointment  as  surgeon-general  of  the
army,  and  in  April,  1862,  he  received  this  commis-
sion with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  in-
stituted radical  changes  in  the  management  of
his  office,  established  the  army  medical  museum
by  special  order,  and  suggested  the  plan  of  the
"  Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the  Rebellion."
Charges  of  irregularities  in  the  award  of  liquor
contracts  were  made  against  him,  and  he  was  tried
by  court-martial,  and  dismissed  from  the  army  in
August,  1864.  He  at  once  removed  to  New  York,
where  he  settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,
and  made  a  specialty  of  diseases  of  the  nervous
system.  In  1867-'73  he  was  professor  of  diseases
of  the  mind  and  nervous  system  in  Bellevue  hos-
pital medical  college,  and  then  was  elected  to  a
similar  chair  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York.  He  remained
there  until  1882,  when  he  became  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  New  York  post-graduate  medical  school,
and  has  since  delivered  lectures  on  his  specialty  in
that  institution.  Dr.  Hammond  has  also  delivered
lectures  in  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Vermont,  and  in  1870  became  physician  at
the  New  York  state  hospital  for  diseases  of  the
nervous  system.  In  1878  a  bill  was  submitted  to
congress  authorizing  the  president  to  review  the
proceedings  of  the  court-martial,  and,  if  justice
demanded,  to  reinstate  Dr.  Hammond.  This
measure  was  passed  by  the  house  unanimously,
and  by  the  senate  with  but  one  dissenting  vote.
In  August,  1879,  it  was  approved  by  the  president,
and  Dr.  Hammond  was  restored  to  his  place  on
the  rolls  of  the  army  as  surgeon-general  and  briga-
dier-general on  the  retired  list.  Besides  contrib-
uting to  current  medical  literature,  he  founded'
and  edited  the  "  Maryland  and  Virginia  Medical
Journal,"  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  "  New
York  Medical  Journal,"  and  established  the  "  Quar-
terly Journal  of  Psychological  Medicine  and  Medi-
cal Jurisprudence,"  becoming  its  editor.  His  medi-
cal works  in  book -form  include  "Physiological
Memoirs"  (Philadelphia,  1863);  "A  Treatise  on
Hygiene,  with  Special  Reference  to  the  Military
Service"  (1863);  "Lectures  on  Venereal  Diseases"
(1864);  "On  Wakefulness,  with  an  Introductory
Chapter  on  the  Physiology  of  Sleep  "  (1865) ;  "  On


Sleep  and  its  Derangements"  (1869);  "Insanity
and  its  Medico  -  Legal  Relations "  (New  York,
1866) ;  "  Physics  and  Physiology  of  Spiritualism  "
(1870) ;  "  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  Svstem,"  which
has  been  translated  into  French  and  Italian  (1871) ;
"  Insanity  in  its  Relation  to  Crime  "  (1873) ;  "  Lec-
tures on  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  Svstem,"  edit-
ed by  T.  M.  B.  Cross  (1874) ;  "  Spiritualism  and
Allied  Causes  and  Conditions  of  Nervous  Derange-
ment "  (1876 ;  reissued  as  "  Certain  Forms  of  Ner-
vous Derangement,"  1880) ;  "  Treatise  on  Insanity
in  its  Medical  Relations  "  (1883) ;  and  "  On  Sexual
Impotence  in  the  Male  "  (1883).  He  has  also  edited
"  Military.  Medical,  and  Surgical  Essays,"  prepared
for  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission  (Philadelphia,
1864),  and  translated  from  the  German,  Meyer's
"  Electricity  in  its  Relations  to  Practical  Medicine  "
(New  York,  1869 ;  new  ed.,  1874).  Dr.  Hammond
is  the  author  of  various  novels,  including  "  Robert
Severne ;  his  Friend  and  Enemies  "  (Philadelphia,
1867);  "Lai"  (New  York,  1884);  "Dr.  Grattan"
(1884) ;  "  Mr.  Oldmixon  "  (1885) ;  "  A  Strong-Mind-
ed Woman,  or  Two  Years  After  "  (1886) ;  and  "  On
the  Susquehanna  "  (1887).

HAMOND,  Sir  Andrew  Snape,  British  naval
officer,  b.  in  Blackheath,  England,  17  Dec,  1738;  d.
near  Lynn,  Norfolk,  England,  12  Oct.,  1828.  He
entered  the  British  navy  in  1753,  served  under  Lord
Howe,  and  became  a  post -captain  in  1780.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  joined
the  "  Roebuck,"  a  forty-four  gun  ship,  was  pres-
ent at  the  occupation  of  New  York,  and  destroyed
the  "  Delaware  "  frigate  and  other  vessels  engaged
in  obstructing  the  Delaware  river.  He  took  part  in
the  unsuccessful  attack  on  Mud  island  in  October,
1777,  as  also  in  the  successful  one  in  November  of
that  year.  He  was  knighted  in  1778,  acted  as
captain  of  the  fleet  at  the  reduction  of  Charles-
ton, S.  C.  in  1780,  and  late  in  the  year  was  ap-
pointed lieutenant-governor  and  commander-in-
chief  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  returned  to  England
in  1783,  was  made  a  baronet  on  18  Dec,  of  that
year,  became  a  comptroller  in  the  navy  in  1794,
and  retired  in  1806  with  a  pension.

HAMPTON,  Wade,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Caro-
lina in  1754 ;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  4  Feb.,  1835.
He  served  with  distinction  in  the  Revolution  un-
der Marion  and  Sumter,  and  after  the  war  was  in
congress  in  1795-'7.  He  was  a  presidential  elec-
tor in  1801,  and  in  1803-5  served  again  in  con-
gress, having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat.  He  was
made  a  colonel  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1808,  placed
in  command  of  one  of  the  regiments  that  had  been
raised  in  apprehension  of  war  with  England,  and
in  February,  1809,  was  promoted  to  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  stationed  at  New  Orleans.  In  conse-
quence of  continual  disagreements  with  his  subor-
dinates he  was  superseded  by  Gen.  James  Wilkin-
son in  1812,  and  during  the  war  with  England
commanded  a  force  on  the  northern  frontier,  hav-
ing been  given  a  major-general's  commission  on  2
March,  1813.  On  26  Oct.,  1813,  at  Chateaugay,
he  attacked  Sir  George  Prevost,  who  repelled  him
with  an  inferior  force.  He  afterward  frustrated
the  attempt  on  Montreal  by  his  unwillingness  to
co-operate  with  his  old  rival,  Gen.  Wilkinson.  He
resigned  his  commission  on  6  April,  1814,  and  re-
turned to  South  Carolina.  He  acquired  a  large
fortune  by  land  speculations,  and  at  his  death  was
supposed  to  be  the  wealthiest  planter  in  the  United
States,  owning  3,000  slaves.  Gen.  Hampton  was
a  fair  example  of  the  old-fashioned  slave-holding
oligarchs,  being  of  a  high,  proud,  stern,  and  in-
flexible character,  and  ably  administering  his  large
estate.— His  son,  Wade,  b.  21  April,  1791 ;  d.  on  a


70


HAMPTON


HANAFORD


Elantation  near  Mississippi  river,  10  Feb.,  1858,
ecame  lieutenant  of  dragoons  in  1813,  and  was
acting  inspector-general  and  aide  to  Gen.  Jackson
at  New  Orleans  in  January,  1815.  He  succeeded
to  his  father's  estates ;  his  home  at  Columbia,  S.  C,
was  famous  for  its  beauty  and  elegance,  and  the
grounds  were  improved  at  a  cost  of  $60,000,  a
large  sum  for  that  time.  His  sisters  married  Gen.
John  S.  Preston  and  Gov.  Richard  Manning. —
Wade,  son  of  the  second  Wade,  b.  in  Columbia,  S.
C.,  in  1818,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of

South  Caroli-
na, and  after-
ward studied
law,  but  with-
out the  inten-
tion of  practis-
ing. Under  his
father's  train-
ing he  became
a  good  horse-
man, a  fa-
mous hunter,
and  an  accom-
plished fish-
erman. He
served  in  the
legislature  of
South  Caroli-
na in  early  life,
but  his  politi-
cal views  were
those  of  a  Democrat  of  a  national,  rather  than  a  se-
cession, tendency,  and  were  not  popular  in  his  state.
His  speech  against  the  reopening  of  the  slave-trade
was  called  by  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  "  a  mas-
ter-piece of  logic,  directed  by  the  noblest  senti-
ments of  the  Christian  and  patriot."  His  earlier
life  was,  however,  devoted  to  his  plantation  inter-
ests in  South  Carolina  and  Mississippi,  and  to  the
pursuits  of  a  man  of  fortune.  When  the  civil  war
began,  Hampton  first  enlisted  as  a  private,  but
soon  raised  a  command  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and
artillery,  which  was  known  as  "  Hampton's  Legion,"
and  won  distinction  in  the  war.  At  Bull  Run  600
of  his  infantry  held  for  some  time  the  Warrenton
road  against  Keyes's  corps,  and  were  sustaining
Bee  when  Jackson  came  to  their  aid.  In  the  pen-
insular campaign  they  were  again  distinguished,
and  at  Seven  Pines  lost  half  their  number,  and
Hampton  himself  received  a  painful  wound  in  the
foot.  Soon  afterward  he  was  made  brigadier-gen-
eral of  cavalry,  and  assigned  to  Gen.  J.  B.  B.  Stu-
art's command.  He  was  frequently  selected  for  de-
tached service,  in  which  he  was  uncommonly  success-
ful. In  the  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania  campaigns
of  1862-'3  Hampton  was  actively  engaged,  and  he
distinguished  himself  at  Gettysburg,  receiving
three  wounds.  It  is  said  that  twenty-one  out  of
twenty-three  field-officers  and  more  than  half  the
men  in  Hampton's  command  were  killed  or
wounded  in  this  battle.  Hampton  was  made  a
major-general,  with  rank  from  3  Aug.,  1863.  In
1864,  after  several  days'  fighting,  he  gave  Sheridan
a  check  at  Trevillian's  Station,  which  broke  up  a
plan  of  campaign  that  included  a  junction  with
Hunter  and  the  capture  of  Lynchburg.  In  twenty-
three  days  he  captured  over  3,000  prisoners  and
much  material  of  war,  with  a  loss  of  719  men.  He
was  made  commander  of  Lee's  cavalry  in  August,
with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general,  and  in  Septem-
ber struck  the  rear  of  the  National  army  at  City
Point,  bringing  away  400  prisoners  and  2,486  beeves.
Soon  afterward,  in  another  action,  he  captured  500
prisoners. In  one  of  these  attacks  he  lost  his  son  in


battle.  Hampton  was  then  detached  to  take  com-
mand of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston's  cavalry,  and  did
what  he  could  to  arrest  the  advance  of  Sherman's
army  northward  from  Savannah  in  the  spring  of
1865.  After  the  unfortunate  burning  of  Columbia,
S.  C,  on  its  evacuation  by  the  Confederates,  a
sharp  discussion  arose  between  Gen.  Hampton  and
Gen.  Sherman,  each  charging  the  other  with  the
wilful  destruction  of  the  city.  After  the  war  he
at  once  engaged  in  cotton-planting,  but  was  not
successful.  He  accepted  from  the  first  all  the
legitimate  consequences  of  defeat,  an  entire  sub-
mission to  the  law,  and  the  civil  and  political
equality  of  the  negro ;  but  he  has  steadily  defended
the  motives  and  conduct  of  his  people  and  their
leaders.  In  1866,  speaking  of  the  negro,  he  said :
"  As  a  slave,  he  was  faithful  to  us ;  as  a  free  man,
let  us  treat  him  as  a  friend.  Deal  with  him  frank-
ly, justly,  kindly."  During  the  reconstruction  pe-
riod Hampton's  conciliatory  policy  found  little  fa-
vor for  some  time,  but  in  1876  he  was  nominated  for
governor  against  Daniel  H.  Chamberlain.  Each
claimed  to  be  elected,  and  two  governments  were
organized,  but  Mr.  Chamberlain  finally  yielded  his
claims.  (See  Chamberlain,  Daniel  H.)  In  1878
he  met  with  an  accident  by  which  he  lost  a  leg :
but,  while  his  life  was  despaired  of,  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  is  still  serving  (1887).
In  the  senate  his  course  has  been  that  of  a  con-
servative Democrat.  He  has  advocated  a  sound
currency,  resisting  all  inflation,  and  has  generally
acted  in  concert  with  Thomas  A.  Bayard,  whose
aspirations  for  the  presidency  he  has  supported.
Gen.  Hampton  married  in  early  life  Margaret
Preston,  youngest  daughter  of  Gen.  Francis  Pres-
ton. His  second  wife  was  the  daughter  of  Senator
George  McDuffie,  of  South  Carolina.

HAMTRAMCK,  John  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in
Canada  in  1757;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  11  April,
1803.  He  served  as  captain  in  Dubois's  New  York
regiment  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  was  appointed
major  of  infantry,  29  Sept.,  1789,  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  commanding  the  1st  sub-legion,  18  Feb.,
1793.  He  held  command  of  the  left  wing  of  Gen.
Wayne's  armv,  and  was  distinguished  in  his  victory
on  the  Miami  on  20  Aug.,  1794.  In  1802  he  re-
ceived the  commission  of  colonel.  He  was  an  ex-
emplary disciplinarian.  A  monument  was  erected
to  his  memory  and  placed  in  the  grounds  of  St.
Anne's  Roman  Catholic  church,  Detroit,  by  the
officers  whom  he  had  commanded. — His  son,  John
Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,  in  1798  ;
d.  in  Shepherdstown,  Va.,  21  April,  1858,  was  a
sergeant  in  Zachary  Taylor's  expedition  up  the
Mississippi  river  in  1814,  and,  owing  to  his  bravery
in  an  action  opposite  the  mouth  of  Rock  river,
Illinois,  19  July,  1814,  with  700  Sac  and  Fox
Indians  supported  by  British  batteries,  received
an  appointment  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He
was  graduated  in  1819  and  assigned  to  the  artillery,
but  resigned  in  1822,  and  settled  near  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  where  he  became  a  planter.  From  1826  till
1831  he  was  Indian  agent  for  the  Osage  tribe.  He
removed  to  Shepherdstown,  Va.,  in  1832,  where  he
engaged  as  a  planter.  In  1835  he  was  captain  of
the  Virginia  militia,  and  held  this  post  until  his
death.  He  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  colonel
of  the  1st  regiment  of  Virginia  volunteers.  From
8  March  till  20  July,  1848,  he  was  governor  of
Saltillo.  From  1850  till  1854  he  was  mayor  of
Shepherdstown.  In  1853  he  was  appointed  justice
of  the  Jefferson  county  court,  which  office  he  held
until  the  time  of  his  death.

HANAFORD,  Phebe  Anne,  author,  b.  in  Nan-
tucket,  Mass.,  6  May, 1829. Her  father, Capt.


HANCOCK


HANCOCK


71


George  W.  Coffin,  was  a  ship-owner  and  merchant.
Phebe  was  educated  in  the  schools  of  her  native
town,  and  under  the  Rev.  Ethan  Allen,  rector  of
St.  Paul's  Episcopal  church  there.  In  1849  she
married  Joseph  H.  Hanaford,  a  teacher.  After
teaching  several  years  in  Massachusetts,  she  edited
in  1866-'8  the  "Ladies'  Repository"  and  "The
Myrtle,"  and  in  February,  1868,  began  regular
ministerial  work,  having  been  ordained  the  first
woman  minister  in  the  Universalist  church.  Since
that  time  she  has  been  pastor  of  churches  in  Hing-
ham  and  Waltham,  Mass.,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and
Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  and  made  preaching-tours
throughout  the  middle  states,  Ohio,  and  Illinois.
She  is  now  (1887)  pastor  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  New  Haven,  Conn.  In  1870-'2  she  was  at
various  times  chaplain  of  the  Connecticut  legisla-
ture. She  has  been  grand  worthy  chaplain  of  the
Good  Templars,  and  represented  the  grand  lodge  in
the  right  worthy  lodge  at  Detroit  in  1867.  Besides
poems,  addresses,  and  contributions  to  current  lit-
erature, she  has  published  "  Lucretia  the  Quaker-
ess "  (Boston,  1853) ;  "  Leonette,  or  Truth  sought
and  Found"  (Philadelphia,  1857);  "The  Best  of
Books,  and  its  History "  (1857) ;  "  Abraham  Lin-
coln "  (Boston,  1865) ;  "  Frank  Nelson,  the  Run-
away Boy"  (1865);  "The  Soldier's  Daughter"
(1866) ;  "  The  Captive  Boy  of  Tierra  del  Fuego "
(New  York,  1867) ;  "  Field,  Gunboat,  Hospital,  and
Prison"  (Boston,  1867);  "The  Young  Captain"
(1868):  "George  Peabody"  (1870);  "From  Shore
to  Shore,  and  Other  Poems"  (1870);  "Charles
Dickens  "  (1870) ;  "  Women  of  the  Century  "  (1877) ;
and  "Ordination  Book"  (New  Haven,  1887).

HANCOCK,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1755 ;  d.  in  Fotheringay,  Va.,  1  Aug.,  1820.  He
was  educated  by  private  tutors.  During  the  Revo-
lution he  served  as  colonel  of  infantry.  In  1793
he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  re-
elected for  the  following  term,  serving  until  1797.
He  was  greatly  beloved  by  his  associates.

HANCOCK,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  in  1671 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  5  Dec,
1752.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1689,
studied  for  the  ministry,  was  called  to  preach  as  a
candidate  by  the  Congregational  church  at  Lex-
ington, Mass.,  in  1697,  and  in  the  following  year
was  ordained  its  pastor.  Here  he  continued  to
preach  until  his  death.  In  1734  his  son,  Ebenezer,
was  given  him  as  an  assistant,  but  the  young  man
died  suddenly  in  1740,  before  he  had  completed
his  thirtieth  year.  Mr.  Hancock  was  the  author  of
four  published  sermons  delivered  on  special  occa-
sions between  1722  and  1748. — His  son,  Thomas,
merchant,  b.  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  in  1702 ;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1764,  began  life  as  a  book-
seller, but  afterward  became  a  successful  merchant.
Having  no  children,  he  left  most  of  his  large  for-
tune to  his  nephew,  John.  Among  his  bequests
were  £1,000  to  Harvard  college  wherewith  to  found
a  professorship  of  the  Hebrew  and  Oriental  lan-
guages, £1,000  for  propagating  the  gospel  among
the  Indians,  and  £600  to  the  town  of  Boston,  to  be
used  in  the  erection  of  an  insane  hospital.  He  was
liberal  in  his  religious  and  political  sentiments,
but  inclined  to  take  part  with  the  royal  govern-
ment in  its  disputes  with  the  colonies.  He  was  a
member  of  the  house  of  representatives,  and  of  the
council  of  Massachusetts. — Another  son,  John,
clergyman,  b.  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  in  1703 ;  d.  in
Braintree  (now  Quincy),  Mass.,  7  May,  1744,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1719,  and  ordained  at
Braintree,  2  Nov.,  1726,  where  he  remained  until
his  death.  He  possessed  good  talents,  and  was
noted  for  diligence,  prudence,  and  fidelity. He


was  the  author  of  several  sermons  and  letters
printed  between  1738  and  1748. — The  second  John's
son,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,  12  Jan.,
1737;  d.  there,  8  Oct.,  1793,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1754.  On  the  death  of  his  father  he  was
adopted  by  his  uncle,  Thomas,  who  took  him  into
his  counting-house  and  left  him  a  large  fortune,  the
nephew  succeeding  to  the  business.  In  1766  he
was  chosen  to  represent  Boston  in  the  Massa-
chusetts house  of  representatives  with  James  Otis,
Thomas  Cushing,  and  Samuel  Adams,  "where,"
says  Eliot,  "  he  blazed  a  Whig  of  the  first  magni-
tude." The  seizure  of  his  sloop,  the  "  Liberty,"
for  an  alleged  evasion  of  the  laws  of  trade,  caused
a  riot,  the  royal  commissioners  of  customs  barely
escaping  with  their  lives.  After  the  affray  known
as  the  "  Boston  massacre,"  5  March,  1770,  he  was
a  member  of  the  committee  to  demand  of  the  royal
governor  the  removal  of  the  troops  from  the  city ;
and  at  the  funeral  of  the  slain  he  delivered  an  ad-
dress so  glowing  and  fearless  in  its  reprobation  of
the  conduct  of  the  soldiery  and  their  leaders  as
greatly  to  offend
the  governor.  In
1774  he  was  elect-
ed, with  Samuel
Adams,  a  mem-
ber of  the  Provin-
cial congress  at
Concord,  Mass.,
and  subsequently
became  its  presi-
dent. It  was  to
secure  the  persons
of  these  two  pa-
triots that  the  ex-
pedition to  Con-
cord in  April,
1775,  which  led
to  the  battle  of
Lexington,  was
undertaken  by
the  authorities.  It  was,  however,  futile,  as  they  suc-
ceeded in  making  their  escape.  On  12  June,  follow-
ing, Gen.  Gage  issued  a  proclamation  offering  par-
don to  all  the  rebels,  excepting  Samuel  Adams  and
John  Hancock,  "  whose  offences,"  it  was  declared,
"  are  of  too  flagitious  a  nature  to  admit  of  any  other
consideration  than  that  of  condign  punishment."
Mr.  Hancock  was  a  delegate  from  Massachusetts
to  the  Continental  congress  from  1775  till  1780,
and  from  1785  till  1786,  serving  as  president  of
that  body  from  May,  1775,  till  October,  1777.  The
Declaration  of  Independence,  as  first  published,
bore  only  his  name  as  president.  In  1776  he  was
commissioned  major-general  of  the  Massachusetts
militia,  and  in  August,  1778,  commanded  the  con-
tingent of  that  state  in  the  expedition  against
Rhode  Island.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massa-
chusetts constitutional  convention  of  1780,  and
was  governor  of  the  state  from  the  latter  year  till
1785,  and  again  from  1787  until  his  death,  being
re-elected  annually.  In  the  presidential  election
of  1789,  Gov.  Hancock  received  four  electoral  votes.
He  was  a  man  of  strong  common  sense  and  decision
of  character,  of  polished  manners,  easy  address,
affable,  liberal,  and  charitable.  In  his  public
speeches  he  displayed  a  high  degree  of  eloquence.
As  a  presiding  officer  he  was  dignified,  impartial,
quick  of  apprehension,  and  always  commanded
the  respect  of  congress.  He  employed  his  large
fortune  for  useful  and  benevolent  purposes,  and
was  a  liberal  donor  to  Harvard  college.  When  the
best  method  of  driving  the  British  from  Boston
was  under  discussion  at  a  patriotic  club  in  that


72


HANCOCK


HANCOCK


town,  he  is  said  to  have  declared,  "  Burn  Boston,
and  make  John  Hancock  a  beggar,  if  the  public
good  requires  it."  In  the  autumn  of  1776  congress
gave  Washington  instructions  to  destroy  Boston
if  it  should  be  necessary  to  do  so  in  order  to  dis-
lodge the  enemy.  Mr.  Hancock  then  wrote  to  that
officer  to  the  effect  that,  although  probably  the
largest  property-owner  in  the  city,  "  he  was  anxious
the  thing  should  be  done  if  it  would  benefit  the
cause." John  Adams  said  of  his  character :  "  Nor


were  his  talents  or  attainments  inconsiderable.
They  were  far  superior  to  many  who  have  been
much  more  celebrated.  He  had  a  great  deal  of
political  sagacity  and  insight  into  men.  He  was
by  no  means  a  contemptible  scholar  or  orator.
Compared  with  Washington,  Lincoln,  or  Knox,  he
was  learned."  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from
Yale  and  Princeton  in  1769,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Brown  in  1788,  and  from  Harvard  in  1792.
The  illustration  represents  the  Hancock  house,
which  stood  in  Beacon  street,  Boston.

HANCOCK,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Jackson  county,
Ala.,  29  Oct.,  1824.  After  two  years  in  the  Uni-
versity of  East  Tennessee,  Knoxville,  he  studied
law  in  Winchester,  Tenn.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1846,  and  setted  in  Texas  in  1847.  In  that  year
he  held  the  office  of  state's  attorney.  He  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  district  court  of  the  state  in
1851,  where  he  served  until  his  resignation  in  1855.
In  1860-'l  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  but
was  expelled  on  refusing  to  take  the  oath  of  alle-
giance to  the  southern  Confederacy.  He  declined
to  take  arms  during  the  civil  war,  and,  in  order  to
avoid  conscription,  went  to  Mexico  in  1864,  and
subsequently  to  New  York  and  Kentucky.  After
witnessing  Gen.  Lee's  surrender,  he  returned  to
Texas,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  restoration  of
order.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in  1866,  and  was  a  member  of
congress  from  1872  till  1877,  and  again  in  1881-'3,
having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat.  During  his
term  of  service  he  secured  the  passage  of  acts
changing  the  manner  of  issuing  rations  to  Indians
on  the  reservations,  so  that  they  were  given  every
seventh  day;  prohibiting  hunting-parties  unless
accompanied  by  U.  S.  troops,  thus  ending  Indian
raids  from  the  reservations ;  and  establishing  a
military  telegraph  around  the  frontiers  of  Texas.

HANCOCK,  Winfleld  Scott,  soldier,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery Square,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  14  Feb.,
1824 ;  d.  on  Governor's  Island,  New  York  harbor,  9
Feb.,  1886.  His  grandfather,  Richard  Hancock,  of
Scottish  birth,  was  one  of  the  impressed  American
seamen  of  the  war  of  1812  who  were  incarcerated
in  Dartmoor  prison  in  England.  His  father,  Ben-
jamin Franklin  Hancock,  was  born  in  Philadel-


phia, and  when  quite  a  young  man  was  thrown
upon  his  own  resources,  having  displeased  his
guardian  by  not  marrying  in  the  Society  of  Friends.
He  supported  himself  and  wife  by  teaching  while
studying  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828,  and
removed  to  Norristown,  where  he  practised  his  pro-
fession forty  years,  earning  the  reputation  of  a  well-
read,  judicious,  and  successful  lawyer.  Winfield  S.
Hancock  had  the  combined  advantages  of  home  in-
struction and  a  course  in  the  Norristown  academy
and  the  public  high-school.  He  early  evinced  a
taste  for  military  exercises,  and  at  the  age  of  six-
teen entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he
was  graduated,  1  July,  1844.  He  was  at  once
brevetted  2d  lieutenant  in  the  6th  infantry,  and
assigned  to  duty  at  Fort  Towson,  Indian  terri-
tory. He  received  his  commission  as  2d  lieuten-
ant while  his  regiment  was  stationed  on  the  fron-
tier of  Mexico,  where  the  difficulties  that  resulted
in  the  Mexican  war  had  already  begun.  He  was
ordered  to  active  service  in  the  summer  of  1847,
joined  the  army  of  Gen.  Scott  in  its  advance  upon
the  Mexican  capital,  participated  in  the  four  prin-
cipal battles  of  the  campaign,  and  was  brevetted
1st  lieutenant  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct
in  those  of  Contreras  and  Churubusco.  From  1848
till  1855  he  served  as  regimental  quartermaster  and
adjutant,  being  most  of  the  time  stationed  at  St.
Louis. On  7  Nov.,  1855,  he  was  appointed  assistant

Quartermaster  with  the  rank  of  captain,  and  or-
ered  to  Fort  Myers,  Fla.,  where  Gen.  William  S.
Harney  was  in  command  of  the  military  forces  op-
erating against  the  Seminoles.  He  served  under  this
officer  during  the  troubles  in  Kansas  in  1857-'8,
and  afterward  accompanied  his  expedition  to  Utah,
where  serious  complications  had  arisen  between
the  Gentiles  and  the  Mormons.  From  1859  till
1861  Capt.  Hancock  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the
southern  district  of  California.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  in  1861  he  asked  to  be  relieved
from  duty  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  was  transferred
to  more  active  service  at  the  seat  of  war.  In  a  let-
ter to  a  friend  at  this  time  he  said :  "  My  politics
are  of  a  practical  kind — the  integrity  of  the  coun-
try, the  supremacy  of  the  Federal  government,  an
honorable  peace,  or  none  at  all."  He  was  commis-
sioned a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln,  23  Sept.,  1861,  and  at  once  bent  all
his  energies  to  aid  in  the  organization  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  During  the  peninsular  campaign
under  Gen.  McClellan  he  was  especially  conspicu-
ous at  the  battles  of  Williamsburg  and  Frazier's
Farm.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  subsequent
campaign  in  Maryland,  at  the  battles  of  South
Mountain  and  Antietam,  and  was  assigned  to  the
command  of  the  1st  division  of  the  2d  army  corps,
on  the  battle-field,  during  the  second  day's  fight  at
Antietam,  17  Sept.,  1862.  He  was  soon  afterward
made  a  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  com-
manded the  same  division  in  the  attempt  to  storm
Marye's  Heights,  at  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,
13  Dec,  1862.  In  this  assault  Gen.  Hancock  led
his  men  through  such  a  fire  as  has  rarely  been  en-
countered in  warfare.  He  commanded  5,006  men,
and  left  2,013  of  them  on  the  field.  In  the  three
days'  fight  at  Chancellorsville,  in  May,  1863,  Han-
cock's division  took  a  prominent  part.  While  on
the  march  through  western  Maryland  in  pursuit  of
the  invading  army  of  Gen.  Lee,  on  25  June,  he  was
ordered  by  the  president  to  assume  command  of
the  2d  army  corps.  On  the  27th  Gen.  Hooker
asked  to  be  relieved  from  the  command  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac ;  and  orders  from  the  war
department  reached  his  headquarters  near  Fred-
erick, Md.,  assigning  Maj.-Gen.  George  G.  Meade


HANCOCK


HANCOCK


73


to  its  command.  On  1  July  the  report  reached
Gen.  Meade,  who  was  fifteen  miles  distant,  that
there  was  fighting  at  Gettysburg,  and  that  Gen.
Reynolds  had  been  killed.  Gen.  Meade,  who  knew
nothing  of  Gettysburg,  sent  Gen.  Hancock  with
orders  to  take  immediate  command  of  the  forces
and  report  what  should  be  done ;  whether  to  give
the  enemy  battle  there,  or  fall  back  to  another  pro-
posed line.  Hancock  reported  that  he  considered
Gettysburg  the  place  to  fight  the  coming  battle,  and
continued  in  command  until  the  arrival  of  Meade.
In  the  decisive  action  of  3  July  he  commanded  on
the  left  centre,  which  was  the  main  point  assailed
by  the  Confederates,  and  was  shot  from  his  horse.
Though  dangerously  wounded,  he  remained  on  the
field  till  he  saw  that  the  enemy's  assault  was
broken,  when  he  despatched  his  aide-de-camp,  Maj.
W.  G.  Mitchell,  with  the  following  message :  "  Tell
Gen.  Meade  that  the  troops  under  my  command
have  repulsed  the  enemy's  assault,  and  that  we
have  gained  a  great  victory.  The  enemy  is  now
flying  in  all  directions  in  my  front."  Gen.  Meade
returned  this  reply :  "  Say  to  Gen.  Hancock  that  I
regret  exceedingly  that  he  is  wounded,  and  that  I
thank  him  in  the  name  of  the  country  and  for  my-
self for  the  service  he  has  rendered  to-day."  In  a
report  to  Gen.  Meade,  after  he  had  been  carried
from  the  field,  he  says  that,  when  he  left  the  line
of  battle,  "  not  a  rebel  is  in  sight  upright,  and  if
the  5th  and  Oth  corps  are  pressed  up,  the  enemy
will  be  destroyed."  Out  of  fewer  than  10,000  men
the  2d  corps  lost  at  Gettysburg  about  4,000  killed
or  wounded.  It  captured  4,500  prisoners  and
about  thirty  colors.  Gen.  Hancock  at  first  received
but  slight  credit  for  the  part  he  took  in  this  battle,
his  name  not  being  mentioned  in  the  joint  resolu-
tion passed  by  congress,  28  Jan.,  1864,  which
thanked  Meade,  Hooker,  Howard,  and  the  officers
and  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  generally.
But  justice  was  only  delayed,  as,  on  21  April,  1866,
congress  passed  a  resolution  thanking  him  for  his
services  in  the  campaign  of  1863.

Disabled  by  his  wound,  he  was  not  again  em-
ployed on  active  duty  until  March,  1864,  being
meanwhile  engaged  in  recruiting  the  2d  army
corps,  of  which  he  resumed  command  at  the  open-
ing of  the  spring  campaign  of  that  year,  and  bore
a  prominent  part  in  the  battles  of  the  Wilderness
and  Spottsylvania,  where  the  fighting  was  almost
continuous  from  the  5th  to  the  26th  of  May.  In  the
engagement  at  Spottsylvania  Court-House,  Gen.
Hancock,  on  the  night  of  the  11th,  moved  to  a  po-
sition within  1,200  yards  of  Gen.  Lee's  right  cen-
tre, where  it  formed  a  sharp  salient  since  known  as
"the  bloody  angle,"  and  early  on  the  morning  of
the  12th  he  gave  the  order  to  advance.  His  heavy
column  overran  the  Confederate  pickets  without
firing  a  shot,  burst  through  the  abatis,  and  after  a
short  hand-to-hand  conflict  inside  the  intrench-
ments,  captured  "nearly  4,000  prisoners,  twenty
pieces  of  artillery,  with  horses,  caissons,  and  mate-
rial complete,  several  thousand  stand  of  small-
arms,  and  upward  of  thirty  colors."  The  fighting
at  this  point  was  as  fierce  as  any  during  the  war,
the  battle  raging  furiously  and  incessantly  along
the  whole  line  throughout  the  day  and  late  into
the  night.  Gen.  Lee  made  five  separate  assaults  to
retake  the  works,  but  without  success.  In  the  sub-
sequent operations  of  the  army,  at  the  crossing  of
the  North  Anna,  the  second  battle  of  Cold  Harbor,
and  the  assault  on  the  lines  in  front  of  Petersburg,
Gen.  Hancock  was  active  and  indefatigable  till  17
June,  when  his  Gettysburg  wound,  breaking  out
afresh,  became  so  dangerous  that  he  was  compelled
to  go  on  sick-leave,  but  resumed  his  command


again  in  ten  days.  He  was  appointed  a  brigadier-
general  in  the  regular  army,  12  Aug.,  1864,  "for
gallant  and  distinguished  services  in  the  battles  of
the  Wilderness,  Spottsylvania,  and  Cold  Harbor,
and  in  all  the  operations  of  the  army  in  Virginia
under  Lieut.-Gen.  Grant."  On  21  Aug.  the  2d
corps  was  brought  to  Petersburg  by  a  long  night
march,  and  on  the  25th  occurred  the  only  notable
disaster  in  Hancock's  career.  While  he  was  in-
trenched at  Ream's  Station  on  the  Weldon  rail-
road, which  the  corps  had  torn  up.  his  lines  were
carried  by  a  powerful  force  of  the  enemy,  and
many  of  his  men  captured.  The  troops  forming
the  remnants  of  his  corps  refused  to  bestir  them-
selves, and  even  the  few  veterans  left  seemed  dis-
heartened by  the  slaughter  they  had  seen  and
the  fatigues  they  had  undergone.  Gen.  Morgan's
account  of  the  battle  describes  the  commander,
covered  with  dust,  begrimed  with  powder  and
smoke,  laying  his  hand  upon  a  staff -officer's  shoul-
der and  saying :  "  Colonel,  I  do  not  care  to  die,  but  I
pray  to  God  1  may  never  leave  this  field."  In  the
movement  against  the  South  Side  railroad,  which
began  26  October,  Gen.  Hancock  took  a  leading
part,  and,  although  the  expedition  failed,  his  share
in  it  was  brilliant  and  successful.  This  was  his
last  action.  On  26  Nov.  he  was  called  to  Washing-
ton to  organize  a  veteran  corps  of  50,000  men,  and
continued  in  the  discharge  of  that  duty  till  26
Feb.,  1865,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  Middle  military  division,  and  ordered  to
Winchester,  Va.,  to  relieve  Gen.  Sheridan  from  the
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah.  The
latter  set  out  the  next  morning  with  a  large  force
of  cavalry  on  his  expedition  down  the  Shenandoah
valley.  Gen.  Hancock  now  devoted  himself  to  or-
ganizing and  equipping  a  force  as  powerful  as  pos-
sible from  the  mass  at  his  command ;  and  his  suc-
cess was  acknowledged  in  a  despatch  from  the
secretary  of  war.  After  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent Lincoln,  Gen.  Hancock's  headquarters  were
transferred  to  Washington,  and  he  was  placed  in
command  of  the  defences  of  the  capital.  On  26
July,  1866,  he  was  appointed  a  major-general  in
the  regular  army,  and  on  the  10th  of  the  following
month  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  De-
partment of  the  Missouri,  where  he  conducted  a  suc-
cessful warfare  against  the  Indians  on  the  plains,
until  relieved  by  Gen.  Sheridan.  He  was  trans-
ferred to  the  command  of  the  5th  military  district,
comprising  Texas  and  Louisiana,  26  Aug.,  1867,
with  headquarters  at  New  Orleans.  At  this  time
he  issued  his  "  General  Order  No.  40,"  which  made
it  plain  that  his  opinion  as  to  the  duties  of  a  mili-
tary commander  in  time  of  peace,  and  as  to  the
rights  of  the  southern  states,  were  not  consistent
with  the  reconstruction  policy  determined  upon  by
congress.  He  was  therefore  relieved  at  his  own  re-
quest, 28  March,  1868,  and  given  the  command  of
the  Division  of  the  Atlantic,  with  headquarters  in
New  York  city.  After  the  accession  of  Gen.  Grant
to  the  presidency,  he  was  sent,  5  March,  1869,  to
the  Department  of  Dakota;  but  on  the  death  of
Gen.  Meade,  6  Nov.,  1872,  he  was  again  assigned  to
the  Division  of  the  Atlantic.  Gen.  Hancock's  name
was  favorably  mentioned  in  1868  and  1872  as  a
candidate  for  presidential  honors,  and  he  was  nom-
inated the  candidate  of  the  Democratic  party  in  the
Cincinnati  convention,  24  June,  1880.  On  the  first
ballot  he  received  171  votes,  in  a  convention  con-
taining 738  members,  and  Senator  Bayard,  of  Dela-
ware, 153i.  The  remainder  of  the  votes  were  scat-
tered among  twelve  candidates.  On  the  second  bal-
lot Gen.  Hancock  received  320  votes,  Senator  Thom-
as F.  Bayard  111,  and  Speaker  Samuel  J.  RandalL


74


HAND


HAND


of  the  house  of  representatives,  advanced  from  6
to  128^  votes.  On  the  next  ballot  Gen.  Hancock
received  705  votes,  and  the  nomination  was  made
unanimous.  The  election  in  November  resulted  in
the  following  popular  vote :  James  A.  Garfield,  Re-
publican, 4,454,416 ;  Winfield  S.  Hancock,  Demo-
crat, 4,444,952 :  James  B.  Weaver,  Greenback,  308,-
578 ;  Neal  Dow,  Prohibition,  10,305.  After  the  con-
clusion of  the  canvass  Gen.  Hancock  continued  in
the  discharge  of  official  duty.  His  last  notable  ap-
pearance in  public  was  at  Gen.  Grant  s  funeral,  all
the  arrangements  for  which  were  carried  out  under
his  supervision.  The  esteem  in  which  he  was  held
as  a  citizen  and  a  soldier  was  perhaps  never  greater
than  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  had  outlived
the  political  slanders  to  which  his  candidacy  had
given  rise,  and  his  achievements  in  the  field  during
the  civil  war  had  become  historic.  His  place  as  a
general  is  doubtless  foremost  among  those  who
never  fought  an  independent  campaign.  He  was
not  only  brave  himself,  but  he  had  the  ability  to
inspire  masses  of  men  with  courage.  He  was
quick  to  perceive  opportunities  amid  the  dust  and
smoke  of  battle,  and  was  equally  quick  to  seize
them ;  and  although  impulsive,  he  was  at  the  same
time  tenacious.  He  had  the  bravery  that  goes  for-
ward rapidly,  and  the  bravery  that  gives  way
slowly.  Gen.  Grant  says  :  "  Hancock  stands  the
most  conspicuous  figure  of  all  the  general  officers
who  did  not  exercise  a  separate  command.  He
commanded  a  corps  longer  than  any  other  one,  and
his  name  was  never  mentioned  as  having  committed
in  battle  a  blunder  for  which  he  was  responsible.
He  was  a  man  of  very  conspicuous  personal  ap-
pearance. Tall,  well-formed,  and,  at  the  time  of
which  I  now  write,  young  and  fresh-looking,  he
presented  an  appearance  that  would  attract  the  at-
tention of  an  army  as  he  passed.  His  genial  dis-
position made  him  friends,  and  his  personal  cour-
age and  his  presence  with  his  command  in  the
thickest  of  the  fight  won  him  the  confidence  of
troops  serving  under  him.''  To  a  reporter  in
search  of  adverse  criticism  during  the  presidential
canvass  of  1880,  Gen.  Sherman  said :  "  If  you  will
sit  down  and  write  the  best  thing  that  can  be  put
in  language  about  Gen.  Hancock  as  an  officer  and
a  gentleman,  I  will  sign  it  without  hesitation."
See  "  Life  of  Gen.  W.  S.  Hancock,"  by  Junkin  and
Norton  (New  York,  1880) ;  "  Addresses  at  a  Meeting
of  the  Military  Service  Institution  in  Memory  of
Hancock  "  (1886) ;  Francis  A.  Walker's  "  History  of
the  Second  Corps  "  (1887) ;  and  "  In  Memoriam :
Military  Order  of  the  Loyal  Legion  "  (1887).

HAND,  Augustus  C,  jurist,  b.  in  Stoneham,
Vt.,  4  Sept.,  1803;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,  Essex
co.,  N.  Y.,  8  March,  1878.  He  studied  law  at  the
Litchfield,  Conn.,  school,  and,  removing  to  Eliza-
bethtown, N.  Y.,  was  soon  afterward  appointed
surrogate  of  Essex  county.  He  served  in  congress
in  1839-'41,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,
and  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  and  chair-
man of  its  judiciary  committee  in  1845-8.  He
was  elected  a  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  in
1848,  and  on  this  bench  and  that  of  the  court
of  appeals  he  sat  until  his  defeat  for  the  latter
office  in  1855.  He  then  resumed  the  practice  of
his  profession,  in  which  he  continued  till  his  death.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic
convention  of  1868. — His  son,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.
in  Elizabethtown,  N.  Y.,  1  May,  1834 ;  d.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  21  May,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1851,  and  practised  law  with  his  father
in  Elizabethtown  till  his  removal  in  1860  to  Al-
bany. He  was  corporation  counsel  for  the  city  of
Albany  in  1863,  reporter  of  the  court  of  appeals  in


1869-'72,  and  in  June,  1878,  he  was  appointed
judge  in  the  supreme  court  to  fill  out  the  unex-
pired term  of  William  F.  Allen,  but  returned  to
practice  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year.  He  de-
clined the  Democratic  nomination  for  governor,
and  also  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the  superior
court  in  1875,  and  was  one  of  the  commissioners
for  the  reform  of  the  municipal  government.  In
1885  he  was  president  of  the  special  water  commis-
sion of  Albany.  Judge  Hand  had  a  large  practice
before  the  court  of  appeals  of  New  York.  He  was
senior  counsel  in  all  the  elevated  railroad  cases,
represented  the  state  against  the  canal  contractors,
and  frequently  declined  to  be  a  candidate  for  pub-
lic office  during  his  latter  years.  He  collected  one
of  the  most  valuable  libraries  in  the  state,  was
president  of  the  Young  men's  Christian  associa-
tion of  Albany  in  1863,  and  of  the  New  York  state
bar  association  in  1865,  and  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Union  in  1884.  He  edited  "  The  Phi-
lobiblon  of  Chancellor  Debury  "  (Albany,  1861).

HAND,  Daniel  Whilldin,  surgeon,  b.  in  Cape
May  Court-House,  N.  J.,  18  Aug.,  1834.  He  re-
ceived an  academic  education,  took  a  partial  course
at  the  University  of  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  and  then
studied  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1856.  In  1857  he  be-
gan practice  in  his  profession  at  St.  Paul,  Minn.
In  July,  1861,  he  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon
of  the  1st  Minnesota  volunteers,  and  in  the  next
month  was  commissioned  brigade-surgeon  with
the  rank  of  major.  He  accompanied  the  Army  of
the  Potomac  in  the  peninsular  campaign;  was
slightly  wounded  at  Fair  Oaks ;  in  August,  1862,
was  placed  in  charge  of  the  general  hospital  at
Newport  News ;  and  in  October  made  medical  di-
rector of  U  S.  forces  at  Suffolk,  Va.  While  on
duty  near  Suffolk,  he  was  taken  prisoner  in  May,
1863,  confined  in  Libby  prison,  and  after  his  release,
in  July,  1863,  was  made  medical  director  of  North
Carolina.  In  February,  1865,  he  was  promoted  to
lieutenant-colonel,  and  in  the  next  month  to  colo-
nel. He  was  mustered  out  of  service  in  November,
1865,  and  resumed  practice  in  St.  Paul.  Since
1872  he  has  been  president  of  the  Minnesota  board
of  health,  in  1883  was  appointed  professor  of  sur-
gery in  the  University  of  Minnesota,  and  is  one  of
the  founders  of  the  State  medical  society.  He  has
written  largely  for  medical  journals.

HAND,  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Clyduff,  King's
co.,  Ireland,  31
Dec,  1744;  d.  in
Rockford,  Lancas-
ter co.,  Pa.,  3  Sept.,
1802.  In  1774  he
accompanied  the
18th  Royal  Irish
regiment  to  this
country  as  sur-
geon's mate,  but
resigned  and  set-
tled in  Pennsylva-
nia in  the  practice
of  medicine.  At
the  beginning  of
the  Revolution  he
joined  Gen.  Will-
iam Thompson's
brigade  as  lieuten-
ant -  colonel,  and
served  at  the  siege
of  Boston.  He  was
promoted  colonel
in  1776,  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Long  Island
and  Trenton,  and  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-


HANDLEY


HANSON


75


eral  in  1777.  He  succeeded  Gen.  John  Stark  in
command  at  Albany  in  1778,  and  soon  afterward
served  with  Gen.  John  Sullivan  in  his  expedition
against  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations  in  central
New  York.  The  command  of  one  of  the  two  bri-
gades of  the  light-infantry  corps  was  assigned  him
in  August,  1780,  and  near  the  close  of  the  war  he
succeeded  Alexander  Scammell  as  adjutant-general.
He  was  a  member  of  congress  in  1784-'5,  a  signer
of  the  Pennsylvania  constitution  of  1790,  and  occu-
pied many  local  offices  of  public  trust.  In  1798,
in  anticipation  of  a  war  with  France,  Gen.  Wash-
ington recommended  Gen.  Hand's  appointment  as
adjutant-general.  He  was  of  fine  and  manly  appear-
ance, and  distinguished  in  the  army  for  his  fine
horsemanship.  Although  he  was  of  a  daring  dis-
position, he  won  the  affection  of  his  troops  by  his
amiability  and  gentleness.

HANDLEY,  George,  governor  of  Georgia,  b.
near  Sheffield,  England,  9  Feb.,  1752:  d.  in  Rae's
Hall,  Ga.,  17  Sept.,  1793.  He  arrived  in  Savannah
in  May,  1775,  joined  the  Georgia  continental  bat-
tery as  captain  in  1776,  and  rose  to  be  lieutenant-
colonel.  He  was  actively  engaged  in  South  Caro-
lina and  Georgia  during  the  Revolution,  and  was
captured  at  Augusta  and  sent  to  Charleston  as  a
prisoner  of  war.  He  was  afterward  sheriff  of  Rich-
mond county,  often  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  in  1787  was  inspector-general.  He  was  elected
governor  of  the  state  in  1788,  and  from  August,
1789,  till  his  death,  was  collector  of  the  port  of
Brunswick.  He  was  also  a  commissioner  to  the
proposed  state  of  Frankland  about  1785.

HANDY,  Alexander  Hamilton,  jurist,  b.  in
Princess  Anne,  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  25  Dec,  1809;
d.  in  Canton,  Miss.,  12  Sept.,  1883.  After  being
admitted  to  the  bar,  he  removed  to  Mississippi  in
1836,  and  was  a  judge  of  the  high  court  of  errors
from  1853  till  1867,  when  he  resigned.  He  then
removed  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession there,  also  holding  the  chair  of  law  in  the
University  of  Maryland  till  1871,  when  he  returned
to  Mississippi.  Judge  Handy  was  an  active  advo-
cate of  secession.  In  1860  he  was  appointed  a
commissioner  to  Maryland  by  the  governor  of  Mis-
sissippi, but  failed  to  obtain  a  hearing  from  the
legislature.  On  19  Dec,  1860,  in  a  speech  in  Bal-
timore, he  declared  that  secession  was  only  a  tem-
porary measure,  and  was  "  not  intended  to  break
up  the  present  government,  but  to  perpetuate  it."
Judge  Handy's  decisions  form  a  large  part  of
volumes  26-41  of  the  "  Mississippi  Reports."  He
published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Secession  Con-
sidered as  a  Right "  (1862),  and  a  "  Parallel  between
the  Reign  of  James  the  Second,  of  England,  and
that  of  Abraham  Lincoln."

HANGER,  George  (Lord  Coleraine),  English
soldier,  b.  in  1750 :  d.  in  London,  31  March,  1824.
He  was  the  younger  son  of  a  noble  family,  and
was  educated  for  the  army.  He  served  through
the  American  Revolution,  became  a  major  in  Tarle-
ton's  legion,  and  was  wounded  in  an  action  with
Maj.  W.  R.  Davie's  dragoons  at  Charlotte,  N.  C.,
where  his  corps  was  roughly  handled.  Hanger's
reputation  in  America  was  that  of  a  sensualist.
He  was  a  boon  companion  of  George  IV.,  and,  on
succeeding  to  his  title  in  1814,  refused  to  assume
it.  He  published  a  reply  to  Lieut.  Roderick  Mac-
kenzie's "  Strictures  on  Col.  Banaster  Tarleton's
History  of  the  Southern  Campaigns  of  1780  and
1781 "  (1789),  and  other  tracts  on  military  subjects,
his  own  "  Life,  Adventures,  and  Opinions,"  with  a
portrait  of  himself  hanging  by  the  neck  (London,
1801) ;  and  "  Lives,  Adventures,  and  Sharping
Tricks  of  Eminent  Gamesters  "  (1804).


HANNA,  Robert,  senator,  b.  in  Laurens  dis-
trict, S.  C,  6  April,  1786 ;  d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,
19  Nov.,  1858.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to
Indiana,  and  in  1802  settled  in  Brookfield  in  that
state.  He  was  sheriff  of  the  eastern  district  from
1809  till  the  organization  of  a  state  government,  a
member  of  the  Indiana  constitutional  convention  of
1816,  and  register  of  the  land-office,  general  of
militia,  and  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature. He  removed  to  Indianapolis  in  1825,  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  a  vacancy,
serving  from  5  Dec.  of  that  year  till  3  Jan.,  1832,
and  was  afterward  a  member  of  the  state  senate.
He  was  killed  by  a  railroad-train  while  he  was
walking  on  the  track  at  Indianapolis.

HANNA,  William  Brantly,  jurist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  23  Nov.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  in
1853  from  the  Central  high-school  of  Philadelphia,
studied  law  with  his  father  and  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Tsar  in
1857.  He  was  assistant  district  attorney  of  Phila-
delphia for  several  years,  and  from  1867  till  1874
served  in  the  councils  of  the  city.  In  1872  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention
of  the  state,  in  which  body  he  served  until  its  ad-
journment. In  1874  he  was  elected  one  of  the  three
first  judges  of  the  orphans'  court  of  Philadelphia,
which  had  been  established  under  the  new  consti-
tution, and  in  1878  was  commissioned  to  be  the
first  president  judge  of  this  court.  In  1884,  as
the  candidate  of  both  the  Republican  and  Demo-
cratic parties,  he  was  re-elected  to  this  office  for  a
term  of  ten  years  by  a  practically  unanimous  vote.
He  is  president  of  the  corporation  of  the  Hahne-
mann medical  college  and  hospital  of  Philadelphia,
and  was  for  some  years  president  of  the  trustees  of
the  Baptist  orphanage.  In  June,  1885,  Bucknell
university,  at  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  conferred  upon  him
the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.

HANNAY,  James,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Richi-
bucto,  New  Brunswick,  in  1842.  After  engaging
in  journalism  for  a  time,  he  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  New  Brunswick  in  1867.
His  works  include  "  The  Captivity  of  John  Gyles  "
(1875) ;  "  History  of  Acadia  "  (1879) ;  and  "  History
of  the  Queen's  Rangers  "  (1883).

HANNEGAN,  Edward  A.,  senator,  b.  in  Ohio ;
d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  25  Feb.,  1859.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Kentucky,  where  he  spent  his  boyhood,
and  afterward  began  to  practise  law  in  Covington,
Ind.  He  was  frequently  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture in  1833-'7,  and  was  a  representative  in  con-
gress, having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat.  He  was
U.  S.  senator  from  Indiana  in  1843-9,  and  from
22  March,  1849,  till  13  Jan.,  1850,  was  minister  to
Prussia.  Mr.  Hannegan  was  eloquent  and  brill-
iant, but  erratic.  In  1852,  while  under  the  influ-
ence of  liquor,  he  killed  his  brother-in-law,  Capt.
Duncan.  He  afterward  removed  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.

HANSON,  John,  delegate  to  congress,  b.  in
Charles  county,  Md.,  in  1715;  d.  in  Oxen  Hills,
Prince  George  co.,  Md.,  22  Nov.,  1783.  He  re-
ceived an  English  education,  and  was  a  member
of  the  Maryland  house  of  delegates  nearly  every
year  from  1757  till  1781.  He  removed  to  Frederick
county  in  1773,  was  an  active  patriot,  and  in  1775
was  treasurer  of  the  county.  About  that  time  he
was  commissioned  by  the  Maryland  convention  to
establish  a  gun-lock  factory  at  Frederick.  On  9
Oct.,  1776.  he  was  one  of  a  committee  to  go  to
the  camp  of  the  Maryland  troops  in  New  Jersey,
"with  power  to  appoint  officers  and  to  encour-
age the  re-enlistment  of  the  Maryland  militia."
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental congress


76


HANSON


HARBAUGH


from  1781  till  his  death,  served  one  year  as  its
president,  from  5  Nov.  of  that  year,  and  in  that
capacity  gave  Washington  the  thanks  of  congress
for  the  victory  at  Yorktown.  After  1782  feeble
health  compelled  him  to  retire  from  public  life. —
His  son,  Alexander  Contee,  jurist,  b.  22  Oct.,
1749;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1806,  was  high  in
the  confidence  of  Washington,  and  resided  for  some
time  in  his  family,  acting  as  his  private  secretary
for  several  months.  He  was  afterward  chosen  by
Washington  as  one  of  his  aides,  but  illness  pre-
vented his  acceptance.  He  was  the  first  judge  of
the  general  court  of  Maryland  under  the  constitu-
tion of  1776,  and  prepared  a  compilation  of  the
laws  of  the  state.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  con-
vention that  ratified  the  National  constitution  in
1788,  declined  a  U.  S.  judgeship,  and  from  1789
till  his  death  was  chancellor  of  the  state.  In  1789,
at  the  request  of  the  legislature,  he  prepared  a
"Digest  of  a  Testamentary  System."  He  wrote
forcibly  on  most  of  the  political  questions  of  the
day,  and  some  of  his  articles  have  been  preserved
by  the  Maryland  historical  society  under  the  name
of  the  "  Hanson  Pamphlets." — Alexander  Contee's
son,  Alexander  Contee,  senator,  b.  in  Maryland,
27  Feb.,  1786;  d.  in  Belmont,  Md.,  23  April,  1819,
was  educated  at  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis.  He
afterward  edited  the  "  Federal  Republican  "  at  Bal-
timore, bitterly  denouncing  the  administration.
On  22  June,  1812,  the  populace  of  the  city,  irritated
by  one  of  his  articles,  attacked  and  destroyed  his
printing-office.  The  journal,  after  a  temporary
suspension,  was  re-issued  simultaneously  in  Balti-
more and  Georgetown,  D.  C,  on  27  July.  This  led
to  another  attack  on  28  July,  but  the  house  had
been  garrisoned  with  thirty  armed  men,  among
whom  were  Gen.  Henry  Lee  and  Gen.  James  M.
Lingan,  and  they  fired  on  the  mob,  killing  one
and  wounding  others.  The  rioters  then  brought
a  piece  of  cannon  to  bear  on  the  house,  and  the  mi-
litia was  called  out,  but  an  arrangement  was  finally
made,  much  against  Mr.  Hanson's  will,  by  which
he  and  his  friends  were  to  be  placed  in  jail  by  the
authorities,  while  their  persons  and  property  were
to  be  protected.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  mob
broke  into  the  jail,  assisted  by  officials  within,  and
after  barbarously  treating  those  that  did  not  escape,
left  Mr.  Hanson  and  others  for  dead  in  front  of
the  building,  inflicted  on  Gen.  Lee  wounds  from
which  he  never  fully  recovered,  and  killed  Gen.
Lingan  outright.  The  mob  now  withdrew  to  break
into  the  post-office,  where  the  issue  of  Hanson's
paper  awaited  mailing,  and  the  editor  was  secretly
removed  by  his  friends.  He  afterward  continued
the  publication  of  his  journal  at  Georgetown.  The
leaders  of  the  mob  were  afterward  arrested,  but
were  acquitted,  and  the  attorney-general  sympa-
thized with  them  so  far  as  to  wish  that  every  de-
fender of  the  house  had  been  killed.  These  out-
rages contributed  to  the  political  revolution  that
shortly  afterward  gave  the  state  to  the  Federalists.
Hanson  was  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  24
May,  1813,  till  2  Jan.,  1817,  and  then  took  his  seat
in  the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  Robert  G.  Harper,
resigned,  and  served  till  his  death.

HANSON,  John  Wesley,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  May,  1823.  After  attending  the  Lowell
high-school,  he  entered  a  counting-room  in  that
city,  where  he  remained  seven  years,  still  continu-
ing his  studies.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry
of  the  Universalist  church  in  Wentworth,  N.  H.,
in  1845,  held  pastorates  in  Danvers,  Mass.,  in
1846-'8,  and  Gardiner,  Me.,  in  1850-'4,  and  in  1848
edited  the  "  Massachusetts  Era,"  the  first  Republi-
can paper  in  Lowell. He  edited  the  "  Gospel  Ban-


ner "  in  Augusta,  Me.,  in  1854-'60,  and  was  pastor
in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  till  1865,  serving  also  in  1863-'4
as  chaplain  of  the  6th  Massachusetts  regiment  and
army  correspondent  of  the  Boston  "Journal"  and
the  New  York  "Tribune."  He  was  pastor  in
Dubuque,  Iowa,  in  1866-'9,  and  then  had  charge  of
the  "  New  Covenant "  in  Chicago,  111.,  till  1884.
Buchtel  college,  Ohio,  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1876.  He  has  published  histories  of  Danvers,
Mass.  (Danvers,  1847),  Norridgewock,  Me.  (Nor-
ridgewock,  1849),  and  Gardiner,  Me.  (Gardiner,
1852) ;  "  Bible  Threatenings  Explained  "  (Chicago,
1847) ;  "  Witnesses  to  the  Truth,"  a  collection  of
quotations  from  the  poets  (Boston,  1850 ;  enlarged
as  "  Cloud  of  Witnesses,"  1883) ;  "  Aion-Aionios  "
(Chicago,  1876) ;  "  Bible  Proofs  of  Universal  Salva-
tion "  (1877) ;  "  Twelve  Sermons  on  the  Lord's
Prayer  "  (1883) ;  "  The  New  Covenant,"  a  transla-
tion of  the  New  Testament "  (2  vols.,  1883-'5) ;  and
"  Voices  of  the  Faith  "  (1884).— His  wife,  Eliza
Rice  (Holbrook),  b.  in  Norridgewock,  Me.,  11
April,  1825 ;  d.  in  Blue  Island,  111.,  16  Sept.,  1865,
married  Dr.  Hanson  on  30  May,  1846.  She  pub-
lished "  Women  Workers,"  a  popular  book.

HARADEN,  Jonathan,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Gloucester,  Mass.,  in  1745 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  26
Nov.,  1803.  When  the  war  of  independence  be-
gan, he  joined  the  "  Tyrannicide  "  as  1st  lieutenant,
and  shortly  afterward  was  promoted  captain,  and
appointed  to  the  command  of  the  "  Pickering."  In
a  night  assault  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay  he  captured  a
British  privateer  of  60  men  and  22  guns,  beat  off  a
London  privateer  with  42  guns  and  140  men,  and
on  another  occasion  came  upon  three  armed  vessels
in  a  line,  and  captured  one  after  the  other,  with  no
loss  of  life  on  his  own  vessel.  He  is  said  to  have
taken  nearly  1,000  cannon  from  the  British  during
the  war.  At  the  close  of  1781,  with  all  his  vessels
and  prizes,  he  was  captured  by  the  royal  com-
mander, Rodney,  at  St.  Eustatius,  West  Indies.
The  "  Julius  Caesar  "  was  his  last  command.

HARASZTHY,  Agostin,  viticulturist,  b.  in
Hungary  in  1812 ;  d.  near  Leon,  Nicaragua,  10
Aug.,  1869.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in
early  manhood,  lived  for  several  years  in  Wiscon-
sin, Iowa,  and  Texas,  and  in  1850  settled  in  Cali-
fornia as  superintendent  of  the  San  Francisco
mint.  He  engaged  largely  in  grape-culture  in
1858,  and  was  superintendent  of  the  Buena  Vista
viticultural  society's  vineyard  in  Sonoma  county.
In  1864  he  went  abroad  to  investigate  the  culture
of  the  grape  and  procure  continental  varieties.  In
1867  he  visited  Nicaragua  and  obtained  from  that
government  the  right  to  manufacture  there  dis-
tilled liquors  for  twenty  years.  While  he  was
exploring  the  swamps  near  Leon',  he  fell  into  a
stream,  and  was  devoured  by  alligators.  He  pub-
lished a  "Treatise  on  Grape-Culture  in  Europe
and  California  "  (San  Francisco,  1865).

HARBAUGH,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  near
Waynesborough,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Mercers-
burg,  Pa.,  28  Dec,  1867.  He  taught  to  obtain
means  to  enter  college,  and  studied  at  Mercersburg,
Pa.,  but  was  unable  to  finish  either  a  classical  or
theological  course.  He  was  ordained  in  1843,  and
installed  as  pastor  of  the  German  Reformed  church
at  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  and  in  1850  accepted  a  call  to
the  church  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  where  he  remained
until  his  removal  to  Lebanon  in  1860.  In  1863  he
was  appointed  by  his  synod  professor  of  theology
at  the  Mercersburg  seminary.  He  occupied  this
chair  until  his  death,  which  was  occasioned  by  un-
due mental  exertion.  In  his  theological  views  Dr.
Harbaugh  was  the  foremost  representative  of  the
school  that  emphasized  the  efficacy  of  the  sacra-


HARBY


HARDENBERGH


77


ments  and  the  priestly  character  of  the  ministry.
He  founded  the  "  Guardian,"  and  was  its  editor  for
seventeen  years,  compiled  numerous  church  alma-
nacs, edited  "  The  Child's  Treasury,"  contributed  a
great  number  of  sketches  to  the  German  Reformed
church  "  Cyclopaedia,"  and  at  the  time  of  his  death
edited  the  "  Mercersburg  Review,"  and  was  one  of
the  staff  of  the  "Reformed  Church  Messenger."
He  also  wrote  quaint  poems  in  the  German  Penn-
sylvania dialect.  He  published  "Heaven,  or  the
Sainted  Dead"  (Philadelphia,  1848);  "Heavenly
Recognition"  (1851);  "The  Heavenly  Home"
(1853);  "Union  with  the  Church"  (1853);  "Birds
of  the  Bible  "  (1854) ;  "  Life  of  Rev.  Richard
Schlatter "  (1857) ;  "  The  Fathers  of  the  German
Reformed  Church"  (1858);  "The  True  Glory  of
Woman,  and  a  Plea  for  the  Lord's  Portion  of  a
Christian's  Wealth  "  (1860) ;  "  The  Golden  Censer  "
(1860) ;  "  Hvmns  and  Chants  "  (Lebanon,  1861) ;  and
" Christological  Theology"  (Philadelphia,  1864).
HARBY,  Isaac,  dramatist,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1788 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  Nov.,  1828.
Isaac's  grandfather  was  a  Jewish  lapidary  of  the
emperor  of  Morocco,  who,  under  the  displeasure
of  that  monarch,  was  forced  to  fly  from  the  coun-
try. His  son  emigrated  to  South  Carolina,  and
established  himself  in  Charleston.  After  studying
law  Isaac  taught  on  Edisto  island,  and  afterward
edited  "  The  Quiver,"  "  The  Investigator,"  and  the
"  Southern  Patriot,"  and  was  favorably  known  as
an  essayist  and  dramatic  writer  and  critic.  The
year  before  his  death  he  removed  to  New  York,
and  contributed  to  "  The  Evening  Post "  and
other  newspapers.  A  sketch  of  his  life  and  writ-
ings was  published  by  Henry  L.  Pinckney  and  A.
Moise  (Charleston,  1829).  He  is  the  author  of  the
dramas  "  Alexander  Severus  "  (1807) ;  "  The  Gor-
dian  Knot  "  (1807);  "  Alberti  "  (1819);  and  several
orations  in  pamphlet-form.

HARDEE,  William  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Sa-
vannah, Ga.,  about  1817;  d.  in  Wytheville,  Va.,
6  Nov.,  1873. He  was  graduated  at the U.  S.

military  acad-
emy in  1838,  and
after  serving  in
Florida,  in  the
2d  dragoons,  he
was  promoted  to
a  1st  lieutenan-
cy, 3  Dec.  1839,
and  sent  by  the
secretary  of  war
to  the  celebrated
military  school
of  St.  Maur,
France.  While
there  he  was  at-
tached to  the
cavalry  depart-
ment of  the
French  army.
He  was  stationed
for  a  time  on  the
western  frontier,  appointed  captain  of  dragoons,  18
Sept.,  1844,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Taylor  in  1846
across  the  Rio  Grande.  His  company  was  the  first
to  engage  the  enemy  at  Curricitos,  where  he  was
overwhelmed  by  superior  numbers  and  made  pris-
oner. He  was  exchanged  in  time  to  take  part  in  the
siege  of  Monterey,  and  was  promoted  to  major  for

gallantry  on  25  March,  1847.  At  the  end  of  the  war
e  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  a  little
later  was  appointed  major  in  the  2d  cavalry,  of
which  Albert  Sidney  Johnston  was  colonel  and  Rob-
ert E.  Lee  lieutenant-colonel. About  this  time  he


received  instructions  from  the  war  department
to  prepare  a  system  of  tactics  for  the  use  of  in-
fantry. On  the  completion  of  this  work,  in  1856,
he  was  ordered  to  West  Point  as  commandant  of
cadets,  with  the  local  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel ;
and  there  he  remained,  with  the  exception  of  one
year,  during  which  he  was  absent  in  Europe,  un-
til the  end  of  January,  1861.  He  then  joined  the
Confederate  army  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  and
was  assigned  to  duty  at  Fort  Morgan,  Mobile.
In  June,  1861,  he  was  made  brigadier-general,
and  sent  to  Arkansas  under  Gen.  Polk.  He  was
soon  afterward  transferred  to  Kentucky,  where
he  gained  a  victory  over  a  small  National  force  at
Mumfordsville,  17  Dec,  1861.  Events  were  now
shaping  for  more  vigorous  work  in  the  southwest.
At  Shiloh,  Hardee's  corps,  the  3d,  formed  the  first
Confederate  line,  and  made  the  first  attack.  He
was  promoted  to  major-general,  and  Beauregard,
in  his  report,  praised  Hardee's  skill  and  general
ability.  He  commanded  the  left  wing  at  Perry-
ville,  8  Oct.,  1862,  and  took  a  conspicuous  part  in
all  the  movements  at  Murfreesboro.  For  his  con-
duct at  Perryville  and  throughout  the  campaign
he  was  appointed  lieutenant-general,  ranking  after
Longstreet.  After  the  fall  of  Vicksburg,  Hardee
had  charge  of  a  camp  of  paroled  prisoners  in
Alabama.  Later  in  the  year  he  was  put  in  com-
mand of  the  2d  corps  under  Bragg,  and,  after  the
battle  of  Chattanooga,  was  temporarily  appointed
his  successor.  In  May,  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston
assumed  the  command,  and  Hardee  resumed  his
subordinate  position.  Hardee  was  relieved  at  his
own  request  in  September,  1864,  and  appointed  to
the  command  of  the  Department  of  South  Caro-
lina. He  finally  surrendered  at  Durham  Station,
N.  C,  26  April".  1865.  At  the  close  of  the  war
Gen.  Hardee  retired  to  his  plantation  in  Alabama.
Hardee's  Tactics,  or  the  "  U.  S.  Rifle  and  Light-
Infantry  Tactics,"  the  work  already  referred  to
(New  York,  1856),  is  eclectic  rather  than  original,
and  is  drawn  mainly  from  French  sources.

HARDENBERGH,  Jacob  Rutsen,  clergyman,
b.  in  Rosendale,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y..  in  1738;  d.  in
New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  30  Oct.,  1790.  His  ances-
tor, Johannes,  a  Prussian  by  birth,  emigrated  to
this  country  in  the  latter  part  of  the  17th  cen-
tury. Jacob  was  educated  at  Kingston  academy,
studied  theology  under  Rev.  John  Frelinghuysen,
and  was  licensed  by  the  American  classis  of  the
Reformed  Dutch  church  in  1758,  being  the  first
minister  of  that  church  who  was  not  obliged  to  go
to  Holland  for  study,  examination,  and  licensure.
Shortly  before  this  he  married  the  widow  of  his
former  instructor,  who  had  died  suddenly  in  1757.
and  in  1758  succeeded  him  as  pastor  of  five  united
congregations  near  Raritan,  N.  J.,  where  his  min-
istry was  very  successful.  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1770.  During  two  winters
Washington's  army  was  encamped  within  the
bounds  of  his  parish,  and  the  commanding  gen-
eral was  often  a  guest  at  his  house.  He  was  an
ardent  patriot,  and  an  object  of  special  enmity  to
his  Tory  neighbors.  The  British  general  offered
£100  for  his  arrest,  and  he  was  accustomed  to
sleep  with  a  loaded  musket  by  his  side.  On  26
Oct.,  1779,  a  company  of  the  Queen's  rangers,  un-
der Col.  Simcoe,  burned  his  church  to  the  ground.
Dr.  Hardenbergh  removed  to  Rosendale,  N.  Y.,  in
1781,  and  in  1785  was  elected  first  president  of
Queen's  (now  Rutgers)  college,  which  he  had  been
instrumental  in  establishing  in  1770,  but  which
had  not  been  in  active  operation,  owing  to  the
occupation  of  New  Brunswick  by  British  troops.
He  also  acted  as  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church


78


I1ARDEY


HARDIN


in  that  town  Dr.  Hardenbergh  took  an  active
part  in  the  controversy  that  resulted  in  securing
the  separation  of  the  Dutch  church  in  this  coun-
try from  that  in  Holland.

HARDEY,  Mary  Aloysia,  mother  superior,
b.  in  Prince  George  county,  Md.,  in  1809 ;  d.  in
Paris,  France,  17  June,  1886.  Her  parents  emi-
grated to  Louisiana  in  1814,  and  some  years  after-
ward she  was  placed  in  the  Academy  of  Grand
Coteau,  conducted  by  sisters  of  the  Sacred  Heart.
She  was  admitted  to  the  order  as  a  novice  in  1816,
and  on  the  day  after  her  reception  went  with  her
superior  to  found  the  convent  of  St.  Michael's  on
the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  sixty  miles  from  New
Orleans.  She  finally  became  its  superior,  but
during  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1832  saw  nearly
her  whole  community  swept  away.  In  May,  1841,
at  the  request  of  Bishop  Hughes  she  came  to  New
York  and  opened  the  first  school  of  the  Sacred
Heart  in  a  small  house  in  Houston  street,  which
soon  was  filled  to  overflowing.  She  was  obliged
to  open  a  larger  place  in  Astoria ;  but  this  also  soon
became  too  small,  and  in  1847  Mother  Hardey  suc-
ceeded in  purchasing  the  present  site  of  the  Acad-
emy of  the  Sacred  Heart  at  Manhattanville.  She
established  academies  in  Albany,  Rochester,  Cin-
cinnati, Philadelphia,  Boston,  Providence,  Detroit,
Halifax,  and  Montreal,  as  well  as  two  additional
day-academies  in  New  York  city.  On  29  Sept.,
1872,  she  was  appointed  assistant-general  of  the
Society  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  and  went  to  live  in
the  mother  house  in  Paris,  where  she  resided  un-
til her  death.  Mother  Hardey's  influence  was  not
confined  to  this  country.  In  all  matters  affecting
the  general  interests  of  the  order  her  voice  was  all-
powerful;  and  the  increase  of  the  schools  of  the
Sacred  Heart,  not  only  in  Europe  but  in  Austra-
lia and  New  Zealand,  was  due  principally  to  her  ad-
ministrative ability  and  energy.

HARDIE,  James,  teacher,  b.  in  Scotland  about
1750;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1832.  He  was  a
graduate  of  Marischal  college,  Aberdeen,  and  was
an  inmate  of  the  family  of  the  poet  Beattie,  who
persuaded  him  to  remove  to  New  York.  He  was
tutor  in  Columbia  college  from  1787  till  1790,  but
became  poor  and  dissipated,  finally  obtaining  a
scanty  support  in  the  employ  of  the  board  of
health.  His  published  works  are  "  Corderii  Collo-
quia  "  (New  \  ork,  1805) ;  "  Epistolary  Guide,"  for
the  use  of  schools  (1817) ;  "Freeman's  Monitor"
(1818);  "Account  of  Malignant  Fevers  in  New
York"  (1799  and  1805);  "Viris  Illustribus  Urbis
Romae  "  (1818) ;  "  Dictionary  of  the  Wonders  of
Art  and  of  Nature,  especially  in  America  "  (1819) ;
"Account  of  the  Yellow  Fever  in  New  York"
(1822);  "Description  of  the  City  of  New  York"
(1827) ;  and  "  Biographical  Dictionary  "  (1830).

HARDIE,  James  Allen,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  5  May,  1823 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
5  May,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1843,  and  entered  the  artillery
service.  He  was  an  assistant  professor  of  geogra-
phy, history,  and  ethics  at  West  Point  in  1844-'6,
and  served  as  company  officer  in  garrison,  frontier,
and  Indian  service  till  1861.  During  the  Mexican
war  he  commanded  a  New  York  regiment  of  vol-
unteers, with  the  rank  of  major,  and  in  1857  he
was  appointed  captain  in  the  3d  artillery.  He  was
transferred  to  the  5th  artillery  in  1861,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  aide-de-camp,  and
served  on  Gen.  McClellan's  staff  during  the  penin-
sular and  Maryland  campaigns,  and  on  that  of
Gen.  Burnside  in  the  battles  around  Fredericks-
burg. He  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, 29  Nov.,  1862,  assistant  adjutant-general  in


1863,  assigned  to  special  duty  in  the  war  depart-
ment, and  was  assistant  secretary  to  Sec.  Edwin  M.
Stanton  while  he  held  office.  Gen.  Hardie  was  ap-
pointed inspector-general  in  1864,  and  in  1865  was
brevetted  brigadier-  and  major-general,  U.  S.  army,
for  his  services  during  the  war.  In  1866  he  was
senior  member  of  the  commission  to  inspect  ord-
nance and  ordnance  stores  in  forts  and  arsenals,
and  commissioner  to  audit  the  military  claims  of
Kansas,  Montana,  Dakota,  California,  and  Oregon.
He  edited  numerous  military  reports.

HARDIN,  Charles  Henry,  governor  of  Mis-
souri, b.  in  Trimble  county,  Ky.,  15  July,  1820.
His  father  removed  to  Missouri  in  the  autumn  of
1820,  and  in  1821  settled  in  Columbia,  Boone  co.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Miami  university,  Ohio,
in  1841,  and  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Fulton,
Mo.,  in  1843.  He  was  attorney  of  the  3d  judicial
district  in  1848-'52,  and  has  been  several  times  a
member  of  each  branch  of  the  legislature.  In  1855
he  was  one  of  a  commission  to  revise  and  codify
the  statute  laws  of  the  state.  He  voted  against  the
secession  of  the  state,  and  in  1862  retired  to  his
farm  near  Mexico,  Mo.,  where,  after  the  war,  he
resumed  the  practice  of  law.  In  1874  he  was
elected  governor  of  Missouri.  Gov.  Hardin  en-
dowed Hardin  female  college,  near  Mexico,  Mo.,
in  1873,  with  property  valued  at  over  $60,000.
He  has  since  been  president  of  its  board  of  direct-
ors, and  has  given  much  of  his  attention,  as  a
public  man,  to  the  cause  of  education.

HARDIN,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Fauquier  county,
Va.,  1  Oct.,  1753;  d.  on  Ohio  river  in  April,  1792.
His  father  removed  when  John  was  twelve  years  of
age  to  an  unbroken  wilderness  near  the  Pennsyl-
vania line,  where  he  became  so  skilful  a  marks-
man that  he  was  greatly  feared  by  the  hostile  In-
dians. He  was  ensign  in  Lord  Dunmore's  expedi-
tion against  the  Indians  in  1774,  and  served  as  a
scout.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he
joined  the  Continental  army  as  lieutenant  in  Gen.
Daniel  Morgan's  rifle  corps,  and  refused  a  major's
commission,  saying  that  he  could  do  his  country
more  good  in  the  capacity  in  which  he  was  serving.
He  removed  to  Kentucky  in  1786,  and  in  the  same
year  volunteered  under  Gen.  Elisha  Clarke  on  the
Wabash  expedition,  and  was  appointed  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  militia.  He  was  in  every  expedition
against  the  Kentucky  Indians  from  1787  until  his
death,  except  that  of  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair.  In
April,  1792,  he  was  sent  by  Gen.  James  Wilkinson
with  overtures  of  peace  to  the  Miami  Indians,  and
while  he  was  bearing  a  flag  of  truce  near  Shawnee-
town,  his  fine  horse  and  equipments  attracted  the
cupidity  of  the  chiefs,  who  treacherously  shot  him
to  obtain  these  spoils.  The  county  of  Hardin,
which  was  formed  in  1792,  was  named  in  his  honor.
— John's  son,  Martin  D.,  lawyer,  b.  on  Mononga-
hela  river,  Pa.,  21  June,  1780;  d.  in  Frankfort,
Ky.,  8  Oct.,  1823,  was  educated  in  the  Transylva-
nia academy,  Ky.,  where  he  removed  with  his  fa-
ther at  six  years  of  age.  He  studied  law,  practised
in  Franklin  county,  served  several  terms  in  the
legislature,  and  in  1812  was  secretary  of  the  state.
When  war  was  declared  with  Great  Britain  he  joined
the  northwestern  division  of  the  army  under  Gen.
Harrison,  and  was  promoted  major  of  the  Kentucky
regiment  of  volunteers.  In  1816  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat  to  fill  the  unex-
pired term  of  William  T.  Barry,  who  had  resigned.
He  was  distinguished  for  legal  knowledge  and
ability,  and  practised  his  profession  with  marked
success.  He  published  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the
Kentucky  Court  of  Appeals  "  (Louisville,  1810). —
John's  nephew,  Benjamin,  statesman,  b.  in  West-


HARDING


HARDING


79


moreland  county,  Pa.,  in  1784;  d.  in  Bardstown,
Ky.,  24  Sept.,  1852.  He  removed  to  Kentucky
in  childhood,  received  a  primary  education,  stud-
ied law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1806,  and  be-
gan to  practise  at  Bardstown.  He  served  in  the
state  house  of  representatives  in  1810-'ll  and
1824-'5,  and  in  1815  took  his  seat  in  congress,  hav-
ing been  elected  as  a  Whig,  and  served  till  1817,
and  again  from  1833  till  1837.  In  1844  he  was  ap-
pointed secretary  of  state  of  Kentucky,  held  office
till  his  resignation  in  1847,  and  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1849.  He  was
distinguished  as  a  debater,  and  his  style  was  pun-
gent and  sarcastic.  John  Randolph,  of  Roanoke,
described  him  as  "a  kitchen-knife,  rough  and
homely,  but  keen  and  trenchant." — Martin  D.'s  son,
John  J.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  6  Jan.,  1810 ;
d.  in  Buena  Vista,  Mexico,  27  Feb.,  1847,  was
educated  at  Transylvania  university,  studied  law,
and  removed  to  Jacksonville,  111.,  where  he  prac-
tised his  profession.  For  several  years  he  was
,  prosecuting  attorney,  and  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1836-'42.  In  1842  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat,  and  served  one  term.  He
volunteered  when  the  Mexican  war  began,  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  1st  Illinois  regiment,  and
was  killed  on  the  second  day  of  the  battle  of  Buena
Vista,  while  leading  his  men  in  the  final  charge.

HARDING,  Abner  Clark,  soldier,  b.  in  East
Hampton,  Middlesex  co.,  Conn.,  10  Feb.,  1807 ;  d.
in  Monmouth,  Warren  co.,  111.,  19  July,  1874.  He
was  educated  chiefly  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  academy,
and  after  practising  law  in  Oneida  county  for
some  time  removed  to  Illinois.  In  that  state  he
.  continued  to  practise  law  for  fifteen  years,  and  to
manage  farms  for  twenty-five  years.  In  1848  he
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
constitution  under  which  Illinois  was  governed
from  1848  till  1870.  He  also  served  in  the  legis-
lature in  1848-'9  and  1850.  During  the  ten  years
preceding  the  civil  war  he  was  engaged  in  rail-
way enterprises.  In  1862  he  enlisted  as  a  private
in  the  83d  Illinois  infantry,  and  rose  to  the  rank
of  colonel.  For  bravery  at  Fort  Donelson  he  was
promoted  to  brigadier-general,  and  in  1863  had
command  at  Murfreesboro,  Tenn.  In  1864  he  was
elected  a  representative  in  congress,  and  was  re-
elected in  1866,  serving  from  4  Dec,  1865,  till  3
March,  1869.  Gen.  Harding  early  entered  with
zeal  into  the  construction  of  railroads  in  central
Illinois,  and  was  one  of  the  projectors  and  build-
ers of  the  Peoria  and  Oquawka  railroad,  now  a
{)art  of  the  Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy.  He
eft  a  fortune  of  about  $2,000,000,  no  small  part
of  which  he  had  amassed  in  railroad  enterprises.
Several  years  before  his  death  he  endowed  a  pro-
fessorship in  Monmouth  college.

HARDING,  Benjamin  F.,  senator,  b.  in  Wyo-
ming county,  Pa.,  4  Jan.,  1823.  He  was  educated
at  the  public  schools,  studied  law,  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1847.  He  began  practice  in  Illi-
nois in  1848,  and  in  1849  removed  to  Oregon,
where  he  was  clerk  of  the  territorial  legislature  in
1850-'l,  and  a  member  of  that  body  and  its  speaker
in  1852.  He  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Oregon
in  1853,  and  secretary  of  the  territory  in  1854-'9.
After  its  admission  to  the  Union  he  was  a  member
of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1859-'62,
being  speaker  during  the  last  two  years.  He  was
then  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Republican,  to  fill
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  Edward  D.
Baker,  who  was  killed  at  Ball's  Bluff,  and  served
from  1  Dec,  1862,  till  3  March,  1865.

HARDING,  Chester,  artist,  b.  in  Conway,
Mass.,  1  Sept.,  1792 :  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  April,


1866.  His  family  removed  to  Caledonia,  N.  Y.,
when  he  was  fourteen  years  old,  and  he  was  early
thrown  upon  his  own  resources  for  support,  and
eventually  became  a  house-painter  in  Pittsburg,
Pa.  He  worked  at  this  occupation  a  year,  when
acquaintance  with  a  travelling  portrait-painter  led
him  to  attempt  art.  Having  succeeded  in  produc-
ing a  crude  portrait  of  his  wife,  he  devoted  him-
self enthusiastically  to  the  profession.  He  painted
several  other  portraits  at  Pittsburg,  and  then  went
to  Paris,  Ky.,  where  he  finished  100  portraits  in
six  months  at  $25  each.  After  receiving  slight  in-
struction in  Philadelphia,  he  established  himself
in  St.  Louis.  In  August,  1823,  he  went  to  London,
and  spent  three  years  in  studying  and  painting,
when  he  returned  to  Boston,  where  he  became  very
popular.  In  1843  he  went  to  England  again,  and
afterward  resided  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  spending
his  winters  frequently  in  St.  Louis  or  in  some  of
the  southern  cities.  Among  the  distinguished  per-
sons who  sat  for  him  were  James  Madison,  James
Monroe,  John  Quincy  Adams,  John  Marshall,
Charles  Carroll,  William  Wirt,  Henry  Clay,  John

C.  Calhoun,  Washington  Allston,  the  Dukes  of  Nor-
folk, Hamilton,  and  Sussex,  Samuel  Rogers,  and
Sir  Archibald  Allison.  His  last  work  was  a  por-
trait of  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman.  His  portrait  of
Daniel  Webster  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Bar
association  of  New  York,  and  that  of  John  Ran-
dolph is  in  the  Corcoran  gallery  at  Washington,

D.  C.  He  wrote  "  My  Egotistography,"  which  has
been  printed,  but  not  published.

HARDING,  Jesper,  publisher,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  5  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,  1865.
After  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  printing  under
Enos  Bronson,  the  publisher,  he  engaged  in  the
business  on  his  own  account  at  the  age  of  eighteen.
In  1829  he  purchased  the  "  Pennsylvania  Inquirer,"
which  had  been  established  a  few  months  before,
and  at  about  the  same  time  he  began  to  print
Bibles,  of  which  he  subsequently  became  the  largest-
publisher  in  the  United  States.  The  first  Bible  pub-
lished by  him — a  quarto,  bound  in  sheep — was  sold
for  one  dollar.  As  the  first  editor  of  the  "  Inquir-
er," Mr.  Harding,  during  the  contest  between  Presi-
dent Jackson  and  the  directors  of  the  Bank  of  the
United  States,  attempted  the  difficult  task  of  de-
fending the  latter  while  supporting  the  former ;
but,  when  the  government  deposits  were  removed
from  the  bank,  he  supported  the  anti-Jackson  fac-
tion of  the  party,  and  in  1836  advocated  the  elec-
tion of  Harrison.  Finally,  however,  the  "  Inquir-
er "  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Whig  party,  to  the
fortunes  of  which  Mr.  Harding  adhered  until  the
overthrow  of  the  party  in  1852.  Mr.  Harding  was
also  largely  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  paper
at  Trenton.  N.  J.  In  1859  he  retired  from  the
publishing  business,  and  was  succeeded  in  it  by  his
son,  William  W.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  held
the  office  of  collector  of  internal  revenue,  under
appointment  by  President  Lincoln.  —  His  son,
George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  26  Oct.,  1827,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1846.  read  law  with  Hon.  John  Cadwalader,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1849.  He  has  since  con-
tinued in  active  practice,  devoting  himself  to  patent
cases.  When  arguing  the  telegraph  case  of  Samuel
F.  B.  Morse  against  O'Reilly  in  the  U.  S.  supreme
court,  he  operated  in  the  court-room  miniature  lines
of  telegraph  representing  the  entire  system  then
existing  between  New  York  and  Washington.  In
the  "  hat-body  "  case  he  operated  machinery  so  as
to  make  a  complete  hat  in  the  court-room.  He
was  associated  with  Abraham  Lincoln  and  Edwin
M.  Stanton  in  the  McCormick  reaper  case,  and  in-


80


HARDY


HARDY


troduced  a  miniature  grain-field  to  illustrate  the
process  of  reaping  by  machinery.  His  most  suc-
cessful effort  was  in  the  Tilghman  glycerine  case,
when  his  argument  induced  the  supreme  court  to.
reverse  its  first  decision  on  the  same  patent.  Since
1854  Mr.  Harding  has  been  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society. — Another  son,  William
White,  publisher,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  1  Nov.,
1830:  d.  there  15  May.  1889.  He  became  asso-
ciated with  his  father  in  1855  in  the  publishing  of
the  "  Inquirer "  and  of  Harding's  edition  of  the
Bible.  Over  two  million  copies  of  the  Bible  have
been  published  by  the  Hardings.  In  April,  1860,
William  W.  Harding  changed  the  name  of  the
newspaper  to  the  "  Philadelphia  Inquirer,"  and  its
size  from  a  folio  to  a  quarto  sheet.  During  the
civil  war  he  rendered  important  services  to  the
government,  in  acknowledgment  of  which  Sec.
Stanton  wrote  to  Mr.  Harding:  "Prom  no  one
have  I  received  in  my  official  labors  more  disinter-
ested and  highly  prized  support  than  from  your-
self." From  1863  till  1878  Mr.  Harding  manufac-
tured paper  at  the  Inquirer  paper-mills,  Manayunk,
near  Philadelphia,  where  he  introduced  many  new
systems  and  inventions.  At  the  Centennial  in
1876  he  was  awarded  a  medal  for  paper-making,
binding,  and  printing,  he  being  the  only  exhibitor
at  whose  establishment  the  paper  was  made,
printed,  and  bound  into  the  completed  book.

HARDY,  Arthur  Sherburne,  author,  b.  in  An-
dover,  Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1847.  He  studied  for  a  year
at  Amherst,  and  in  1865  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1869.  Sub-
sequently he  became  2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  artil-
lery, and,  after  a  few  months'  service  as  assistant
instructor  of  artillery  tactics  in  the  academy,  he
was  assigned  to  garrison  duty  in  Fort  Jefferson,
Fla.  In  1870  he  was  honorably  discharged  from
the  U.  S.  army  at  his  own  request,  and  until  1873
held  the  professorship  of  civil  engineering  and  ap-
plied mathematics  in  Iowa  college,  Grinnell.  He
then  spent  one  year  in  study  at  the  Ecole  imperiale
des  ponts  et  chaussees  in  Paris.  On  his  return  he
was  professor  of  civil  engineering  in  the  Chandler
scientific  school  of  Dartmouth  until  1878,  when  he
accepted  the  chair  of  mathematics  in  the  college
proper.  In  1873  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
from  Amherst,  and  he  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies.  Prof.  Hardy  has  published
"Elements  of  Quaternions"  (Boston,  1881) ;  "  Im-
aginary Quantities,"  translated  from  the  French  of
Argand,  with  notes  (New  York,  1881) ;  and  "  New
Methods  in  Topographical  Surveying  "  (1884).  Be-
sides these,  he  is  the  author  of  a  poem  entitled
"  Francesca  of  Rimini "  (Philadelphia,  1878),  and
of  the  two  novels,  "  But  yet  a  Woman  "  (Boston,
1883),  and  "The  Wind  of  Destiny"  (1886).

HARD V,  Arthur  Sturgis,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  at  Mount  Pleasant,  Brant  co.,  Ont.,  14  Dec,  1837.
He  was  educated  at  a  grammar-school  and  at  the
Rockwood  academy,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1865.  He  then  began  practice  at
Brantford,  was  appointed  city  solicitor  in  1867,
and  in  1875  elected  a  bencher  of  the  Law  society
of  Ontario.  In  1873  he  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature of  Ontario  for  South  Brant,  re-elected  for
the  same  constituency  in  1875,  by  acclamation,  and
in  March,  1877,  became  provincial  secretary  and
registrar  of  Ontario.  Mr.  Hardy  has  introduced
and  carried  through  the  legislature  measures  con-
solidating and  amending  the  jurors'  act,  and  others
relating  to  the  liquor-license  law,  the  jurisdiction
of  division  courts,  and  joint-stock  companies.

HARDY,  Benjamin  Franklin,  physician,  b.  in
Kennebunk,  Me.,  28  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  San  Fran-


cisco, Cal.,  22  Nov.,  1886.  He  was  left  an  orphan
at  four  vears  of  age,  was  educated  at  Haverford
college,  Pa.,  and  graduated  in  medicine  in  1840  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  subsequently
removed  to  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  and  after  prac-
tising there  for  several  years  accepted  the  appoint-
ment of  court  physician  and  physician  in  charge
of  the  marine  hospital  at  the  Hawaiian  islands.  He
arrived  there  in  1856,  and  after  remaining  six  years
removed  to  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  where  he  practised
until  his  death.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  San
Francisco  lying-in  hospital  and  foundling  asylum,
incorporated  in  1868,  and  regarded  this  as  his  life-
work.  He  was  its  manager,  physician,  and  surgeon
till  within  two  months  of  his  death.

HARDY,  Sir  Charles,  British  soldier,  b.  about
1705 ;  d.  in  Spithead,  England,  18  May,  1780.  He
became  captain  in  the  navy,  10  Aug.,  1741,  governor
and  commander-in-chief  at  Newfoundland  in  1744,
and  as  rear-admiral  of  the  white  was  second  in
command  at  the  taking  of  Louisburg  in  1758.  He
was  British  administrative  governor  of  New  York
in  1755-'7,  and  vice-admiral  of  the  white  in  Hawke's
victory  of  Belle  Isle  in  1759.  Sir  Charles  was  gov-
ernor of  Greenwich  hospital  in  1771-'80. — His
brother,  Josiah,  merchant,  was  governor  of  New
Jersey  in  1761-3,  but  was  dismissed  for  issuing  a
commission  to  judges  during  good  behavior,  in  vio-
lation of  his  instructions.

HARDY,  Elias,  lawyer,  b.  in  1746 ;  d.  in  St.
John,  New  Brunswick,  in  1799.  He  was  practising
as  a  lawyer  in  New  York  at  the  close  of  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  and  soon  afterward  settled  in  St.
John,  New  Brunswick,  where  he  was  known  as  the
"  London  lawyer."  At  the  election  of  members
for  the  first  house  of  assembly,  Mr.  Hardy  was
elected  for  Northumberland  county,  and  was  chosen
for  St.  John  in  the  second  house  of  assembly.  In
the  celebrated  slander  case  of  1790,  in  which  Mon-
son  Hait  was  placed  on  trial  charged  with  accusing
Benedict  Arnold  with  burning  his  warehouse  in
order  to  defraud  the  company  that  had  insured  the
property,  Mr.  Hardy  was  counsel  for  the  defendant,
against  whom  the  jury  returned  a  verdict  of  two
shillings  and  sixpence  damages.  He  married  a
daughter  of  Dr.  Peter  Huggerford,  surgeon  in  the
New  York  regiment  raised  by  Col.  Beverley  Robin-
son. Several  years  after  her  husband's  death  Mrs.
Hardy  and  her  family  returned  to  New  York.

HARDY,  James  Ward,  educator,  b.  in  Georgia,
19  Jan.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Alabama,  14  Aug.,  1853.  He
was  graduated  at  Randolph-Macon  college,  Va.,  in
1837,  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  to  the  chair
of  natural  science  in  that  institution,  also  entering
the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
He  was  for  several  years  professor  of  mathematics
in  Grange  college,  Ala.,  and  afterward  its  president.

HARDY,  Samuel,  statesman,  b.  in  Isle  of  Wight
county,  Va.,  about  1758;  d.  in  New  York  city  in
October,  1785.  He  was  a  son  of  Richard  Hardy,
and  descended  from  George  Hardy,  who  repre-
sented that  county  in  the  house  of  burgesses
1642-'52.  Samuel  was  educated  at  William  and
Mary  college  in  1776-'81,  began  the  practice  of
law,  was  in  the  house  of  delegates  one  or  two  ses-
sions, and  in  June,  1781,  was  appointed  a  member
of  the  executive  council.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Continental  congress  from  Virginia  in  1783-5.  On
6  May,  1784,  he  voted  against  the  resolution  in
congress  restricting  the  salary  of  a  foreign  minis-
ter of  the  United  States  to  $8,000,  and  on  7  May
opposed  the  motion  that  the  salary  of  a  U.  S.  sec-
retary for  foreign  affairs  should  not  exceed  $3,000
per  annum.  In  May,  1784,  he  nominated  Jefferson
as  minister  plenipotentiary  to  Europe  to  assist


HARE


HARE


81


<#yk^


John  Adams  and  Benjamin  Franklin  in  negoti-
ating treaties  of  commerce ;  and  in  January,  1785,
was  a  member  of  a  committee  that  reported  on  let-
ters that  had  been  received  from  U.  S.  ministers  in
Europe  relative  to  a  foreign  loan.  He  was  for  a
time  lieutenant-governor  of  Virginia,  and  a  county
in  the  northern  part  of  that  state  was  named  in  his
honor.  He  was  a  friend  of  Alexander  Hamilton,
who  wrote  a  poetical  tribute  to  his  memory.

HARE,  Robert,  scientist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  17  Jan.,  1781 ;  d.  there,  15  May.  1858.  He  was
the  son  of  an  English  emigrant  who  early  estab-
lished a  large  brewery  in  Philadelphia,  of  which

the  active  manage-
ment soon  fell  into
the  hands  of  the
son.  He  followed  a
course  of  lectures
on  chemistry  and
physics  in  Philadel-

Ehia,  and  before  he
ad  attained  the
age  of  twenty  was
a  member  of  the
Chemical  society
of  Philadelphia,  to
which  he  communi-
cated in  1801  a  de-
scription of  his  im-
portant discovery
of  the  oxyhydrogen
blow-pipe,  which  he
called  a  "  hydrostatic  blow-pipe."  The  original
paper  was  published  with  the  title  "Memoir  on
the  Supplv  and  Application  of  the  Blow-Pipe"
(Philadelphia,  1802).  The  elder  Silliman,  who  was
engaged  with  him  in  a  series  of  experiments  with
this  instrument  in  1802-'3,  subsequently  distin-
guished it  as  the  "  compound  blow-pipe."  "  This
apparatus,"  says  Silliman,  "was  the  earliest  and,
perhaps,  the  most  remarkable  of  his  original  con-
tributions to  science."  He  read  a  supplementary
paper  giving  an  "  Account  of  the  Fusion  of  Stron-
tites  and  Volatilization  of  Platinum,  and  also  a  new
Arrangement  of  Apparatus  "  before  the  American
philosophical  society  in  June,  1803.  By  means  of
this  apparatus  he  was  the  first  to  render  lime,  mag-
nesia, iridium,  and  platinum  fusible  in  any  consid-
erable quantity,  and  the  so-called  Drummond  and
calcium  lights  are  simply  applications  of  the  prin-
ciples discovered  by  him.  Among  his  other  inven-
tions is  the  valve-cock  or  gallows-screw,  by  means
of  which  communication  between  cavities  in  sepa-
rate pieces  of  apparatus  is  made  perfectly  air-tight.
He  devised  improved  forms  of  the  voltaic  pile  with
which  the  intense  powers  of  extended  series  of
Toltaic  couples  were  used  long  in  advance  of  simi-
"  ir  combinations  in  Europe.  In  1816  he  invented
the  calorimotor,  a  form  of  battery  by  which  a  large
lount  of  heat  is  produced.  A  modified  form  of
lis  apparatus,  devised  in  1820  and  called  the  de-
fiagrator,  was  employed  in  1823  in  volatilizing  and
fusing  carbon.  It  was  with  these  batteries  that
the  first  application  of  voltaic  electricity  to  blast-
'  lg  under  water  was  made  in  1831,  and  the  experi-
ments were  conducted  under  the  direction  of  Dr.
Hare.  He  also  attained  a  high  reputation  as  a
chemist,  and  was  the  author  of  a  process  for  de-
narcotizing  laudanum,  and  also  of  a  method  for  de-
tecting minute  quantities  of  opium  in  solution.  In
1818  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and
natural  philosophy  in  William  and  Mary,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  was  made  professor  of  chemistry
in  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  where  he  remained  until  1847.  His
vol.  in. — 8


course  of  instruction  was  marked  by  the  original-
ity of  his  experiments  and  of  the  apparatus  that  he
employed,  which  was  frequently  of  unusual  dimen-
sions. His  valuable  collection  of  chemical  and
physical  apparatus  was  presented  to  the  Smithso-
nian institution  on  his  resignation  from  his  pro-
fessorship in  1847.  In  later  years  he  became  a
convert  to  Spiritualism,  and  lectured  in  its  advo-
cacy. Dr.  Hare  received  the  honorary  degree  of
M.  D.  from  Yale  in  1806,  and  from  Harvard  in
1816.  In  1839  he  was  the  first  recipient  of  the
Rumford  premium  for  his  oxyhydrogen  blow-pipe,
and  his  improvements  in  galvanic  apparatus.  Dr.
Hare  was  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences,  of  the  American  philosophical
society  (1803),  and  an  honorary  life-member  of  the
Smithsonian  institution.  His  contributions  to  sci-
entific literature  were  large.  In  Silliman's  "Amer-
ican Journal  of  Science  "  alone  he  published  nearly
200  papers.  Besides  contributions  to  other  scientific
periodicals,  he  was  the  author  of  moral  essays  in
the  "  Portfolio,"  writing  frequently  under  the  pen-
name  of  Eldred  Grayson,  and  of  "  Brief  View  of  the
Policy  and  Resources  of  the  United  States  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1810) ;  "  Chemical  Apparatus  and  Manipu-
lations "  (1836) ;  "  Compendium  of  the  Course  of
Chemical  Instruction  in  the  Medical  Department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  "  (1840) ;  "  Me-
moir on  the  Explosiveness  of  Nitre "  (Washing-
ton, 1850) ;  and  "  Spiritualism  Scientifically  Demon-
strated "  (New  York,  1855). — His  son,  John  I  n  nes
Clark,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Oct.,
1816,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1834,  and  after  studying  law  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1841.  Ten  years  later  he  was  elected
associate  judge  of  the  district  court  of  Philadel-
phia, and  in  1867  became  presiding  judge.  In
1875  he  was  made  presiding  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  in  Philadelphia,  which  office  he  still
holds.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1868
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which  he
was  a  trustee  in  1858-'68,  and  in  which  he  was  for
some  time  professor  of  institutes  of  law.  In  con-
junction with  Horace  B.  Wallace  he  published
"  American  Leading  Cases  in  Law  "  (2  vols.,  Phila-
delphia, 1847) :  and  has  edited  "  Smith's  Leading
Cases  in  Law  "  (2  vols.,  1852),  "  White  and  Tudor's
Leading  Cases  in  Equity  "  (3  vols.,  1852) :  and  "  Hare
on  Contracts"  (1887);  also  "The  New  English
Exchequer  Reports." — Robert's  nephew,  George
Emlen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  4  Sept.,
1808,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1826.  He  was
ordained  deacon  by  Bishop  White,  20  Dec,  1829,
and  before  his  ordination  to  the  priesthood  was
chosen  rector  of  St.  John's  church,  Carlisle,  Pa.,
where  he  remained  several  years.  He  was  after-
ward rector  of  Trinity  church,  Princeton,  N.  J.
He  was  assistant  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1844-'5,  and
subsequently  had  charge  of  the  academy  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  Philadelphia,  be-
ing also  rector  of  St.  Matthew's.  He  undertook
after  this  the  instruction  of  the  diocesan  training-
school,  which  soon  grew  into  the  Philadelphia  di-
vinity-school. He  has  continued  in  the  faculty  of
the  latter  more  than  twenty-five  years,  most  of  the
time  as  professor  of  biblical  learning,  and  is  now
professor  of  New  Testament  literature.  He  served
many  years  on  the  standing  committee  of  the  dio-
cese of  Pennsylvania,  and  has  been  often  a  dele-
gate to  the  general  convention.  He  was  one  of  the
American  committee  for  the  revision  of  the  Old
Testament  translation.  Columbia  gave  him  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1843,  and  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1873. — George  Em-


82


HARGIS


HARKINS


len's  son,  William  Hobart,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  17  May.  1838,  was  educated  in
part  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  but,  on  ac-
count of  trouble  with  his  eyes,  he  left  before  gradu-
ation. He  was  ordained  deacon,  19  June,  1859,  by
Bishop  Bowman,  and  priest,  25  May,  1862,  by  Bish-
op Alonzo  Potter.  During  his  deaconate  he  was
assistant  minister  in  St.  Luke's  church,  Philadel-
phia. In  May,  1861,  he  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's,
Chestnut  Hill,  where  he  remained  for  two  years.
In  1863  he  was  in  charge  of  St.  Luke's,  Philadel-
phia, during  the  absence  of  the  rector,  and  in  1864
was  elected  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Ascension
in  the  same  city.  He  next  became  secretary  and
general  agent  of  the  foreign  committee  of  the
board  of  missions,  which  office  he  filled  for  several
years.  In  1871  Dr.  Hare  was  elected  by  the  house
of  bishops  missionary  bishop  of  Cape  Palmas  and
parts  adjacent,  in  West  Africa,  but  declined  the
appointment.  In  October,  1872,  he  was  elected
missionary  bishop  of  Niobrara,  and  was  consecrated
in  St.  Luke's,  Philadelphia,  9  Jan.,  1873.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  three  colleges  in
1873.  At  the  general  convention  of  1883  the
Indian  missionary  jurisdiction  of  Niobrara  was
changed  and  extended.  It  now  embraces  the
southern  part  of  Dakota,  and,  by  vote  of  the  house
of  bishops,  he  was  placed  in  charge,  with  the  title
of  "  Missionary  Bishop  of  South  Dakota."  Bishop
Hare  deposed  a  missionary,  Rev.  S.  D.  Hinman,  on
charges  of  immorality,  and,  to  vindicate  his  action,
sent  a  communication  to  the  board  of  missions.
For  this,  Hinman  sued  him  for  libel  in  the  New
York  courts,  and  obtained  a  verdict  for  $10,000,
but  after  appeals  the  judgment  was  reversed.

HARGIS,  Thomas  F.,  jurist,  b.  in  Breathitt
county,  Ky.,  24  June,  1842.  He  removed  with  his
parents  to  Rowan  county  in  1856,  and  received  a
scanty  education.  In  1861  he  entered  the  Confed-
erate service  as  a  private  in  the  5th  Kentucky  in-
fantry. He  was  promoted  captain  in  1863,  and  in
November,  1864,  was  captured  in  Luray  valley  and
held  a  prisoner  until  the  termination  of  the  war.
Returning  home  penniless  at  the  age  of  twenty-
three,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  and  mastery
of  the  English  branches,  and  to  the  law.  He  was
licensed  to  practise  in  1866,  and  in  1868  removed
to  Carlisle,  Ky.  The  year  following  he  was  elected
judge  of  Nicholas  county,  and  he  was  re-elected  in
1870.  He  was  chosen  to  the  state  senate  in  1871,
elected  judge  of  the  criminal  court  in  1878,  and
raised  to  the  appellate  bench  of  Kentucky  in  1879.
After  serving  as  chief  justice  during  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  death  of  an  associate  judge,  he
served  two  years  longer  by  his  own  succession.
Declining  a  re-election,  he  retired  from  the  supreme
bench  in  1884,  and  removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,
where  he  is  now  (1887)  engaged  in  practice.

HARGROVE,  Robert  Kennon,  M.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Pickens  county,  Ala.,  17  Sept.,  1829.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Alabama  in  1852,
and  was  professor  of  pure  mathematics  there  in
1853-7.  He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Meth-
odist Episcopal  church  in  the  latter  year,  was  presi-
dent or  the  Centenary  institute  in  Alabama  in
1805-7.  and  of  Tennessee  female  college  in  1868-73.
In  1882  he  was  elected  a  bishop  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  He  was  the  first  to  urge  the
bond-scheme  that  saved  the  publishing-house  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  originated
the  woman's  department  of  church-extension  for
the  securing  of  parsonages  in  the  same  church,  and
was  a  member  of  the  commission  that  in  1878  es-
tablished fraternal  relations  between  the  northern
and  southern  branches  of  the  Methodist  church.


HARING,  John,  patriot,  b.  in  Tappan,  Orange
(now  Rockland)  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  Sept.,  1739;  d.  in
Blauveltville,  N.  Y.,  1  April,  1809.  His  ancestors
came  from  Holland.  He  served  in  the  first  four
provincial  congresses,  and  sat  in  the  Continental
congress  in  1774-'5  and  1785-7.  He  was  elected  in
1776  to  the  New  York  general  assembly,  which  never
organized,  sat  on  the  judicial  bench  of  the  county
in  1778-'88,  and  in  1781-90  was  state  senator.  He
was  a  commissioner  for  settling  the  dispute  be-
tween New  York  and  Massachusetts  about  western
lands,  and  in  1788  was  a  member  of  the  state  con-
vention that  ratified  the  U.S.  constitution,  but  voted
against  it. See  his  life  by  Franklin  Burdge  (1878).

HARKER,  Charles  G.,  soldier,  b.  in  Swedes-
borough,  N.  J.,  2  Dec,  1837:  killed  at  the  battle
of  Kenesaw  Mountain,  27  June,  1864.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1858,
entered  the  2d  infantry,  and  became  1st  lieuten-
ant of  the  15th  infantry,  14  May,  1861.  He  was
promoted  captain,  24  Oct.,  1861,  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  65th  Ohio  volunteers,  and  colo-
nel on  11  Nov.,  1861.  He  was  engaged  in  the  bat-
tle of  Shiloh  and  the  siege  of  Corinth  and  the
battle  of  Stone  River,  and  was  recommended  for
promotion,  but  did  not  receive  it  until  he  had
still  further  distinguished  himself  at  Chicka-
mauga  and  Chattanooga.  He  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  to  date  from  20  Sept.,  1863,
commanded  a  brigade  under  Gen.  Howard  in
the  campaign  in  Georgia,  and  held  the  peak  of
Rocky  Face  Ridge,  7  May,  1864,  against  deter-
mined efforts  of  the  enemy  to  dislodge  him.

HARKER,  Samuel,  clergyman.  He  became
pastor  of  a  church  at  Black  River,  N.  J.,  31  Oct.,
1752.  He  published  "  Predestination  Consistent
with  General  Liberty  "  (1761),  for  which  he  was
excluded,  and  disqualified  to  preach  by  the  synods
of  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  He  subsequently
published  an  "  Appeal  from  the  Synod  to  the
Christian  World  "  (1763).

HARKEY,  Simeon  Walcher,  clergyman,  b.
in  Iredell  county,  N.  C,  3  Dec.  1811.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Gettysburg  Lutheran  seminary
in  1834,  and  from  1850  till  1866  was  professor  of
theology  in  the  University  of  Illinois.  He  was
president  of  the  general  synod  of  his  church  in
1857.  In  1865  he  served  as  chaplain  at  Camp
Butler,  near  Springfield,  111.  He  has  been  success-
ful as  an  organizer  and  pastor  of  congregations,
preaching  both  in  English  and  German.  Witten-
berg college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1852.
His  publications  in  book -form  are  "Lutheran
Sunday-School  Question-Book  "  (1838) ;  "  Church's
Best  State  "  (1843) ;  "Daily  Prayer-Book  "  (1844);
"Value  of  an  Evangelical  Ministry"  (1853):  and
"  Justification  by  Faith  "  (1875).  Among  his  ad-
dresses are  "  True  Greatness,"  "  Andrew  Jack-
son's Funeral,"  "  Prisons  for  Women,"  and  "  Mis-
sion of  Lutheran  Church."  He  is  now  (1887)
writing  a  series  of  articles  on  his  personal  remi-
niscences of  Lutheranism  in  Illinois.

HARKINS,  Mathew,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  17  Nov.,  1845.  He  attended  the  Latin-
school  of  his  native  city,  and  was  graduated  with
a  Franklin  medal  in  1862.  He  studied  a  year  at
the  College  of  the  Holy  Cross  at  Worcester,  Mass.,
and  on  leaving  was  sent  by  Bishop  Fitzpatrick  to
pursue  a  course  of  theology  at  the  English  college
of  Douay  and  in  the  seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,
Paris.  After  six  years'  study  he  was  ordained,
and  visited  Rome  before  returning  home.  After
serving  as  curate  of  the  Church  of  the  Immacu-
late Conception  at  Salem,  Mass.,  he  was  appointed
in  1876  rector  of  St.  Malachi's  church  at  Arling-


HARKNESS

ton,  his  parish  including  Lexington  and  Belmont.
Here  he  remained  for  eight  years,  after  which  he
was  transferred  to  St.  James's  in  Boston.  He  took
an  especial  interest  in  the  Sunday-school,  and
gained  great  popularity  as  a  preacher.  He  was
nominated  for  the  see  of  Providence  in  January,
1887.  The  diocese  over  which  he  presides  is  prob-
ably the  largest  in  New  England,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  archdiocese  of  Boston.  Bishop  Har-
kins  was  selected  by  Archbishop  Williams  as  his
theologian  at  the  plenary  council  of  Baltimore,
where  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  notaries.

HARKNESS,  Albert,  educator,  b.  in  Mendon
(now  Blackstown),  Mass.,  6  Oct..  1822.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1842,  at  the  head  of  his
class,  and  served  as  master  in  the  Providence
high-school  from  1843  till  1846,  when  he  became
senior  master,  and  held  this  post  until  1853.  He
then  travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  spending
about  two  years  in  the  universities  of  Gottingen,
Bonn,  and  Berlin.  On  his  return  in  1855  he  was
appointed  professor  of  the  Greek  language  and
literature  in  Brown,  which  chair  he  still  (1887)
holds.  He  has  received  the  degrees  of  Ph.  D.  from
Bonn  in  1854  and  LL.  D.  from  Brown  in  1869.
His  publications  are  principally  text-books,  which
are  extensively  used.  They  include  "  Arnold's
First  Latin  Book"  (New  York,  1851):  "Second
Latin  Book  "  (1853) ;  "  First  Greek  Book  and  In-
troductory Greek  Reader  "  (1860 ;  revised  ed.,  1885) :
"Latin  Grammar"  (1864;  revised  eds.,  1874  and
1881);  "Latin  Reader"  (1865);  "Introductory
Latin  Book"  (1866):  "Latin  Composition"  (1868)";
editions  of  "Caesar"  (1870;  revised  ed.,  with  a
treatise  on  the  military  system  of  the  Romans,
1886),  "  Cicero  "  (1873),  and' "  Sallust "  (1878) ;  and
"Complete  Latin  Course  for  the  First  Year"
(1883). — His  son,  Albert  Granger,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  19  Nov.,  1857,  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1879,  and  studied  in  Berlin,  Leipzig,  and  Bonn.
Since  1883  he  has  been  professor  of  Latin  and
German  in  Madison  university,  Hamilton,  N.  Y.

HARKNESS,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rox-
burghshire, Scotland,  13  March,  1803  ;  d.  in  Jersey
City,  N.  J.,  4  July,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Edinburgh,  was  ordained  to  the  min-
istry in  1832,  and  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyte-
rian church  in  Ecclefechan,  Scotland.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1839,  and  held  pastorates  in
New  York  city,  Fishkill,  and  Rochester,  N.  Y.  In
1862  he  was  installed  over  the  3d  Presbyterian
church  in  Jersey  City,  where  he  remained  until
his  death.  He  had  studied  medicine,  had  taken  a
medical  degree,  and  practised  among  his  various
congregations.  He  adopted  homoeopathy  in  1840.
He  contributed  frequently  to  the  magazines  of  his
denomination,  and  published  "  Messiah's  Throne
and  Kingdom  "  (New  York,  1855). — His  son,  Will-
iam, astronomer,  b.  in  Ecclefechan,  Scotland,  17
Dec,  1837,  studied  at  Lafayette  college,  and  was
graduated  in  1858  at  Rochester  university,  where
he  also  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1874.  He
was  graduated  in  medicine  in  1862,  was  appointed
aide  at  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory  in  August  of
that  year,  and  also  served  as  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.
army  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  during
the  attack  on  Washington  in  July,  1864.  He  was
commissioned  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.
navy,  with  the  relative  rank  of  lieutenant-com-
mander, in  August.  1863,  and  stationed  at  the  naval
observatory  in  Washington,  D.  C.  In  1865-'6,  dur-
ing a  cruise  on  the  "  Monadnock."  he  made  an  ex-
tensive series  of  observations  on  terrestrial  mag-
netism at  the  principal  ports  in  South  America.
His  results  were  published  by  the  Smithsonian  in-


HARLAN  83

stitution  (Washington,  1872).  On  his  return  he
was  attached  to  the  U.  S.  hydrographic  office  dur-
ing 1867,  and  from  1868  till  1874  to  the  naval  ob-
servatory. He  discovered  the  1474  line  of  the  solar
corona  at  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  during  the  total
eclipse  of  7  Aug.,  1869.  In  1871  he  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  U.  S.  transit-of- Venus  commission,
and,  after  designing  most  of  the  instruments  to  be
employed,  he  went  to  Hobart  Town,  Tasmania,  as
chief  of  the  party  that  observed  the  transit  there,
made  a  voyage  around  the  world,  and  returned  to
Washington  in  1875.  He  was  promoted  to  the  rela-
tive rank  of  captain  in  1878,  was  made  executive
officer  of  the  transit-of- Venus  commission,  and
fitted  out  all  of  the  expeditions  in  1882.  The  ma-
chine used  for  measuring  the  astronomical  photo-
graphs obtained  was  designed  by  him,  and  a  dupli-
cate of  this  machine  has  recently  been  made  for  the
Lick  observatory  in  California.  Since  the  return
of  the  transit-of- Venus  parties,  he  has  been  engaged
in  reducing  and  discussing  their  observations.  He
also  devised  the  sperometer  caliper,  which  is  the
most  accurate  instrument  known  for  measuring
the  inequalities  of  the  pivots  of  astronomical  in-
struments. Prof.  Harkness  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies,  and  has  prepared  a  great  num-
ber of  papers  and  reports.

HARLAN,  James,  lawver,  b.  in  Mercer  county,
Ky.,  22  June,  1800 ;  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  18  Feb.,
1863.  He  received  a  public-school  education,  and
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  from  1817  till  1822.
He  then  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1823,  beginning  to  practise  in  Harrodsburg.
He  was  for  four  years  prosecuting  attorney  for  his
circuit,  and  in  1834  was  elected  a  representative  in
congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  1835  till  1839.
During  his  last  session  he  was  chairman  of  the
committee  for  investigating  defalcations.  He  was
secretary  of  state  of  Kentucky  in  1840-'4,  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1841,  and  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1845.  In  1850  he  was  appointed  attor-
ney-general for  Kentucky,  which  office  he  held
until  his  death. — His  son,  John  Marshall,  lawyer,
b.  in  Boyle  county,  Ky.,  1  June,  1833,  was  graduated
at  Centre  college  in  1850,  and  at  the  law  depart-
ment of  Transylvania  university  in  1853.  In  1851
he  was  adjutant-general  of  Kentucky,  and  in  1858
became  judge  of  Franklin  county,  Ky.  He  was
afterward  an  unsuccessful  Whig  candidate  for
congress,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  en-
tered the  Union  army  as  colonel  of  the  10th  Ken-
tucky infantry.  He  was  attorney-general  of  Ken-
tucky in  1863^-'7,  and  was  the  unsuccessful  Repub-
lican candidate  for  governor  of  the  state  in  1871
and  1875.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Louisiana  com-
mission that  was  appointed  by  President  Hayes,
and  on  29  Nov.,  1877,  became  associate  justice  of
the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  as  successor  of  David
Davis. — John  Marshall's  son,  Richard  Daven-
port, was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1881,  and  is
now  (1887)  in  charge  of  the  First  Presbyterian
church  on  Fifth  avenue,  in  New  York  city.

HARLAN,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Clarke  coun-
ty, 111.,  25  Aug.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Indiana  Asbury  university  in  1845,  held  the  office
of  superintendent  of  public  instruction  in  Iowa  in
1847,  and  was  president  of  Iowa  Wesleyan  univer-
sity in  1853.  He  was  elected  to  the  IJ.  S.  senate
in  1855  as  a  Whig,  and  served  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  public  lands,  but  his  seat  was  de-
clared vacant  on  a  technicality  on  12  Jan.,  1857.
On  the  17th  of  the  same  month  he  was  re-elected
for  the  term  ending  in  1861,  and  in  the  latter  year
was  a  delegate  to  the  Peace  convention.  He  was
re-elected  to  the  senate  for  the  term  ending  in


84


HARLAN


HARNDEN


1867,  but  resigned  in  1865,  having  been  appointed
by  President  Lincoln  secretary  of  the  interior.
He  was  again  elected  to  the  senate  in  1866,  and
was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  loyalists'  con-
vention of  that  year.  He  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  District  of  Columbia  and  Indian
affairs,  and  also  served  on  those  on  foreign  rela-
tions, agriculture,  and  the  Pacific  railroad.  In
1869  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  Iowa  uni-
versity. After  leaving  the  senate  in  1873  he  be-
came editor  of  the  "  Washington  Chronicle."  From
1882  till  1885  he  was  presiding  judge  of  the  court
of  commissioners  of  Alabama  claims.

HARLAN,  Richard,  naturalist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  19  Sept.,  1796 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
30  Sept.,  1843.  Previous  to  his  graduation  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1818,  he  made  a  voyage  to  Calcutta  as
surgeon  of  an  East  India  ship.  He  practised  his
profession  in  Philadelphia,  was  elected  in  1821
professor  of  comparative  anatomy  in  the  Phila-
delphia museum,  was  a  member  of  the  cholera
commission  in  1832,  and  surgeon  to  the  Philadel-
phia hospital.  In  1839  he  visted  Europe  a  second
time,  and  after  his  return  in  1843  removed  to  New
Orleans,  and  became  in  that  year  vice-president  of
the  Louisiana  state  medical  society.  He  was  a
member  of  many  learned  societies  in  this  country
and  abroad,  and  published  "  Observations  on  the
Genus  Salamandra  "  (Philadelphia,  1824) ;  "  Fauna
Americana "  (1825) ;  "  American  Herpetology  "
(1827) ;  "  Medical  and  Physical  Researches"  (1835) ;
and  a  translation  of  Gannal's  "  History  of  Embalm-
ing," with  additions  (1840). — His  son,  George  Cu-
vier,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  Jan.,
1835,  was  educated  at  Delaware  college  and  in  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, where  he  was  graduated  in  1858.  He  was
appointed  resident  physician  of  Wills  eye  hospital
in  1857,  of  St.  Joseph's  hospital  in  1858,  and  of  the
Pennsylvania  hospital  in  1859.  For  some  time
during  the  civil  war  he  served  as  medical  officer  on
the  gun-boat  "  Union,"  and  for  three  years  was
surgeon  of  the  11th  Pennsylvania  cavalry.  He  is
now  (1887)  professor  of  diseases  of  the  eye  in  the
Philadelphia  polyclinic,  and  has  published  numer-
ous papers  on  his  specialty.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Diseases  of  the  Orbit "  in  Wood's  "  Reference
Hand-Book,"  and  has  revised  parts  of  the  Ameri-
can edition  of  Holmes's  "  System  of  Surgery."

HARLAND,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,
1  March,  1861.  He  received  his  education  in  the
College  of  the  city  of  New  York  and  in  Harvard,
but  was  not  graduated.  From  1883  till  1886  he
was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  surrogate  of  New
York.  He  writes  under  the  pen-name  of  Sidney
Luska,  and  has  published  "  As  It  was  Written "
(New  York,  1885):  "Mrs.  Peixada"  (1886);  "The
Yoke  of  the  Thorah,"  and  "A  Land  of  Love  "  (1887).

HARM  AND,  Louis  Gustave,  French  pilot,  b.  in
Dieppe,  France,  in  1503;  d.  in  Acapulco,  New
Spain,  in  1549.  He  had  served  in  the  French  navy,
and  in  1541  offered  his  services  to  Antonio  de  Men-
doza,  then  viceroy  of  New  Spain,  who  attached
him  to  the  expedition  commanded  by  Vasquez  de
Coronado  and  Fray  Marcos  de  Niza.  On  his  re-
turn, Mendoza  appointed  him  chief  pilot,  and  in
1543  sent  him  to  explore  the  coasts  of  California.
He  sailed  in  a  small  brig  on  20  March,  1543,  and
kept  always  in  sight  of  the  land,  making  charts,
and  advancing  three  degrees  farther  than  Her-
nando de  Alarcon  in  the  Gulf  of  California.  He
rectified  the  map  of  Alarcon,  and  brought  back
proof  that  California  is  not  an  island,  as  had  been
believed. Harmand  landed  several  times,  and  col-


lected some  interesting  traditions  current  among
the  natives,  which  he  published  under  the  title
"  Les  indigenes  de  la  Californie  "  (Paris,  1547).  A
copy  of  the  original  edition,  probably  the  only  one
now  in  existence,  is  in  the  National  library  of  Paris.
It  has  been  reprinted  by  Ternaux  Com  pans,  the
historian  of  the  discovery  of  South  America,  in  his
collection.  Harmand's  map  of  California  is  won-
derfully exact,  considering  that  the  navigator  had
scarcely  any  instrument.

HARMAR,  Josiah,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1753  ;  d.  there,  20  Aug.,  1813.  He  was  edu-
cated chiefly  in  Robert  Proud's  Quaker  school.  In
1776  he  entered  the  Continental  army  as  captain
in  the  1st  Pennsylvania  regiment,  was  made  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  the  following  year,  and  served
until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  in  Washington's
army  in  the  campaigns  of  1778-'80,  and  in  Gen.
Greene's  division  in  the  south  in  1781-'2.  In  1783
he  was  made  brevet-colonel  of  the  1st  U.  S.  regi-
ment. He  took  the  ratification  of  the  definitive
treaty  to  France  in  1784,  and  as  Indian  agent  for
the  northwest  territory  was  present  when  the
treaty  was  made  at  Fort  Mcintosh  on  20  Jan.,
1785.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  infantry
on  12  Aug.,  1784,  and  in  1787  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general by  resolution  of  congress.  He  be-
came general-in-chief  of  the  army  in  1789,  and  in
1790  he  commanded  an  expedition  against  the
Miami  Indians.  He  resigned  his  commission  in
1792,  and  in  the  following  year  was  appointed  ad-
jutant-general of  Pennsylvania,  which  office  he
held  until  1799.  During  this  service  he  was  active
in  preparing  and  equipping  the  Pennsylvania
troops  for  Wayne's  Indian  campaign  of  1793-'4.

HARMONY,  David  B.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Eas-
ton,  Pa.,  3  Sept.,  1832.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman on  7  April,  1847,  passed  that  grade  in
1853,  became  lieutenant  in  1855,  lieutenant-com-
mander in  1862,  commander  in  1866,  captain  in
1875,  and  commodore  in  1885.  He  served  on  the
"  Iroquois "  at  the  passage  of  Fort  Jackson  and
Fort  St.  Philip,  and  at  the  capture  of  New  Or-
leans, and  took  part  in  many  severe  engagements
with  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  and  Grand  Gulf.
He  was  executive  officer  of  the  iron-clad  "  Na-
hant "  in  the  first  attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  7  April,
1863,  and  in  the  engagement  with  the  ram  "  At-
lanta "  on  17  June,  and  in  all  the  attacks  on  de-
fences at  Charleston,  from  4  July  till  7  September.
He  held  a  command  in  the  Eastern  gulf  squadron
in  1863,  and  commanded  the  "Saratoga  in  the
Western  gulf  squadron  in  1864-'5,  taking  part  in
the  capture  of  Mobile  and  its  defences.  He  com-
manded a  division  of  eight  vessels  in  an  expedition
to  Montgomery,  Ala.,  in  April,  1865,  and  in  1867
commanded  the  "  Frolic "  in  Europe,  one  of  the
vessels  of  Admiral  Farragut's  squadron.  He  was
honorably  mentioned  in  the  reports  of  Com.  De
Camp,  Com.  Palmer,  and  Com.  Downes.  He  made
his  last  cruise  in  1881,  was  a  member  of  the  exam-
ining and  retiring  boards  in  1883-'5,  and  is  now
(1887)  serving  as  chief  of  the  bureau  of  yards  and
docks,  having  held  this  office  since  1885.

HARNDEN,  William  Frederick,  expressman,
b.  in  Reading,  Mass.,  23  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  14  Jan.,  1845.  For  five  years  he  was  con-
ductor and  passenger-clerk  on  the  Boston  and
Worcester  railroad.  Early  in  1839  he  originated
the  express  system  of  transportation  for  merchan-
dise or  parcels.  On  4  March  of  that  year,  after  pub-
lic announcement  in  the  newspapers  for  several
days,  he  made  his  first  trip  from  Boston  to  New
York  as  an  "  express-package  carrier."  Mr.  Harn-
den  proposed  also  to  take  the  charge  of  freight  and


HARNETT


HARNEY


85,


attend  to  its  delivery,  for  which  purpose  he  was  to
make  four  trips  a  week.  The  project  recommended
itself  to  business  men,  and  was  particularly  ac-
ceptable to  the  press,  to  which  Mr.  Harnden  made
bimself  useful  in  the  voluntary  transmission  of
news  in  advance  of  the  mail.  In  1840  Dexter
Brigham,  Jr.,  his  New  York  agent,  became  his  part-
ner, and  soon  afterward  went  to  England,  where  he
laid  the  foundation  of  Harnden  and  Company's
foreign  business.  During  the  same  year  their  line
was  extended  to  Philadelphia,  and  later  to  Albany.
The  business  grew  with  great  rapidity,  but  Mr.
Harnden's  health  failed,  and  he  soon  died.  For
several  years  the  company  was  continued  by  the
remaining  members  of  the  firm,  but  in  1854  it  was
consolidated  with  others  to  form  the  Adams  express
company.  In  1866  a  monument  was  erected  to
Mr.  Harnden's  memory  in  Mount  Auburn  ceme-
tery, near  Cambridge,  Mass.,  by  the  "  express  com-
panies of  the  United  States."

HARNETT,  Cornelius,  statesman,  b.  probably
in  North  Carolina,  20  April,  1723 ;  d.  in  Wilming-
ton, N.  C,  20  April,  1781.  He  acquired  property
at  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  and  first  became  known  in
public  affairs  through  his  opposition  to  the  stamp-
act  and  kindred  measures.  He  represented  the
borough  of  Wilmington  in  the  provincial  assembly
in  1770-'l,  and  was  chairman  of  the  more  impor-
tant committees  of  that  body.  In  1772  Mr.  Har-
nett, Robert  Howe,  and  Judge  Maurice  Moore  were
named  by  the  assembly  a  committee  to  prepare  a
remonstrance  against  the  appointment,  by  Gov.
Martin,  of  commissioners  to  run  the  southern
boundary-line  of  the  province.  In  1773  Josiah
Quincy,  while  travelling  in  the  south  for  his  health,
spent  a  night  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  Harnett,
whom  he  styled  "the  Samuel  Adams  of  North
Carolina."  As  the  Revolution  approached,  Har-
nett became  its  master-spirit  throughout  the  Cape
Pear  region.  In  December,  1773,  he  was  placed  on
the  committee  of  continental  correspondence  for
the  Wilmington  district.  In  the  Provincial  con-
gress of  1775  he  represented  his  old  constituents ;
and  when  a  provincial  council  was  appointed  to
fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  abdication  of  Mar-
tin, he  was  made  its  president  and  became  the  act-
ual governor  of  North  Carolina.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Provincial  congress  at  Halifax,  N.  C,  in
the  spring  of  1776,  and,  as  chairman  of  a  committee
to  consider  the  usurpations  of  the  home  govern-
ment, submitted  a  report  that  empowered  the  North
Carolina  delegates  in  the  Continental  congress  to
use  their  influence  in  favor  of  a  declaration  of  in-
dependence. Soon  afterward  Sir  Henry  Clinton,
with  a  British  fleet,  appeared  in  Cape  Pear  river,
and  honored  Harnett  and  Robert  Howe  by  except-
ing them  from  his  offer  of  a  general  pardon  to
those  who  should  return  to  their  allegiance.  When,
on  22  July,  the  Declaration  of  Independence  ar-
rived at  Halifax,  Harnett  read  it  to  a  great  con-
course of  citizens  and  soldiers,  who  took  him  on
their  shoulders  and  bore  him  in  triumph  through  the
town.  In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he  assisted
in  drafting  a  state  constitution  and  bill  of  rights,
and  to  his  liberal  spirit  the  citizens  are  indebted
for  the  clause  securing  religious  liberty.  Under
the  new  constitution  Harnett  became  one  of  the
council,  and  was,  in  1778,  elected  to  fill  Gov.  Cas-
well's seat  in  congress.  His  name  is  to  be  found
signed  to  the  "  articles  of  confederation  and  per-
petual union."  When  the  British  subsequently
took  possession  of  the  Cape  Fear  region,  Harnett
was  taken  prisoner  and  died  in  captivity.

HARNEY,  John  Hopkins,  journalist,  b.  in
Bourbon  county,  Ky.,  20  Feb.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Jefferson


county,  Ky.,  27  Jan.,  1867.  Being  left  by  the  death
of  his  parents  in  straitened  circumstances,  he  was
compelled  to  educate  himself,  and  developed  a
talent  for  mathematics.  At  the  age  of  seventeen
he  successfully  solved  a  problem  in  surveying  that
had  been  referred  to  him  by  two  rivals,  which
attracted  so  much  attention  that  he  was  soon
made  principal  of  the  Paris,  Ky.,  academy.  The
money  thus  earned  he  devoted  to  the  purchase
of  a  scholarship  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  Ohio,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1827  in  belles-lettres
and  theology.  He  was  appointed  professor  of
mathematics  in  the  University  of  Indiana  in  1828,
and  in  1833  accepted  the  corresponding  chair  at
Hanover  college,  Ind.,  and  began  the  preparation
of  his  "  Algebra."  In  1839  he  was  made  president
of  Louisville  college.  This  office  he  retained  until
1843,  when  the  college  was  closed.  The  year  fol-
lowing, Mr.  Harney  began  the  publication  of  the
Louisville  "  Democrat,"  which  he  continued  to
edit  until  his  death.  He  was  elected  trustee  of  the
Louisville  school-board  in  1850,  and  afterward
president,  and  established  many  reforms.  In  1861-2
he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  as  chairman
of  the  committee  on  Federal  relations,  when  Ken-
tucky was  invaded  by  the  Confederate  army,  he
drafted  the  famous  resolution,  "  Resolved,  That
Kentucky  expects  the  Confederate,  or  Tennessee,
troops  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  soil  uncondition-
ally." Mr.  Harney  declined  a  re-election  and  de-
voted himself  to  protesting  in  the  "Democrat"
against  the  arbitrary  arrest  and  deportation  of
citizens,  opposing  the  grant  of  "  another  man  or
another  dollar "  until  the  liberties  of  the  citizen
were  assured.  This  led  to  his  arrest,  but  Gen.
Burnside,  after  looking  into  the  matter,  disapproved
the  action  of  his  subordinates,  and  the  journalist
was  released.  At  the  close  of  the  war  Mr.  Harney
urged  the  repeal  of  the  severe  laws  against  self-
expatriated  Confederates,  and  succeeded  in  carry-
ing a  measure  of  full  restoration  ;  but  in  1868  he
opposed  the  nomination  of  such  rehabilitated  citi-
zens for  high  office,  on  the  ground  that  it  would
provoke  further  arbitrary  arrests.  His  "Algebra  "
(Louisville,  1840)  ranks  high  as  a  text-book  for
advanced  pupils. — His  son,  William  Wallace,
journalist,  b.  in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  20  June,  1831,
was  educated  at  Louisville  college  and  at  home,  and
graduated  at  the  law  department  of  Louisville
university  in  1855.  He  was  principal  of  a  ward
school  in  the  latter  city  in  1852-'6,  and  afterward
became  the  first  principal  of  the  Louisville  high-
school.  During  the  two  years  succeeding  he  occu-
pied the  chair  of  English  and  ancient  languages  in
the  State  university  at  Lexington,  Ky.  He  then
became  associate  editor  of  the  Louisville  "  Demo-
crat," and  in  1869  its  editor-in-chief.  In  the  lat-
ter year  he  removed  to  Florida,  where  he  planted
an  orange-grove.  From  September,  1883,  till
March,  1885,  he  edited  "  The  Bitter  Sweet "  at  Kis-
simmee,  Fla.  Besides  his  labors  as  a  journalist,
Mr.  Harney  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  pe-
riodicals, and  has  written  several  essays  oh  orange-
culture.  His  fugitive  poems  and  his  sketches  of
southern  life  are  popular.

HARNEY,  John  Milton,  poet,  b.  in  Sussex
county,  Del.,  9  March,  1789;  d.  in  Bardstown,  Ky.,
15  Jan.,  1825.  He  was  a  son  of  Thomas  Harney,
an  officer  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  In  1791
the  family  emigrated  to  Tennessee,  and  subse-
quently removed  to  Louisiana.  Young  Harney
studied  medicine  and  settled  at  Bardstown,  Nelson
co.,  Ky.  While  on  a  visit  to  Europe  he  received  a
|  naval  appointment,  and  spent  several  years  in
;  Buenos  Ayres. On  his  return  to  the  United  States


86


HARNISCII


HARO


he  edited  a  paper  at  Savannah,  Ga.,  for  a  time,
but,  being  seized  with  a  violent  fever  in  conse-

Suence  of  his  exertions  at  a  Are,  he  returned  to
ardstown  in  broken  health  and  died  there.  Be-
fore his  death  he  had  become  a  Roman  Catholic
and  joined  the  order  of  Dominican  monks,  entering
a  monastery  at  Bardstown.  With  the  exception
of  "  Crystalina,"  a  fairy-tale  in  six  cantos,  pub-
lished anonymously  (1816),  Mr.  Harney's  poems
were  not  printed  until  after  his  death,  and  then
appeared  only  in  magazines.  The  lines  "  To  a
Valued  Friend,"  "  Echo  and  the  Lover,"  "  The
Whippoorwill,"  and  "  The  Fever  Dream  "  have  been
the  most  admired. — His  brother,  William  Selby,
b.  near  Haysboro,  Davidson  co.,  Tenn.,  27  Aug.,
1800 ;  d.  in  Orlando,  Fla.,  9  May,  1889.  He  was  ap-
pointed from  Louisiana  2d  lieutenant  13  Feb.,  1818,
and  promoted  to  be  1st  lieutenant,  7  Jan.,  1-819.
He  was  commisioned  captain,  14  May,  1825 ;  major
and  paymaster,  1  May,  1833 ;  lieutenant-colonel,
2d  dragoons,  15  Aug.,  1836 ;  colonel,  30  June,
1846;  and  brigadier-general,  14  June,  1858.  He
took  part  in  the  Black  Hawk  war  in  1833,  and
also  in  the  Florida  war,  distinguishing  himself
in  action  at  Fort  Mellon  and  in  the  defence  of  a
trading-house  at  Carloosahatchie,  23  July,  1839.
He  commanded  several  expeditions  into  the  Ever-
glades, and  in  December,  1840,  was  breve tted  colo-
nel "for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct."  He
was  also  mentioned  for  his  bravery  at  Medellin,
Mexico,  25  March,  1847,  and  was  breve  tted  briga-
dier-general for  gallantry  at  Cerro  Gordo.  On  3
Sept.,  1855,  he  completely  defeated  the  Sioux  In-
dians at  Sand  Hills,  on  the  north  fork  of  the  Platte
river.  In  June,  1858,  he  was  placed  in  command
of  the  Department  of  Oregon,  and  on  9  July,  1859,
took  possession  of  the  island  of  San  Juan,  near  Van-
couver, which  was  claimed  by  the  English  govern-
ment to  be  included  within  the  boundaries  of  British
Columbia.  A  dispute  with  Great  Britain  and  the
recall  of  Harney  followed.  He  was  subsequently
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Department  of
the  West,  and  in  April,  1861,  while  on  his  way
from  St.  Louis  to  Washington,  was  arrested  by  the
Confederates  at  Harper's  Ferry  and  taken  to
Richmond,  Va.  Here  he  met  with  many  old  ac-
quaintances, who  urged  him  to  join  the  south.  On
meeting  Gen.  Lee,  Harney  said  to  him :  "  I  am
sorry  to  meet  you  in  this  way."  Lee  replied :  "  Gen.
Harney,  I  had  no  idea  of  taking  any  part  in  this
matter ;  I  wanted  to  stay  at  Arlington  and  raise
potatoes  for  my  family ;  but  my  friends  forced  me
into  it."  Gen.  Harney  also  met  Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnston,  who  told  him  that  he  was  opposed  to
the  war,  but  that  he  would  be  execrated  by  his
relatives,  all  of  whom  lived  in  Virginia,  if  he  did
not  side  with  the  south.  Harney  was  speedily
released,  and  departed  for  Washington.  On  his
return  to  St.  Louis  he  issued  several  proclamations
warning  the  people  of  Missouri  of  the  danger  of
secession,  and  the  evil  effects  that  would  follow
from  a  dissolution  of  the  Union.  On  21  May  he
entered  into  an  agreement  with  Gen.  Sterling
Price,  commanding  the  Missouri  militia,  to  make
no  military  movement  so  long  as  peace  was  main-
tained by  the  state  authorities.  He  was  soon  after-
ward relieved  of  his  command,  and  was  placed
on  the  retired  list,  1  Aug.,  1863.  On  13  March,
1865,  he  was  brevetted  major-general  "  for  long
and  faithful  service."  Gen.  Harney  was  a  famous
Indian  fighter.  See  "  The  Life  and  Military  Ser-
vices of  Gen.  William  Selby  Harney,  by  L.  U.
Reavis"  (St,  Louis,  1887).

HARNISCH,  Albert  Ernest,  sculptor,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  14  Feb.,  1842. He  early  showed  a


taste  for  art,  and  while  still  a  lad  modelled  his
first  work,  a  "Cupid."  This  was  followed  by
"  Love  in  Idleness,"  "  Wandering  Psyche,"  "  Little
Protector,"  and  "  Little  Hunter."  He  then  studied
under  Joseph  A.  Bailly  in  the  Philadelphia  acade-
my of  fine  arts,  and  in  1869  went  to  Italy,  where
he  still  resides  (1887).  There  he  has  executed  sev-
eral important  works,  among  them  his  "  Boy  in
the  Eagle's  Nest."  He  has  also  made  a  special-
ty of  portrait-busts.  To  the  Philadelphia  exhibi-
tion of  1876  he  sent  a  statue,  and  a  "  Sketch  for
a  Monument  to  the  Prisoner's  Friend."  In  1878
he  executed  a  model  for  a  proposed  equestrian
statue  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee,  to  be  erected  at
Richmond,  Va.,  which  is  said  to  be  "  remarkable
in  respect  to  its  simplicity."  He  is  also  to  be
credited  with  the  Calhoun  monument  at  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  dedicated  26  April,  1887,  the  Clement
Barclay  family  group,  and  other  works.

HARO,  Alonso  Nunez  de  (ah'ro),  Mexican  arch-
bishop, b.  in  Villagarcia,  Spain,  31  Oct.,  1729 ;  d.  in
Mexico,  26  May,  1800.  He  studied  philosophy  and
theology  with  the  Dominicans  of  Peter  Martyr,
at  the  Royal  university,  and  at  the  College  of
San  Clemente  de  Espailoles  at  Bologna,  where  he
was  subsequently  appointed  rector  and  profes-
sor of  sacred  literature.  He  was  nominated  arch-
bishop of  Mexico  by
Clement  XIV.,  and
became  celebrated
for  his  eloquence.
He  founded  numer-
ous charitable  and
educational  institu-
tions, the  principal
of  which  was  the  Col-
lege of  Tepotzotlan.
Here,  among  other
professorships,  he  es-
tablished one  of  the
Mexican  language.
He  endowed  the  col-
lege liberally,  and  be-
stowed on  it  an  ex-
tensive and  well-cho-
sen library.  He  was
at  one  time  visited  by
his  former  school-
mate Father  O'Brien,
pastor  of  St.  Peter's
church,  New  York,  and  raised  $5,920  for  his  church.
He  also  gave  Father  O'Brien  several  paintings  for
St.  Peter  s,  among  others  a  "  Crucifixion  "  by  Val-
lejo,  a  Mexican  painter.  Archbishop  Haro  ordered
the  words  "  Here  lies  Alonso,  the  sinner,  dust  and
nothingness,"  to  be  engraved  on  his  tomb.

HARO,  Gonzalo  Lopez  de,  Spanish  naviga-
tor, b.  in  Coruina,  Spain,  in  1734;  d.  in  Acapul-
co,  or  in  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico,  in  1796.  He  settled
early  in  New  Spain,  acquired  a  reputation  as  a
skilful  pilot  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  in  1788  was
appointed  by  the  viceroy,  Flores,  chief  pilot  of  the
expedition  to  the  northwest,  which  left  San  Bias
on  8  March,  consisting  of  the  frigate  "  Princesa  "
and  the  brig  "  San  Carlos,"  under  the  command
of  Esteban  Martinez.  On  23  June  they  passed  the
volcano  of  Miranda  in  eruption,  and  after  parting
company  with  the  other  vessel,  in  a  storm,  Haro
discovered,  on  30  June,  a  Russian  establishment
formed  by  the  crew  of  the  "  Tschernikoff,"  who
had  been  shipwrecked  in  1746.  Bearing  toward
Trinity  island,  he  met  his  convoy  again,  on  2  July,
and  they  touched  at  the  island  of  Kodiak  and  the
Schumagin  islands,  and  discovered,  on  16  July,  the
Unimok  volcano,  landing  on  3  Aug.  at  Ounalaska.


HARO Y  TAMARIZ


HARPER


87


They  sailed  again  on  24  Aug.,  and  arrived  in  San
Bias  on  5  Dec,  1788.  In  February,  1789,  Haro  was
sent  again  with  the  same  vessels  with  orders  to
take  possession  of  Nootka  in  the  name  of  the  king
of  Spain,  and  did  so  on  5  May.  On  3  July  the
English  brig  "  Argonaut "  entered  the  port,  with
the  intention  of  forming  an  establishment,  and
Haro  confiscated  the  vessel  and  arrested  the  master,
Colnet.  He  established  a  factory  and  trading-post
there,  but,  not  finding  any  inducement  to  winter,
he  sailed  on  31  Oct.,  and  entered  San  Bias,  6  Dec,
1789.  He  wrote  a  description  of  his  two  voyages,
the  manuscript  of  which  is  preserved  among  the
archives  at  Mexico.  The  authority  of  Haro's  ob-
servations was  accepted  in  the  treaty  of  April,  1828,
between  the  United  States  and  Russia.

HARO  Y  TAMARIZ,  Antonio  de,  Mexican
politician,  b.  in  San  Luis  Potosi  in  1810 ;  d.  in
Europe  about  1872.  He  was  one  of  the  chiefs  of
the  conservative  party,  and  for  some  time  secretary
of  the  treasury  under  Santa-Anna.  In  1854  he  de-
clared against  the  dictator,  and  put  himself  at  the
head  of  a  revolution  in  San  Luis  Potosi,  while  Vi-
daurri  did  the  same  in  the  north,  and  Comonfort
and  Alvarez  in  the  south  ;  but  Haro  did  not  fully
accept  the  liberal  principles  of  the  latter,  and,  while
proclaiming  the  deposition  of  Santa-Anna,  de-
manded guarantees  for  the  clergy  and  the  army,
and  the  convocation  of  a  congress.  After  the  fall
of  the  dictator  he  refused  to  recognize  the  authority
of  the  provisional  president,  Carrera,  but  declared
in  favor  of  the  junta  of  Cuernavaca,  and  recognized
Comonfort  as  president,  after  the  resignation  of
Alvarez.  But  he  soon  joined  the  conservative  op-
position, and  in  January,  1856,  was  arrested  and
accused  of  a  conspiracy  to  establish  an  empire  either
in  his  own  favor  or  that  of  a  son  of  Iturbide.  He
was  taken  to  Vera  Cruz,  whence  he  was  to  be  sent
as  an  exile,  but  escaped,  joined  the  clerical  forces
in  Puebla,  and  was  given  the  title  of  general-in-
chief  of  the  army.  Puebla  was  soon  besieged  by
the  government  troops,  and,  although  Haro  de-
fended the  city  obstinately,  democratic  ideas  began
to  spread  in  the  garrison,  and  the  soldiers  opened
the  gates  to  the  besiegers  toward  the  end  of  March,
1856.  Haro  was  taken  prisoner,  carried  to  Mexico,
and  sent  into  exile,  where  he  died.

HARPER,  James,  founder  of  a  firm  of  print-
ers and  publishers,  originally  consisting  of  James,
b.  13  April,  1795,  d.  in  New  York,  27  March,  1869 ;
John,  b.  22  Jan..  1797,  d.  22  April,  1875 ;  Joseph
Wesley,  b.  25  Dec,  1801,  d.  14  Feb.,  1870;  and
Fletcher,  b.  31  Jan.,  1806.  d.  29  May,  1877.  They
were  the  sons  of  Joseph  Harper,  a  farmer  at
Newtown,  L.  I.  James  and  John  came  to  New
York,  and  James  was  apprenticed  to  Paul  and
Thomas,  while  John  served  Jonathan  Seymour,
printers.  Having  concluded  their  apprenticeship,
they  established  themselves  in  business,  at  first
only  printing  for  booksellers,  but  soon  began  to
publish  on  their  own  account.  The  first  book  that
the  firm  printed  was  "Seneca's  Morals,"  in  1817,
and  by  a  strange  coincidence  a  new  edition  of  this
work  appeared  on  the  day  of  the  death  of  the  last
of  the  four  brothers. The  first  book  that they

Sublished  on  their  own  account  was  "  Locke  on  the
[uman  Understanding,''  in  1818.  The  old  firm  of
J.  and  J.  Harper  issued  about  200  works.  Wesley
and  Fletcher  Harper  were  apprenticed  to  their
elder  brothers,  and  as  they  became  of  age  were
admitted  as  partners;  and  the  style  of  the  firm
was  about  1833  changed  to  "Harper  and  Broth-
ers." In  1853  their  establishment  occupied  nine
contiguous  buildings  in  Cliff  and  Pearl  streets,
filled  with  costly  machinery  and  books. On  10


Dec  of  that  year  the  whole  was  burned  to  the
ground,  in  consequence  of  a  workman  engaged  in
repairs  having  thrown  a  burning  paper  into  a  tank
of  benzine,  which  he  mistook  for  water.  Most
of  their  stereotype  plates  were  stored  in  vaults,  and
were  saved ;  but  the  loss  in  buildings,  machinerv,
and  books  amounted  to  $1,000,000,  upon  which
there  was  only  $250,000  insurance.  The  next  day
they  hired  temporary
premises,  and  em-
ployed the  principal
printers  and  binders
in  New  York,  Bos-
ton, and  Philadelphia
in  reproducing  their
books.  Before  the
ruins  of  the  fire  could
be  cleared  away  the
plans  for  their  new
edifice  were  prepared.
It  covers  about  half
an  acre  of  ground,
extending  from  Cliff
street  to  Franklin
square  in  Pearl  street,
and,  including  cel-
lars, the  structure  is
seven  stories  high.  It  is  absolutely  fire-proof,  and
constitutes  probably  the  most  complete  publishing
establishment  in  the  world,  all  the  operations  in  the
preparation  and  publication  of  a  book  being  car-
ried on  under  a  single  roof,  and  the  regular  num-
ber of  employes  in  the  premises  of  both  sexes  be-
ing about  1,000.  Besides  the  books  published,  they
issue  four  illustrated  periodicals:  "Harper's  Maga-
zine," established  in  1850,  a  monthly,  devoted  to
literature  and  the  arts ;  "  Harper's  Weekly,"  estab-
lished in  1857,  devoted  to  literature  and  topics  of
the  day ;  "  Harper's  Bazar,"  established  in  1867,
devoted  to  the  fashions,  literature,  and  social  life;
and  "  Harper's  Young  People,"  a  children's  maga-
zine, established  in  1881.  James  Harper  was  in
1844  elected  mayor  of  the  city  of  New  York  for
the  succeeding  year,  and  he  was  subsequently  put
forward  for  the  governorship  of  the  state;  but  he
preferred  to  conduct  the  business  of  the  firm  rather
than  enter  public  life.  In  March,  1869,  while  driv-
ing in  Fifth  avenue,  his  horses  took  fright,  and  he
was  thrown  from  his  carriage ;  when  aid  reached
him  he  was  insensible,  and  died  two  days  afterward.
Wesley  Harper,  who  for  many  years  had  charge  of
the  literarv  department,  died  atter  a  long  illness.
John  Harper  died  22  April.  1875.  and  Fletcher
Harper,  29  May,  1877;  and  the  firm  was  reorgan-
ized by  the  admission  of  several  of  the  sons  of  the
original  partners.  These,  after  receiving  a  care-
ful education,  several  of  them  at  Columbia  college,
entered  the  house,  each  serving  a  regular  appren-
ticeship in  some  branch  of  the  business.  The  firm
now  (1891)  consists  of  Joseph  Weslev  Harper,  b.
16  March,  1830;  John  Wesley,  b.  6  May,  1831;
Joseph  Henry,  b.  23  June,  1850;  John,  b.  13  Aug.,
1855 ;  James'Thorne.  b.  30  Aug.,  1855  ;  Horatio  R.,
b.  17  March,  1858.  Fletcher  Harper.  Jr..  a  member
of  the  firm,  died  22  May,  1890.  Fletcher,  Jr.'s,
wife  established  in  1878  a  summer  resort  at  north
Long  Branch.  N.  J.,  for  the  working-girls  of  New
York,  providing  accommodations  at  actual  cost,
and  since  her  death  this  charity  has  been  contin-
ued bv  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Hiram  W.  Sibley.

HARPER,  John  M.,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Johnstone.  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  10  Feb.,  1845.
After  studying  at  the  parish-school  and  the  Glas-
gow established  church  training-college,  he  went  to
Canada  and  was  graduated  at  Queen's  university,


88


HARPER


HARRAH


Kingston,  Ontario.  He  subsequently  received  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of  Illinois,  af-
ter finishing  a  three  years'  course  in  the  section  of
metaphysical  science.  Before  leaving  his  native
country  he  had  received  an  appointment  to  an  acad-
emy in  New  Brunswick,  and,  after  several  years'
residence  in  the  maritime  provinces,  he  became  the
principal  of  the  Victoria  high-school  at  St.  John,
N.  B.  When  this  school  was  destroyed,  in  the  great
fire  at  St,  John,  Dr.  Harper  became  principal  of  the
Provincial  normal-school  at  Charlottetown,  Prince
Edward  island,  and  afterward  professor  in  the
Amalgamated  normal-school  and  Prince  of  Wales
college,  with  special  supervision  of  the  training  of
teachers.  He  is  now  inspector  of  superior  schools
for  the  province  of  Quebec,  and  editor  of  the
"  Educational  Record  "  of  Quebec.  Dr.  Harper  was
instrumental  in  establishing  a  periodical  in  Nova
Scotia  devoted  to  the  cultivation  of  Canadian  litera-
ture, and  has  written  much  in  prose  and  verse,  in-
cluding poems  in  the  Scottish  dialect.  He  has  also
prepared  and  published  school  text-books,  and  is  the
author  of  various  lectures.

HARPER,  Joseph  Morrill,  physician,  b.  in
Limerick,  York  co.,  Me.,  21  June,  1787;  d.  in  Can-
terbury, N.  H.,  15  Jan.,  1865.  He  studied  medicine,
and  began  to  practise  in  1810  at  Canterbury,  where
he  afterward  resided.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812
as  assistant  surgeon  in  the  4th  infantry.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1826-'7,  and  again  in
1829-'30,  serving  during  the  latter  year  as  president
of  the  senate,  and  ex-officio  as  governor  from  Feb-
ruary until  June,  1831,  through  the  resignation  of
Mathew  Harvey.  He  was  then  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  3
March,  1835.  From  1842  till  1856  he  was  president
of  the  Mechanics'  bank  of  Concord,  N.  H.  He
passed  the  latter  part  of  his  life  on  a  farm,  having
retired  from  the  practice  of  his  profession.

HARPER,  Robert  Goodloe,  senator,  b.  near
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in  1765 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
15  Jan.,  1825.  He  was  the  son  of  poor  parents,
who,  during  his  childhood,  removed  to  Granville,
N.  C.  At  the  age  of
fifteen  he  served,  un-
der Gen.  Greene,  in  a
troop  of  horse,  com-
posed of  the  youth
of  the  neighborhood,
during  the  closing
scenes  of  the  south-
ern campaign  of  the
Revolution.  He  was
graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1785,  studied
law  in  Charleston,  S.
C,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1786.
He  soon  removed  to
the  interior  of  the
state,  where  he  be-
came known  through
a  series  of  articles  on
a  proposed  change  in
the  constitution.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature
and  subsequently  sent  to  congress,  serving  from
9  Feb.,  1795,  till  3  March,  1801,  and  warmly  sup-
porting the  administrations  of  Washington  and
Adams.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  being  pro-
moted from  the  rank  of  colonel  to  that  of  major-
general.  Soon  after  the  defeat  of  the  Federal-
ists he  married  the  daughter  of  Charles  Carroll,
of  Carrollton,  and  removed  to  Baltimore,  Md.,
where  he  attained  eminence  at  the  bar.  He  was
employed  with  Joseph  Hopkinson  as  counsel  for


foj:  8#~tfL*-S


Judge  Samuel  Chase,  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  in
his  impeachment  trial.  At  a  dinner  given  at  George-
town, D.  C,  5  June,  1813,  in  honor  of  the  recent
Russian  victories,  he  gave  as  a  toast  "  Alexander
the  Deliverer,"  following  it  with  a  speech  eulogiz-
ing the  Russians.  On  the  publication  of  the  speech,
Robert  Walsh  addressed  the  author  a  letter  in
which  he  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  oration
underrated  the  military  character  of  Napoleon,
and  failed  to  point  out  the  danger  of  Russian  as-
cendency. To  this  letter  Harper  made  an  elaborate
reply,  Walsh  responded,  and  the  correspondence
was  then  (1814)  published  in  a  volume.  Harper  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  from  Maryland  to  serve
from  29  Jan.,  1816,  till  3  March,  1821,  but  resigned
in  the  former  year  to  become  one  of  the  Federalist
candidates  for  vice-president.  In  1819-'20  he  visited
Europe  with  his  family,  and  after  his  return  em-
ployed himself  chiefly  in  the  promotion  of  schemes
of  internal  improvements.  He  was  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  American  colonization  society,  and  the
town  of  Harper,  near  Cape  Palmas,  Africa,  was
named  in  his  honor.  His  pamphlet,  entitled  "  Ob-
servations on  the  Dispute  between  the  United
States  and  France  "  (1797),  acquired  great  celebrity.
He  also  printed  "An  Address  on  the  British
Treaty"  (1796);  "Letters  on  the  Proceedings  of
Congress";  and  "Letters  to  His  Constituents "
(1801).  A  collection  of  his  various  letters,  ad-
dresses, and  pamphlets  was  published  with  the  title
"  Select  Works  "  (Baltimore,  1814).

HARPER,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  the  island  of
Antigua,  17  Jan.,  1790;  d.  in  South  Carolina,  10
Oct.,  1847.  His  father,  an  English  Methodist,  had
been  sent  to  Antigua  as  a  missionary  by  John
Wesley,  but  came  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  afterward
removed  to  Columbia,  S.  C,  where  William  was
graduated  at  South  Carolina  college  in  1808.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1818
emigrated  to  Missouri.  In  1819  he  was  elected
chancellor,  and  was  a  member  of  the  convention
that  adopted  the  state  constitution  of  1821.  In
1823  he  resigned,  and,  returning  to  Columbia,
S.  C,  was  made  state  reporter.  After  performing
the  duties  of  the  office  for  two  years,  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  senator  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by
the  death  of  John  Gaillard,  and  served  from  28
March  till  7  Dec,  1826.  He  then  removed  to
Charleston,  S.  C,  and  practised  his  profession  un-
til 1828,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of
representatives  and  chosen  speaker.  The  same
year  he  was  elected  chancellor,  and  retained  the
office  until  1830,  when  he  was  made  one  of  the
judges  of  the  court  of  appeals.  On  the  abolition
of  that  court  in  1835  he  was  again  chosen  chan-
cellor. In  November,  1832,  he  was  a  member  of
the  convention  that  passed  the  ordinance  of  nulli-
fication, and  met  with  the  same  body  in  March,
1833,  to  rescind  it.  He  is  the  author  of  an  article  on
"  Colonization  "  in  the  "  Southern  Review,"  a  speech
in  congress  on  the  "  Panama  Mission,"  a  eulogy  on
Chancellor  de  Saussure,  and  several  addresses  in
favor  of  nullification.

HARPER,  William  Rainey,  Hebraist,  b.  in
New  Concord,  Ohio,  26  July,  1856.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Muskingum  college,  in  his  native  town,  in
1870,  and  was  professor  of  Hebrew  in  Chicago  Bap-
tist theological  seminary  from  1879  till  1887,  when
he  became  professor  of  the  Semitic  languages  at
Yale.  He  has  published  several  Hebrew  text-
books, including  "  Elements  of  Hebrew  "  (Chicago,
1882),  and  is  the  editor  of  "Hebraica"  and  the
"  Old  Testament  Student."

HARRAH,  Charles  Jefferson,  merchant,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Jan.,  1817. His  education


HARRIMAN


HARRINGTON


89


was  embraced  in  three  days  of  schooling.  At  the
age  of  seven  he  went  to  work  on  a  farm,  where  he
remained  until  in  his  fourteenth  year.  He  then  be-
came apprenticed  to  the  ship-carpenter's  trade,  in
which  he  continued  until  1843,  when,  on  account
of  failing  health,  he  sailed  for  Brazil.  In  1852-'7
he  was  proprietor  of  a  ship-yard  at  Rio  Janeiro,
and  then  engaged  in  railroad  and  navigation  enter-
prises, amassing  a  large  fortune,  with  which  he
returned  to  his  native  city  in  1874.  During  his
thirty  years'  residence  in  Brazil  he  held  confiden-
tial relations  with  the  imperial  government.  In
1865  he  was  sent  by  the  emperor  to  the  United
States  to  purchase  iron-clads  and  armaments,  bring-
ing with  him  a  letter  of  credit  for  £1,000,000,
which  was  shortly  followed  by  another  for  an  equal
amount.  In  1867  he  was  sent  on  a  confidential
mission  to  the  river  Platte  to  investigate  irregu-
larities and  abuses  in  the  commissariat  department
of  the  Brazilian  army.  In  1869  he  was  president
of  the  first  telegraph  company  organized  in  the
empire.  In  1870,  with  a  few  other  merchants,  he
established  at  Rio  Janeiro  the  first  public  school  in
the  empire,  and  during  the  same  year  the  emperor
made  him  a  knight  of  the  Imperial  order  da  Rosa,
and  afterward  a  commander  of  the  same  order.

HARRIMAN,  Walter,  governor  of  New  Hamp-
shire, b.  in  Warner,  N.  H.,  8  April,  1817 ;  d.  in  Con-
cord, N.  H.,  25  July,  1884.  He  received  an  aca-
demical education  and  began  teaching,  but  be-
came a  Universalist  clergyman,  and  in  1841  took
charge  of  a  society  at  Harvard,  Mass.  After  a  few
years  he  became  pastor  of  a  new  Universalist
church  in  his  native  town.  In  1851,  having  mean-
time engaged  in  trade,  he  decided,  against  the
earnest  solicitation  of  friends,  to  abandon  the  min-
istry. In  1849,  and  again  in  1850,  he  had  already
been  chosen  representative  of  his  town  to  the  gen-
eral court,  and  in  1853  and  1854  was  elected  state
treasurer.  In  August,  1855,  he  was  appointed  to
a  clerkship  in  the  pension-office  at  Washington,
but  resigned  the  following  January  to  take  part  in
the  political  canvass  of  that  winter,  which  resulted
in  "  no  choice  "  by  the  people.  In  the  spring  of
1856  he  was  appointed  by  President  Pierce  on  a
commission  to  classify  and  appraise  the  Indian
lands  of  Kansas.  He  was  again  in  the  legislature
in  1858,  and  in  1859  and  1860  was  elected  to  the
state  senate,  his  Republican  opponent  being  on
each  occasion  his  own  brother.  He  made  speeches
to  sustain  the  Know-Nothing  movement  in  1855-'6,
canvassed  Michigan  for  Buchanan  in  company
with  Gen.  Lewis  Cass,  and  was  an  earnest  sup-
porter of  Stephen  A.  Douglas  in  1860.  In  May,
1861,  Mr.  Harriman  became  editor  of  the  i4  Union
Democrat,"  published  at  Manchester,  N.  H.,  in
which  he  advocated  forcible  and  immediate  ac-
tion against  the  seceding  states.  He  became  colo-
nel of  the  11th  New  Hampshire  regiment,  was
taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness,  6
May,  1864,  sent  to  Macon,  Ga.,  and  removed  thence
to  Charleston,  where  he  was  placed,  with  forty-
nine  other  northern  officers,  under  the  fire  of  the
National  batteries  on  Morris  island.  There  he  was
for  fifty-two  days,  until  Gen.  Poster,  in  retaliation,
placed  fifty  Confederate  officers  of  the  same  rank
under  fire  of  the  guns  on  Fort  Sumter  and  Fort
Moultrie.  This  led  to  an  exchange  on  4  Aug.,
1864.  After  returning  home  and  engaging  actively
in  the  campaign  of  that  year  in  favor  of  Lincoln
and  Johnson,  Col.  Harriman  rejoined  his  regiment,
and  commanded  a  brigade  at  Petersburg.  In
March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general.
He  was  elected  secretary  of  state  of  New  Hamp-
shire in  1865  and  1866,  and  governor  in  1867  and


1868.  In  the  last  year  he  made  a  tour  in  the  mid-
dle and  western  states,  advocating  the  election  of
Gen.  Grant.  As  a  political  speaker  he  had  few
superiors.  He  was  naval  officer  at  the  port  of
Boston  throughout  Grant's  entire  administration,
removed  to  Concord,  N.  H.,  in  1872,  and  in  1881
was  again  chosen  to  the  legislature.  Gov.  Harri-
man published  a  "  History  of  Warner,  N.  H."  (1879),
and  "  In  the  Orient,"  a  record  of  a  tour  through
Europe  and  the  east  in  1882  (Boston,  1883).

HARRINGTON,  Charles,  Earl  of,  soldier,  b.
in  England,  17  March,  1753;  d.  in  Brighton,  Eng-
land, 5  Sept.,  1829.  He  entered  the  foot-guards  in
1769,  when  he  was  Lord  Petersham,  and  in  Febru-
ary, 1776,  as  a  captain  in  the  29th  regiment,  he  ar-
rived at  Quebec,  and  served  in  all  the  operations
of  Gen.  Burgoyne  until  the  surrender  at  Saratoga,
where  he  was  that  officer's  aide,  and  carried  his
despatches  to  England.  He  succeeded  to  the  earl-
dom in  1779,  afterward  served  in  the  West  Indies,
and  was  promoted  general  in  1803.  He  was  cap-
tain, governor,  and  constable  of  Windsor  castle.

HARRINGTON,  Ebenezer  Burke,  lawyer,
b.  near  Lyons,  Wayne  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1813 ;  d.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  in  1844.  He  was  educated  in  New
York  city,  and  in  1830-'31  served  as  reporter  of
the  senate  of  that  state.  He  began  the  studv  of
the  law  in  1832,  and  compiled  a  digest  of  Eng-
lish and  American  equity  cases  with  the  aid  of
Oliver  L.  Barbour  (Saratoga,  1837).  In  June  of
the  latter  year  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In
1837  he  removed  from  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  to  Michi-
gan, where  he  was  employed  with  E.  J.  Roberts
in  arranging  and  indexing  the  revised  statutes  of
that  state.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1839.  and  acted  as  state  reporter  from
that  year  until  his  death.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Harrington's  Chancerv  Reports  "  (Detroit.  1841).

HARRINGTON,  Joseph,  Jr.,  clergyman,  b.  in
Roxbury,  Mass.,  21  Feb.,  1813;  d.  in* San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  2  Nov.,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1833,  and  became  principal  of  the
academy  at  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  but  at  the  end
of  six  months  took  charge  of  the  Hawes  school  at
South  Boston,  where  he  remained  for  five  years.
While  teaching  he  studied  theology,  and  in  the  au-
tumn of  1839  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  Chicago,
111.,  by  the  American  Unitarian  association.  After
his  ordination  as  an  evangelist  in  Boston  in  Sep-
tember, 1840,  Mr.  Harrington  returned  to  the
west,  and  was  the  first  to  introduce  the  doctrines
of  his  denomination  in  Milwaukee  and  other
places.  He  held  a  pastorate  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
from  1846  till  1852,  when  enfeebled  health  in-
duced him  to  accept  a  call  from  San  Francisco.
He  sailed  from  New  York  in  July  of  that  year,
but  in  crossing  the  isthmus  caught  the  Panama
fever,  which  resulted  fatally.  After  his  death  ap-
peared a  volume  of  his  sermons,  with  a  memoir
bv  William  Whiting  (Boston,  1854).

HARRINGTON,  Mark  Walrod,  astronomer,
b.  in  Sycamore,  111.,  18  Aug.,  1848.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1868,  and
has  since  lectured  on  astronomy  in  Oberlin  col-
lege and  in  the  Louisiana  state  university,  Baton
Rouge.  For  a  year  he  was  connected  with  the
Chinese  foreign  office  in  Pekin.  and  he  also  spent
a  year  in  Alaska.  Subsequently  he  became  pro-
fessor of  astronomy  in  the  University  of  Michi-
gan, which  chair  he  now  holds,  being  also  di-
rector of  the  observatory.  He  is  a  fellow  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  is  a  member  of  other  societies.  In  1884
he  established  the  "  American  Meteorological  Jour-
nal," of  which  he  is  now  (1887)  chief  editor.


90


HARRINGTON


HARRIS


HARRINGTON,  Samuel  Maxwell,  jurist, b. in
Dover,  Del.,  5  Feb.,  1803 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,  28
Nov.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington  col-
lege, Charlestown,  Md.,  in  1823,  with  the  first  honors
of  his  class,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  He  was  appointed  secretary  of  state  of  Dela-
ware in  1829,  and  again  in  1830,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  was  selected  to  fill  a  vacancy  on  the
bench  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and  became  its
chief  justice,  holding  the  office  until  the  court
was  united  with  the  superior  court.  In  the  latter
he  sat  as  associate  justice  until  1855,  when  he  was
again  made  chief  justice.  In  1857  he  succeeded
to  the  chancellorship,  the  highest  judicial  office  in
the  state.  In  1849  he  had  been  placed  at  the  head
of  a  commission  to  revise  and  codify  the  laws,  and
received  a  vote  of  thanks  from  the  legislature.
During  the  civil  war  Judge  Harrington  was  a
staunch  supporter  of  the  government,  and  did
much  to  strengthen  the  administration  of  Mr.  Lin-
coln. In  1854  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of
LL.  D.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Reports  of  the  Su-
preme Court  of  Delaware  "  (3  vols.,  Dover,  1837-'44).
HARRINGTON,  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in
Waltham,  Mass.,  in  1715 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Wor-
cester co.,  Mass.,  18  Dec,  1795.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1737,  studied  theology,  and
settled  in  1741  as  pastor  of  a  Congregational
church  in  Lower  Ashuelot,  now  Swanzey,  N.  H.,
whence  he  was  driven  by  the  Indians  in  1747.
The  following  year  he  was  called  to  the  church  at
Lancaster,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  It  is
related  of  him  that  having  been  in  the  habit,  be-
fore the  Revolutionary  war,  of  praying  in  his  pul-
Eit  for  the  health  of  "  our  excellent  King  George,"
e  so  far  forgot  himself  on  one  occasion,  after  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  as  to  lapse  into  the
old  form,  but  immediately  added,  "  O  Lord !  I  mean
George  Washington."  He  was  one  of  the  most
pure  and  gentle-hearted  among  New  England  pas-
tors, a  scholar  of  remarkable  attainments,  and
Eossessed  of  warm  affections.  He  was  accused  of
eing  a  loyalist,  and  was  undoubtedly  opposed  to
the  Whigs,  being  of  opinion  that  separation  would
ruin  the  colonies. In  1777  a  list  of  proscribed

Eersons  was  posted  up  in  town-meeting,  to  which
is  name  had  been  added  on  motion  of  some  one
who  disliked  him.  He  thereupon  arose,  "  his  hairs
touched  with  silver,  and  his  benignant  features
kindling  into  a  glow  of  honest  indignation,"  and,
baring  his  bosom  before  his  people,  exclaimed,
"  Strike,  strike  here  with  your  daggers !  I  am  a
true  friend  to  ray  country."

HARRIOT,  or  HARRIOTT,  Thomas,  mathe-
matician, b.  in  Oxford,  Eng.,  in  1560 :  d.  in  London,
2  July,  1621.  After  studying  at  St.  Mary's  hall,  Ox-
ford, where  he  took  his  bachelor's  degree  in  1579,
he  became  tutor  to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  who  in  1585
appointed  him  geographer  to  the  second  expedition
to  Virginia  with  Sir  Richard  Grenville.  He  re-
mained there  about  two  years.  On  his  return  he
resumed  his  mathematical  studies,  and  afterward
received  a  yearly  pension  of  £120  from  Henry  Percy,
Earl  of  Northumberland,  who  was  distinguished
for  his  patronage  of  men  of  science.  Harriot's
death  was  caused  by  a  cancer  in  the  lip,  occasioned,
it  is  supposed,  by  his  habit  of  holding  in  his  mouth
instruments  of  brass.  Prom  papers  discovered  in
1784,  it  would  appear  that  he  had  either  procured  a
telescope  from  Holland,  or  divined  the  construction
of  that  instrument,  and  that  he  coincided  in  point
of  time  with  Galileo  in  discovering  the  spots  on
the  sun's  disk.  On  his  return  from  this  country
he  published  "  A  Briefe  and  True  Report  of  the
New Found Land of Virginia,  etc. (London,


1588).  It  was  afterward  translated  into  Latin,
French,  and  German,  and  is  contained  in  volume
iii.  of  Hakluyt's  "  Voyages."  After  his  death  his
"  Artis  Analytical  Praxis  "  was  published  (London,
1631).  In  this  he  discloses  the  important  algebra-
ical discovery  that  every  equation  may  be  regarded
as  formed  by  the  product  of  as  many  simple  equa-
tions as  there  are  units  in  the  number  expressing  its
order.  Besides  this,  Harriot  made  several  changes
in  the  notation  of  algebra.

HARRIS,  Caleb  Fiske,  book-collector,  b.  in
Warwick,  R.  I.,  9  March,  1818 ;  d.  in  Moosehead
lake.  Me.,  2  Oct.,  1881.  He  was  educated  at  the
Academy  of  Kingston,  R.  I.,  and  at  Brown  uni-
versity, but  was  not  graduated.  He  engaged  in  the
commission  business  in  New  York,  and  after  1856
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  till  the  civil  war,  when  he  re-
tired with  a  fortune.  He  subsequently  developed
a  taste  for  the  collection  of  the  works  of  American
poets  and  books  bearing  on  early  American  history.
Mr.  Harris  published  an  "  Index  to  American
Poetry  and  Plays  in  the  Collection  of  C.  Fiske
Harris  "  (1874),  which  contained  references  to  4,129
separate  works.  Of  these,  1,000  were  part  of  a  simi-
lar collection  that  had  been  begun  by  Albert  G.
Greene.  William  Cullen  Bryant,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.
Harris,  said :  "  Your  work  has  amazed  me  by  show-
ing what  multitudes  of  persons  on  our  side  of  the
Atlantic  have  wasted  their  time  in  writing  verses  in
our  language."  Mr.  Harris  and  his  wife  were
drowned  in  Moosehead  lake  by  the  upsetting  of  a
boat.  His  collection,  which  had  increased  to  over
5,000  volumes,  was  bought  by  his  cousin,  Henry  B.
Anthony,  and  was  bequeathed  by  the  latter  to  Brown
university.  A  complete  catalogue,  with  notes  and
sketches  of  Albert  G.  Greene,  Mr.  Harris,  and
Henry  B.  Anthony,  was  made  by  the  Rev.  John  G.
Stockbridge  (Providence,  1886).

HARRIS,  Chapin  A.,  dentist,  b.  in  Pompey,
Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1806;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  in  1860.  He  studied  medicine,  and  settled  in
Ohio,  but  afterward  removed  to  Baltimore,  where
he  practised  dentistry  until  his  death.  He  founded
Baltimore  dental  college  (chartered  in  1839),  and
was  for  some  time  its  professor  of  dental  surgery.
He  edited  the  "  American  Journal  of  Dental  Sci-
ence "  from  its  establishment  in  1839  till  1858,  and
was  a  contributor  to  other  dental  and  medical
journals.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Principles  and
Practice  of  Dental  Surgery"  (Baltimore,  1839);
"  Characteristics  of  the  Human  Teeth  "  (Baltimore,
1841) ;  '■  Diseases  of  the  Maxillary  Sinus  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1842) ;  "  Dictionary  of  Dental  Science  "
(1849) ;  and  has  edited  "  Fox's  Natural  History  and
Diseases  of  the  Human  Teeth,"  with  additions
(1846 ;  2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1855).

HARRIS,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  England  in
1772 ;  d.  in  Georgia  in  March,  1827.  He  came  to
Georgia  in  1788,  studied  law  in  Savannah,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  attained  high  distinction  in
his  profession.  He  was  twice  elected  to  the  judge-
ship of  his  circuit,  but  declined  on  both  occasions,
and  on  the  retirement  of  Gov.  Milledge  from  the
U.  S.  senate  in  1809  the  place  was  tendered  to  him
by  both  parties  and  was  declined.  Harris  county,
in  Georgia,  was  named  in  his  honor.

HARRIS,  David  Bullock,  soldier,  b.  at  Fred-
erick's Hall,  Louisa  co.,  Va.,  28  Sept.,  1814 ;  d.  near
Petersburg,  Va.,  10  Oct.,  1864.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1833,  entered  the
1st  artillery,  and,  after  serving  a  year,  became  as-
sistant professor  of  engineering  at  West  Point.  He
resigned  from  the  army  in  1835,  and  during  several
years  thereafter  was  employed  as  a  civil  engineer
on  the  James  river  and  Kanawha  canal  and  other


HARRIS


HARRIS


91


important  works,  but  subsequently  was  a  large  ex-
porter of  tobacco  and  flour.  When  Virginia  se-
ceded from  the  Union  in  April,  1861,  he  became  a
captain  of  engineers  in  the  state  forces.  He  was
the  first  to  reconnoitre  the  line  of  Bull  Run,  and
when  the  position  at  Manassas  Junction  was  occu-
pied in  force  toward  the  end  of  May,  1861,  he
planned  and  constructed  the  works  for  its  defence.
He  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Philip  St.
George  Cocke  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  ac-
companied Beauregard  to  the  west  early  in  1862,
and  there  planned  and  constructed  the  works  at
Island  No.  10  and  Fort  Pillow,  and  the  river-de-
fences at  Vicksburg.  In  October,  1862,  he  was
transferred  to  Charleston,  and  took  charge  of  the
defensive  engineering  operations  at  that  place.  In
1864,  as  colonel  of  engineers,  he  went  with  Gen.
Beauregard  to  Virginia,  and  was  employed  on  the
defences  of  Petersburg.  A  short  time  before  his
death  he  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general.

HARRIS,  Elisha,  physician,  b.  in  Westminster,
Vt.,  4  March,  1824 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  31  Jan.,
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons  of  New  York  in  1849,  and
entered  on  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  that
city.  In  1855  he  was  appointed  superintendent
and  physician-in-chief  of  the  quarantine  hospital
on  Staten  Island,  and  at  that  time  constructed  a
floating  hospital  for  the  lower  quarantine  station.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  instrumental  in  the
organization  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission  in
New  York  city,  and  was  actively  concerned  in  its
work.  On  the  organization  of  the  Metropolitan
board  of  health  in  1866  he  was  made  registrar  of
vital  statistics,  and  also  corresponding  secretary,
and  in  1868  he  was  appointed  sanitary  superintend-
ent of  New  York  city.  While  holding  this  office
he  made  a  systematic  inspection  of  tenement-houses,
and  so  vigorously  enforced  the  law  providing  for
their  ventilation  and  lighting  that  he  secured,
among  other  reforms,  the  putting  in  of  nearly
40,000  windows  and  about  2,000  roof-ventilators
during  the  year  1869.  He  also  organized  the  first
free  public  vaccination  service,  and  the  system  of
house-to-house  visitation.  In  1873  he  was  again
made  registrar  of  vital  statistics,  and  held  that
office  until  the  reorganization  of  this  bureau  in  1876.
When  the  New  York  state  board  of  health  was  cre-
ated in  1880,  Dr.  Harris  was  appointed  one  of  its
members,  and  then  became  its  secretary,  which  place
he  continued  to  hold  until  his  death.  The  railway
ambulance  that  has  been  adopted  and  used  by  the
Prussian  army  was  invented  by  him.  Dr.  Harris
was  connected  with  many  medical  and  sanitary  as-
sociations in  the  United  States,  was  a  delegate  in
1876  to  the  International  medical  congress  of  the
American  public  health  association,  and  in  1878
was  elected  president  of  that  association.  He  was
the  author  of  numerous  articles  on  sanitary  topics,
and  edited  several  valuable  reports  on  these  subjects.

HARRIS,  George,  Lord,  British  soldier,  b.  18
March,  1746;  d.  at  his  estate  of  Belmont,  Kent,
England,  19  May,  1829.  He  was  educated  at
Westminster,  entered  the  army  in  1759,  became
captain  in  1771,  came  to  this  country  with  his  regi-
ment, and  was  engaged  at  Lexington  and  Bun-
ker Hill.  In  the  latter  action  he  was  severely
wounded  in  the  head,  and  in  consequence  was  tre-
panned and  went  home,  but  returned  in  time  to
take  the  field  previous  to  the  landing  of  the  army
on  Long  Island  in  July,  1776.  Capt.  Harris  was
present  at  the  affair  of  Flatbush.  in  the  skirmishes
on  the  island  of  New  York,  and  in  the  engagement
at  White  Plains.  At  Iron  Hill  he  was  shot  through
the  leg,  but,  notwithstanding  the  severity  of  his


wound,  he  mounted  a  horse  and  went  in  pursuit  of
the  enemy.  He  was  afterward  present  in  every
action  up  to  3  Nov.,  1778,  except  that  of  German-
town.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  to  a  ma-
jority in  his  regiment,  and  in  that  rank  served  under
Brig.-Gen.  Meadows  at  St.  Lucie.  He  afterward
served  in  India,  and  in  February,  1798,  was  made
governor  of  Madras.  In  December,  1798,  he  was
placed  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  captured  Ser-
mgapatam,  for  which  service  he  received  the  thanks
of  both  houses  of  parliament.  He  was  promoted
to  the  colonelcy  of  the  73d  foot,  4  Feb.,  1800 ;  be-
came lieutenant-general,  1  Jan.,  1801 ;  general,  1
Jan.,  1812,  and  was  raised  to  the  peerage  by  the
title  of  Lord  Harris,  11  Aug..  1815.

HARRIS,  George  Washington,  humorist,  b.
in  what  is  now  Alleghenv  City,  Pa.,  20  March,
1814;  d.  near  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  11  Dec,  1869.  He
was  taken  to  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  when  four  years
old,  was  apprenticed  to  a  jeweller,  and  afterward
commanded  a  Tennessee  -  river  steamboat.  He
wrote  able  political  articles  during  the  Harrison
campaign,  and  in  1843  began  to  contribute  humor-
ous stories  to  the  New  York  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"
under  the  pen-name  of  "S — 1."  In  1858-'61  he
wrote  for  Nashville  journals  the  "  Sut  Lovengood
Papers,"  some  of  which  afterward  appeared  in
book -form  as  "Sut  Lovengood's  Yarns"  (New
York,  1867).  Capt.  Harris  made  several  inven-
tions, which  he  described  in  the  "  Scientific  Ameri-
can." He  died  suddenly,  and  it  was  thought  by
some  that  he  was  poisoned.

HARRIS,  Ira,  jurist,  b.  in  Charleston,  Mont-
gomery co.,  N.  Y.,  31  May,  1802  ;  d.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  2  Dec,  1875.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,
was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1824,  studied
law  in  Albany,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1828.  During  the  succeeding  seventeen  years  he
attained  a  high  rank  in  his  profession.  He  was
a  member  of  the  assembly  in  1844  and  1845.  having
been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  and  in  1846  was  state
senator  and  a  delegate  to  the  Constitutional  con-
vention. In  1848  he  became  judge  of  the  supreme
court,  and  held  that  office  for  twelve  years.  In
February,  1861,  Judge  Harris  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  New  York,  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  4  July,  1861,  to  3  March,  1867.  In  the  senate
Mr.  Harris  served  on  the  committee  on  foreign  re-
lations and  judiciary,  and  the  select  joint  com-
mittee on  the  southern  states.  Although  he  sup-
ported the  administration  in  the  main,  he  did  not
fear  to  express  his  opposition  to  all  measures,
however  popular  at  the  time,  that  did  not  appear
to  him  either  wise  or  just.  Judge  Harris  was
for  more  than  twenty  years  professor  of  equity,
jurisprudence,  and  practice  in  the  Albany  law-
school,  and  during  his  senatorial  term  delivered  a
course  of  lectures  at  the  law-school  of  Columbian
university,  Washington,  D.  C.  He  was  for  many
years  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Union
college,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Rochester  uni-
versity, of  which  he  was  the  chancellor,  and  was
president  of  the  American  Baptist  missionary*  union
and  other  religious  bodies. — His  brother,  Hamil-
ton, lawyer,  b.  in  Preble,  Cortland  co.,  N.  Y..  1
May,  1820,  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1841,
admitted  to  the  Albany  bar  in  1845,  and  was  soon
distinguished  as  a  successful  advocate.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1850,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Whig  joint  legislative  committee  of  six
that  was  appointed  to  frame  the  platform,  and  call
state  conventions,  of  what  has  since  become  the  Re-
publican party.  He  was  district  attorney  in  1853,
a  member  of  the  Republican  state  committee  in
1863,  and  from  1864  till  1870  its  chairman. In


92


HARRIS


HARRIS


c^JLuuy^h^fUi


AA4


1868  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national
convention  at  Chicago,  also  chairman  of  the  new
capitol  commission  from  1866  till  his  resignation
in  1875,  serving  in  the  state  senate  from  that  date
until  1879,  when  he  refused  to  accept  a  renomina-
tion. In  1876  he  was  nominated  by  the  Republican

Earty  for  congress,  but  was  defeated,  and  continued
is  seat  in  the  state  senate.  Since  1879  he  has
withdrawn  from  public  life  and  devoted  himself  to
the  practice  of  his  profession.  His  private  library,
consisting  of  3,500  volumes,  many  of  which  are
biographical  works,  is  one  of  the  most  carefully
selected  in  the  state  of  New  York.

HARRIS,  Isham  Green,  senator,  b.  near  Tulla-
homa,  Tenn.,  10  Feb.,  1818.  His  father,  of  the  same
name,  was  the  owner  of  a  sterile  farm  and  ten  or
twelve  negroes,  and  his  family  grew  up  without
discipline. At  fourteen  years  of  age  Isham  went

to  Paris,  Tenn.,  and
took  employment  as
a  shop-boy.  In  the
following  year  he
went  to  school,  and
before  he  was  nine-
teen years  old  re-
moved to  Tippah
county,  Miss.,  where
he  became  a  suc-
cessful merchant.
He  studied  law  for
two  years  at  night,
attending  to  his
business  during  the
day,  and  had  accu-
mulated about  $7,-
000  and  also  estab-
lished a  home  for  his
father  near  Paris,
Tenn.,  when,  through  the  failure  of  a  bank,  he  was
left  penniless.  He  resumed  his  business  at  Paris
with  a  rich  partner,  and  in  two  years  had  repaired
his  losses.  His  nights  meanwhile  had  been  given  to
the  study  of  the  law,  and  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1841.  His  legislative  district  had  a  small  Demo-
cratic majority.  Two  obstinate  Democrats  insisted
on  running,  and  the  leaders  in  caucus  nominated
Harris  as  a  ruse  to  effect  the  withdrawal  of  one  or
the  other.  Neither  would  yield.  He  defeated  them,
and  his  Whig  competitor  also.  Harris  was  elected
to  congress  in  1 848,  and  served  two  terms.  He  re-
fused a  renomination  in  1853,  and  settled  in  Mem-
phis as  a  lawyer.  In  1856  he  canvassed  the  state
as  presidential  elector,  and  the  success  of  his  ticket
was  largely  attributed  to  him.  He  was  elected
governor  of  Tennessee  in  1857,  re-elected  in  1859,
and  again  in  1861,  after  the  civil  war  had  actually
begun.  Until  he  was  driven  from  the  state  by  the
success  of  the  National  arms,  Gov.  Harris  exhibited
ability  and  resource.  He  acted  as  volunteer  aide
on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  and
was  with  him  when  mortally  wounded  at  Shiloh.
He  continued  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of
the  West  during  the  remainder  of  the  war,  shared
its  hardships,  and  took  part  in  all  its  important
battles  except  Perryville.  When  the  war  began
he  was  worth  $150,000;  when  it  closed  he  had
nothing.  He  evaded  capture  on  parole,  went  into
exile  in  Mexico,  where  he  lived  eighteen  months,
and  thence  to  England,  where  he  remained  a  year.
In  1867  he  returned,  and  resumed  the  practice  of
law  in  Memphis,  Tenn.  In  1876  he  announced  him-
self as  a  candidate  for  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  can-
vassed the  state,  challenging  all  comers  to  meet  him
in  public  discussion.  He  was  successful,  took  his
seat,  5  March,  1877,  and  was  re-elected  for  the  term


ending  in  1889.  In  the  senate  he  has  been  an  ad-
vocate of  an  honest  and  economical  administra-
tion of  the  government,  and  an  opponent  of  all
class  legislation.  He  was  a  member  of  the  commit-
tee on  claims,  of  the  select  committee  on  the  levees
of  the  Mississippi  river,  and  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  the  District  of  Columbia,  while  his  party
was  in  power  in  the  senate.

HARRIS,  Joel  Chandler,  author,  b.  in  Eaton-
ton,  Ga.,  8  Dec,  1848.  He  served  an  apprentice-
ship at  the  printing  trade,  subsequently  studied
law,  and  practised  at  Forsyth,  Ga.  He  is  now
(1887)  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Atlanta,  Ga.,  "  Con-
stitution." He  has  contributed,  in  both  prose  and
verse,  to  current  literature,  and  is  the  author  of
"  Uncle  Remus,  His  Songs  and  his  Sayings :  the
Folk-Lore  of  the  Old  Plantation"  (New  York,
1880) :  "  Nights  with  Uncle  Remus  "  (Boston,  1883) ;
and  "  Mingo  and  Other  Sketches  "  (1883).

HARRIS,  John,  Indian  store-keeper,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania in  1716 ;  d.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  29  July,
1791.  He  was  the  founder  of  Harrisburg,  and  for
many  years  the  principal  store-keeper  on  the  fron-
tier :  and  at  his  house  two  notable  "  council-fires  "
were  held  with  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations  and
other  tribes.  At  the  first,  8  June,  1756,  Gov.  Mor-
ris, with  his  council,  was  present ;  and  at  the  second,
1  April,  1757,  the  deputy  of  Sir  William  Johnson,
his  majesty's
deputy  of  the
affairs  of  the
Six  Nations,
met  the  repre-
sentatives of
the  Nations
and  many  of
their  warri-
ors. Mr.  Har-
ris had  the
confidence  of
the  Indians.
At  a  confer-
ence of  Gov.  Hamilton  with  them,  23  Aug.,  1762,
they  asked  that  "  the  present  store-keepers  may  be
removed  and  honest  men  placed  in  their  stead,"
and  selected  John  Harris.  Said  the  chief,  who  ad-
dressed the  governor,  "  I  think  John  Harris  is  the
most  suitable  man  to  keep  store,  for  he  lives  right
in  the  road  where  our  warriors  pass,  and  he  is  very
well  known  by  us  all  in  our  Nation,  as  his  father
was  before  him."  Harris's  house,  built  in  1766,
near  Harrisburg,  is  still  standing.

HARRIS,  John  S.,  senator,  b.  in  Truxton,  Cort-
land co.,  N.  Y.,  18  Dec,  1825.  He  removed  to  Mil-
waukee, Wis.,  in  1846,  and  engaged  in  commercial
and  financial  enterprises  until  1863,  when  he  went
to  Concordia  parish.  La.,  and  began  the  cultiva-
tion of  cotton.  He  was  elected  to  the  Constitu-
tional convention  of  the  state  in  1867,  to  the  state
senate  in  April.  1868,  and  became  U.  S.  senator
in  July,  1868.  He  served  from  17  July,  1868,  to  3
March,  1871,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican.

HARRIS,  John  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albe-
marle county,  Va.,  8  May,  1825.  He  received  an
academic  education,  studied  law,  and  in  1847  be-
gan practice  at  Harrisonburg,  Rockingham  co.  He
was  U.  S.  attorney  in  1852-'9,  a  presidential  elector
in  1856,  and  was  then  elected  a  representative  in
congress,  as  a  Democrat,  serving  in  1859-61.  He
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  of  Virginia  from
1863  till  1865,  and  was  judge  of  the  12th  judicial
circuit  of  Virginia  from  1866  till  1869.  He  was
then  re-elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  1871
till  1881.  He  declined  a  unanimous  renomination
in  1880,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.


HARRIS


HARRIS


93


He  was  chairman  of  the  State  Democratic  conven-
tion in  1884,  and  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  National
Democratic  convention  of  that  year. — His  brother,
William  Anderson,  educator,  b.  in  Augusta
county.  Va.,  16  July,  1827,  was  graduated  at  the
Virginia  military  institute  in  1851,  and  practised
law  for  some  time  in  Virginia.  He  has  been  presi-
dent of  Sparta  institute,  Ga.,  of  Lagrange  female
college,  Ga.,  of  Martha  Washington  college,  Va.,
and  in  1866  became  president  of  the  Wesleyan
female  college,  Staunton,  Va.,  where  he  still  remains
(1887).  In  1875  Randolph-Macon  college,  Va.,  con-
ferred upon  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.

HARRIS,  John  Woods,  jurist,  b.  in  Nelson
county,  Va.,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Galveston,  Tex.,  1  April,
1887.  On  arriving  at  manhood  he  accumulated
money  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  pursue  a  collegi-
ate course  and  study  law.  He  removed  to  Texas
in  1837,  and  began  practice  in  1838.  In  the  same
year  he  was  a  member  of  the  first  congress  of  the
republic,  which  met  at  Austin,  and  in  1841  pro-
posed abolishing  the  Mexican  laws,  and  engrafting
the  common  law  on  the  jurisprudence  of  the  re-
public. In  1846  he  was  appointed  attorney-general
of  the  new  state,  and  was  reappointed  for  a  second
term.  In  1854  he  was  one  of  a  commission  to  revise
the  laws  of  the  state.  He  was  a  Democrat  of  the
strictest  Jeffersonian  school,  and  was  opposed  to
secession,  but  accepted  it,  and  gave  his  support  to
the  cause  of  the  Confederacy.  After  the  war,  his
private  fortune  being  large,  he  confined  his  prac-
tice chiefly  to  important  cases  in  the  higher  courts.

HARRIS,  Miriam  Coles,  novelist,  b.  in  Doso-
ris,  L.  I.,  7  July,  1834.  Her  maiden  name  was
Coles.  She  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  hall,  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  and  in  New  York  city,  and  in  1864
married  Sidney  Harris,  of  that  city,  where  she  has
since  resided.  Her  first  novel,  "  Rutledge  "  (New
York,  1860),  was  published  anonymously.  Her
other  works  include  "  The  Sutherlands  "  (1862) ;
"  Louie's  Last  Term  at  St.  Mary's  "  (1863) ;  "  Frank
Warrington  "  (1871) ;  "  Richard  Vandermark  "
(1871);  " Roundhearts,  and  Other  Stories"  (1871);
"  A  Perfect  Adonis  "  (1880) ;  "  Missy  "  (1882) ;  and
"Dear  Feast  of  Lent"  (1883).

HARRIS,  Peter,  last  of  the  Catawba  Indians,
b.  in  the  Catawba  reservation,  S.  C,  in  1750 ;  d.
there  about  1830.  The  Catawba  Indians  sustained
friendly  relations  with  the  settlers,  and  were  allies
of  the  colonists  during  the  Revolution,  rendering
good  service  against  the  British.  Peter  Harris  was
a  warrior  during  this  struggle,  and  his  petition,
dated  in  1822,  is  preserved  among  the  colonial
records  of  South  Carolina.  He  asked  for  an  annu-
ity in  the  following  words :  "  I  fought  the  British
for  your  sake ;  the  British  have  disappeared ;  you
are  free ;  yet  from  me  have  the  British  took  noth-
ing, nor  have  I  gained  anything  by  their  defeat.
The  deer  are  disappearing,  and  I  must  starve.  In
my  youth  I  bled  in  battle  that  you  might  be  inde-
pendent ;  let  not  my  heart  in  my  old  age  bleed  for
want  of  your  commiseration."  The  legislature
granted  him  an  annuity  of  $60.

HARRIS,  Robert,  Canadian  artist,  b.  near
Carnarvon,  North  Wales,  17  Sept.,  1849.  He
came  to  Canada,  was  educated  at  Charlottetown,
Prince  Edward  island,  and  was  for  some  time
a  land-surveyor.  He  was  self-educated  in  art  till
about  1877,  after  which  he  studied  in  London
and  Paris.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Royal  Canadian  academy  of  arts  in  1879,  and  vice-
president  of  the  Ontario  society  of  artists  in
1880.  He  has  exhibited  pictures  in  the  salon  of
Paris  and  the  Royal  academy  of  London.  He
painted,  by  order  of  the  Canadian  government,  in


1883,  the  large  picture,  now  in  the  parliamentary
building,  Ottawa,  of  the  meeting  of  delegates  in
Quebec  that  resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  Do-
minion of  Canada.  Among  his  other  pictures  are
"Meeting  of  School  Trustees,"  exhibited  in  the
Colonial  exhibition  in  London  in  1886,  and  pur-
chased by  the  government  of  Canada  for  the  Cana-
dian national  gallery,  and  numerous  portraits.

HARRIS,  Samuel,  apostle  to  Virginia,  b.  in
Hanover  county,  Va.,  12  Jan.,  1724;  d.  there  prob-
ably in  1794.  During  his  early  manhood  and  in
middle  life  he  occupied  many  public  offices,  was
church-warden,  burgess  for  the  county,  sheriff,
justice  of  the  peace,  colonel  of  militia,  and  com-
missary. While  riding  through  the  country  in
full  military  dress,  he  came  upon  a  camp-meeting
in  the  woods.  Two  itinerant  Baptist  clergymen
were  haranguing  the  assemblage,  and,  on  seeing
the  colonel,  at  once  directed  their  discourse  to
him.  So  greatly  was  he  impressed  with  their  argu-
ments that  he  was  baptized,  and  became  an  ex-
horter  among  the  poor  white  settlers.  In  1770  he
was  ordained,  and  the  Baptist  association  to  which
he  belonged  invested  him  with  the  office  of  "  apos-
tle." He  relinquished  his  large  property,  lived
with  extreme  frugality,  and  suffered  much  perse-
cution from  the  established  church,  of  which  he
had  formerly  been  a  member.  He  exercised  a
great  influence  over  the  masses,  and  was  distin-
guished as  an  exhorter.

HARRIS,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  East  Ma-
ehias,  Me.,  14  June,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1833,  and  at  Andover  theological  semi-
nary in  1838.  After  teaching  till  1841,  and  hold-
ing pastorates  at  Conway  and  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  he
was  professor  of  systematic  theology  in  Bangor
seminary  in  1855-'67,  and  then  president  of  Bow-
doin, and  professor  of  mental  and  moral  philoso-
phy there  till  1871.  In  that  year  he  became  pro-
fessor of  systematic  theology  at  Yale,  where  he
still  (1887)  remains.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Williams  in  1855.  He  has  published
"  Zaccheus ;  the  Scriptural  Plan  of  Beneficence "
(Boston,  1844) ;  "  Christ's  Prayer  for  the  Death  of
his  Redeemed  "  (1863) ;  "  Kingdom  of  Christ  on
Earth  "  (Andover,  1874) ;  and  "  Philosophical  Basis
of  Theism  "  (New  York,  1883).

HARRIS,  Samuel  Smith,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Autauga  county,  Ala.,  14  Sept.,  1841 ;  d.  in  London,
Eng.,  21  Aug.,"  1888.  He  was  graduated  in  1859,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1860.  After  practising
law  for  several  years,  he  became  a  candidate  for
holy  orders,  was  ordained  deacon,  10  Feb.,  1869,
and  priest  on  30  June.  He  held  pastorates  at
Montgomery,  Ala.,  Columbus,  Ga.,  New  Orleans,
La.,  and  Chicago,  111.,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
general  convention  of  1874  from  Georgia,  and  in
1877  from  Illinois.  In  1878  he  was  elected  to  the
bishopric  of  Quincy,  but  declined.  That  year,
with  the  Rev.  John  Fulton,  he  founded  the  "  Liv-
ing Church,"  and  was  its  editorial  manager  for  six
months.  In  September,  1879,  he  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Michigan.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  William  and  Mary  in  1874.  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Alabama  in  1879,
and  published,  besides  occasional  sermons  and  re-
views, "  Bohlen  Lectures"  (Ann  Arbor,  1882).

HARRIS,  Thaddens  Mason,  clergvman,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  7  July,  1768;  d.  in  Dorchester,
Mass.,  3  April,  1842.  He  was  a  descendant  in  the
sixth  generation  of  Thomas  Harris,  of  Ottery  St.
Mary,  Devonshire,  England.  His  father  was  a
Revolutionary  patriot,  who  died  during  the  war,
leaving  his  family  destitute.  Thaddeus  was  sent
to  earn  his  living  with  a  farmer  in  the  township


94


HARRIS


HARRIS


of  Stirling,  Mass.,  and  received  some  schooling
with  the  farmer's  children.  He  entered  the  school
of  Dr.  Morse,  a  suspected  Tory,  who  prepared  him
for  college,  and  in  1787  he  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard. Through  the  influence  of  friends  he  was  in
this  year  invited  to  become  private  secretary  to
Gen.  Washington,  but  was  prevented  by  an  attack
of  small-pox.  He  taught  at  Worcester  a  year,
studied  theology,  and  in  1781  was  appointed  libra-
rian at  Harvard.  He  accepted  a  call  in  1793  from
the  1st  Unitarian  church  at  Dorchester,  and  re-
mained its  pastor  till  three  years  before  his  death.
Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1813.  He
published  "  Discourses  in  Favor  of  Freemasonry  "
(Boston,  1803) ;  "  Journal  of  a  Tour  of  the  Terri-
tory Northwest  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains"
(1805);  "A  Natural  History  of  the  Bible  "  (1821) ;
"  Memorials  of  the  First  Church  at  Dorchester "
(1830) ;  and  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of  James
Oglethorpe"  (1841).— His  son,  Thaddeus  Will-
iam, entomologist,  b.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  12
Nov.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  16  Jan.,  1856,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1815,  studied  medi-
cine, and  practised  at  Milton  Hill,  Mass.,  until
1831,  when  he  was  appointed  librarian  of  Harvard.
For  several  years  he  gave  instruction  in  botany
and  natural  history,  and  was  the  originator  of  the
"  Harvard  students'  natural  history  society  "  and  a
member  of  the  "  Massachusetts  horticultural  socie-
ty." He  was  appointed  in  1837  a  commissioner  for
a  zoological  and  botanical  survey  of  Massachusetts,
and  after  much  research  published  a  catalogue  of
the  insects  of  that  state,  which  enumerated  2,350
species.  This,  with  his  other  extensive  catalogues
and  his  collection  of  insects,  was  purchased  by  the
Boston  society  of  natural  history.  His  report  on
"Insects  Injurious  to  Vegetation"  (Boston,  1841;
enlarged  ed.,  1852)  was  published  by  the  legisla-
ture, and  is  a  contribution  to  science  of  the  highest
practical  value.  Mr.  Harris  also  took  a  deep  in-
terest in  antiquarian  research,  and  published  more
than  fifty  papers  on  this  subject. — His  son,  Will-
iam Thaddeus,  scholar,  b.  in  Milton,  Mass.,  25
Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  19  Oct.,  1854,
evinced  a  fondness  for  books  at  an  early  age,  and,
in  consequence  of  a  physical  infirmity,  reading
was  his  sole  amusement.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1846,  and  studied  law,  but  was  pre-
vented from  practising  by  delicate  health.  He
edited,  for  the  Massachusetts  historical  society,
Hubbard's  "  History  of  New  England,"  with  new
and  important  notes  (Boston,  1848) ;  the  third  vol-
ume of  the  "  Historical  and  Genealogical  Regis-
ter" (1849);  and  published  "Epitaphs  from  the
Old  Burying-Ground  at  Cambridge  "  (1845).

HARRIS,  Thomas  Cadvvalader,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  18  Nov.,  1825 ;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,
1875.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in
1841,  became  lieutenant  in  1855,  lieutenant-com-
mander in  1862,  commander  in  1866,  and  captain
in  1872.  During  the  civil  war  he  commanded  the
"  Chippewa  "  and  the  "  Yantic."  With  the  "  Chip-
pewa" he  participated  in  several  attacks  on  Fort
Wagner,  Morris  island,  in  July,  1863,  and  in  De-
cember, 1864,  and  January,  1865,  attacked  Fort
Fisher.  In  1865  he  was  recommended  for  promo-
tion by  Admiral  Porter  "  in  consideration  of  his
cool  performance  of  duty  in  these  actions."

HARRIS,  Thomas  Lake,  spiritualist,  b.  in
Fenny  Stratford,  England,  15  May,  1823.  He
came  with  his  father  to  the  United  States,  settled
in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  and  began  to  write  for  the  press
before  his  seventeenth  year,  soon  acquiring  some
celebrity  as  a  poet.  He  renounced  Calvinism  in
early  manhood,  and,  entering  the  ministry  of  the


Universalist  church,  removed  to  New  York,  becom-
ing pastor  of  the  4th  Universalist  society.  Failing
health  compelled  him  to  resign  this  charge,  and  in
the  next  year  he  organized  an  "Independent
Christian  society,"  to  which  he  ministered  until
the  spiritualistic  movement  of  1850.  He  then
joined  a  community  at  Mountain  Cove,  Va.,  and
after  a  few  months  of  investigation  declared  him-
self a  convert  to  the  new  faith,  and  entered  on  a
lecturing  tour  throughout  the  United  States.  On
his  return  to  New  York  he  organized  a  society,
and  established  a  spiritualistic  journal.  He  went
to  Great  Britain  in  1858,  and  lectured  in  London,
Edinburgh,  Manchester,  and  Glasgow,  returning
with  a  few  enthusiasts  who  participated  in  his
views,  and  retired  to  a  farm  in  Dutchess  county,
N.  Y.  As  the  community  increased,  he  purchased
small  farms  near  the  village  of  Anienia,  estab-
lished a  national  bank,  engaged  in  milling  and
other  business,  and  reorganized  the  society,  which
was  henceforth  known  as  the  "  Brotherhood  of  the
New  Life."  He  went  to  Europe  in  its  interests  in
1866,  and  the  next  year  removed  to  Portland,  N.  Y.,
where  he  purchased  large  farms.  No  property  was
held  in  common,  but  members  of  the  society  were
permitted  to  hold  real  estate,  and  cultivate  it  on
their  own  account.  The  authority  of  the  Scriptures
and  the  marriage  relations  were  held  sacred,  there
was  no  written  creed  or  form  of  government,  and
the  system  appeared  to  combine  the  doctrines  of
Plato  in  philosophy,  Swedenborg  in  spiritual
science,  and  Fourier  in  sociology.  It  numbered
more  than  2,000  members,  some  residents  of  the
community,  and  other  citizens  of  foreign  nations.
At  one  time  Lady  Oliphant  and  her  son.  Laurence
Oliphant,  several  Japanese  high  in  official  rank,
and  two  Indian  princes  were  residents  of  this  com-
munity. Several  years  ago  it  was  abandoned  by
Mr.  Harris,  who  went  to  California,  and  his  lands
were  purchased  by  Mr.  Oliphant.  Mr.  Harris
edited  a  spiritualistic  journal  for  some  time,  entitled
"  The  Herald  of  Light,"  and  has  published,  among
numerous  poetical  and  prose  works  descriptive  of
his  philosophy,  "  The  Epic  of  the  Starry  Heavens  "
(New  York,  1854) ;  "  Modern  Spiritualism  "  (1856) ;
"A  Lyric  of  the  Morning  Land  "  (1854) ;  "A  Lyric
of  the  Golden  Age "  (1856) ;  "  Truth  and  Life  in
Jesus  "  (1860) ;  and  "  The  Millennium  Age  "  (1861).

HARRIS,  Thomas  Mealey,  soldier,  b.  in  Wood
county,  Va.,  17  June,  1817.  He  studied  medicine,
and  practised  at  Harrisville  and  Glenville,  Va.  In
May,  1862,  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  10th
West  Virginia  infantry.  He  was  promoted  briga-
dier-general on  29  March,  1865,  sent  out  the  de-
tachment that  silenced  the  last  Confederate  guns
at  Appomattox,  and  was  mustered  out  on  30  April,
1866.  He  applied  himself  after  the  war  to  scientific
farming,  served  a  term  in  the  legislature  of  West
Virginia  in  1867,  was  adjutant-general  of  the  state
in  1869-70,  and  was  pension-agent  at  Wheeling  in
1871-'7.  He  is  the  author  of  medical  essays  and  of
a  tract  entitled  "  Calvinism  Vindicated."

HARRIS,  Townsend,  merchant,  b.  in  Sandy
Hill,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y,  5  Oct.,  1803 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  25  Feb.,  1878.  At  the  age  of  fourteen
he  came  to  New  York,  entered  a  drug-store  as
clerk,  and  by  perseverance  and  industry  rose  to  be
partner  in  a  large  importing  and  jobbing  house.
With  slight  opportunities  of  early  education,  he
became  a  man  of  culture,  with  a  warm  interest
in  popular  education.  He  was  made  school-trus-
tee of  the  9th  ward,  and  later  a  member  and
then  president  of  the  board  of  education.  De-
spite long  opposition,  he  succeeded  in  establish-
ing the  Free  academy,  now  the  College  of  the  city


HARRIS


HARRISON


95


of  New  York.  He  was  also  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Society  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  ani-
mals and  of  the  Central  park  museum  of  natural
history.  In  1848  he  planned  and  carried  out  a
voyage  in  the  South  Pacific,  meeting  with  many
strange  experiences  among  the  islanders  and  can-
nibals. He  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Ningpo  in  1854,  in
1856  made  a  new  treaty  for  the  United  States  with
Siam,  and,  on  the  opening  of  Japan  by  Cora.
Matthew  C.  Perry,  was  selected  as  a  fit  person
to  follow  up  the  work  that  had  been  begun  by
American  diplomacy.  He  lived  nearly  two  years
at  Kakisaki,  near  Shimoda,  and  went  to  Yedo  to
press  his  claims.  His  interpreter,  Mr.  Heusken,
was  assassinated  in  the  street  in  daylight,  but,  with
imperturbable  faith  in  the  Japanese,  Mr.  Harris
remained  in  Yedo  when  the  other  diplomatists
had  removed,  and  secured  in  1858  the  first  treaty
of  trade  and  commerce,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1859,  the
opening  of  three  ports  to  foreign  residents.  He
resigned  his  post  on  the  change  of  administration,
and  resided  in  New  York  until  his  death.

HARRIS,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  29  April,  1765 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  Oct.,
1829.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786.
Having  studied  theology,  he  was  licensed  as  a  Con-
gregational minister,  but,  finding  his  health  not
equal  to  the  work,  he  began  the  study  of  medicine
in  Salem,  Mass.  While  he  was  thus  occupied,  a  copy
of  Hooker's  "  Ecclesiastical  Polity  "  was  put  into  his
hands.  Its  perusal  led  Mr.  Harris  to  give  up  in-
dependency, and,  his  health  having  been  restored,
he  was  ordained  deacon  in  Trinity  church,  New
York,  by  Bishop  Provoost,  16  Oct.,  1791,  and  priest
the  following  Sunday  by  the  same  bishop.  His
first  charge  was  St.  Michael's  church,  Marblehead,
Mass.,  where  he  also  conducted  the  academy.  He
held  both  offices  until  1802,  when  he  accepted  the
rectorship  of  St.  Mark's  church,  New  York  city.
Here  also,  in  the  vicinity  of  his  rectory,  he  estab-
lished an  excellent  classical  school.  In  1811  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  both  from  Harvard
and  from  Columbia.  On  Bishop  Moore's  resigna-
tion of  the  presidency  of  the  latter  institution.  Dr.
Harris  was  chosen  to  succeed  him  in  1811,  and  for
a  few  years  held  the  office  in  connection  with  his
church.  In  1816  he  resigned  the  rectorship  of  St.
Mark's,  and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  to
his  duties  as  president.  Although  suffering  from
disease  in  his  latter  years,  he  discharged  his  duties
with  faithfulness  and  diligence  up  to  the  close  of
his  life.  Dr.  Harris  published  two  sermons,  one
delivered  before  the  convention  of  Massachusetts,
the  other  before  that  of  New York. He  also

Srinted  his  "  Farewell  Sermon "  on  leaving  St.
tark's  church  (1816).

HARRIS,  William  Logan,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
near  Mansfield,  Ohio,  4  Nov.,  1817:  d.  in  New
York  city,  2  Sept.,  1887.  He  attended  the  schools
about  his  home,  and  pursued  a  course  of  clas-
sical and  mathematical  studies  at  the  Norwalk
seminary,  Ohio.  He  united  with  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  1834,  and  in  September,  1837,
was  admitted  on  trial  to  the  Michigan  conference,
which  then  included  the  northwestern  part  of
Ohio.  Upon  the  readjustment  of  the  conference
boundaries  in  1840,  he  became  a  member  of  the
north  Ohio  conference,  and  by  a  later  subdivision
he  fell  into  the  central  Ohio  conference.  For
eight  years  he  labored  in  pastoral  work  on  several
circuits  and  stations  in  the  northern  and  cen-
tral parts  of  Ohio.  In  1845  he  became  an  instruc-
tor in  the  Ohio  Wesleyan  university.  In  1846-'7
he  was  stationed  in  Toledo,  and  iri  1848  at  Nor-
walk. In  that  year  he  became  principal  of  Bald-


win institute,  at  Berea,  where  he  remained  till  in
1851  he  was  chosen  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  history  in  Ohio  Wesleyan  university.
Here  he  continued  until  1860,  when  he  was  elected
by  the  general  conference  one  of  the  correspond-
ing secretaries  of  the  missionary  society  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  which  office  he  helS
by  quadrennial  re-elections  till  May,  1872,  when
he  was  elected  and  ordained  a  bishop.  He  was  a
delegate  in  the  general  conferences  for  1856,  1860,
1864,  1868,  and  1872,  and  also  the  secretary  of  that
body  at  each  of  these  sessions.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1856  and  of  LL.  D.  in  1870.
During  the  years  1872-'3  he  circumnavigated  the
globe,  visiting  the  mission-stations  of  his  church
in  Japan,  China,  and  India,  and  also  those  in  the
various  countries  of  Europe.  He  is  recognized  as
an  expert  in  Methodist  church  law,  and  has  pub-
lished a  small  work  on  "  The  Powers  of  the  Gen-
eral Conference  "  (1859),  and  conjointly  with  Judge
William  J.  Henry,  of  Illinois,  a  treatise  on  "  Eccle-
siastical Law,"  with  special  reference  to  the  gov-
ernment of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  (1870).

HARRIS,  William  Torrey,  educator,  b.  in
North  Killingly,  Conn.,  10  Sept.,  1835.  He  was
educated  at  Phillips  Andover  academy,  and  at
Yale,  where  in  1869  he  received  the  honorary  de-
gree of  A.  M.  In  1868-'80  he  was  superintendent
of  public  schools  in  St.  Louis,  in  1866  founded
the  philosophical  society  of  St.  Louis,  and  the  next
year  founded  and  edited  the  "Journal  of  Specula-
tive Philosophy,"  the  first  of  its  character  ever
published  in  the  United  States.  He  was  president
of  the  National  educational  association  in  1875,
and  represented  the  U.  S.  bureau  of  education  at
the  International  congress  of  educators  at  Brussels
in  1880.  Since  1884  he  has  been  president  of  the
Boston  school-master's  club,  and  is  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  Concord  school  of  philosophy.  Mr.
Harris  contributes  constantly  to  magazines  on
art,  education,  and  philosophy,  has  translated  ex-
tensively from  German  and  Italian  thinkers  of  the
advanced  school,  and  published  twelve  "  Annual
Reports"  on  the  St.  Louis  schools  (St.  Louis,
1869-'81) ;  and  a  "  Statement  of  American  Educa-
tion "  (which  was  used  at  the  World's  expositions
at  Vienna  and  Paris) ;  and  edits  "  Appletons'  In-
ternational Educational  Series."

HARRISON,  Benjamin,  signer  of  the  Decla-
ration of  Independence,  b.  in  Berkelev,  Charles
City  co.,  Va.,  about  1740;  d.  in  April,  1*791.  The
general  impression  that  his  family  was  descended
from  Harrison  the
regicide  appears  to
be  erroneous.  Asa
member  of  the  bur-
gesses in  1764  he
served  on  the  com-
mittee that  pre-
pared the  memo-
rials to  the  king,
lords,  and  com-
mons;  but  in  1765,
with  many  other
prominent  men,
opposed  the  stamp
act  resolutions  of
Henry  as  impoli-
tic. He  was  chosen
in  1773  one  of  the
committee  of  cor-
respondence which  united  the  colonies  against  Great
Britain  in  1774,  was  appointed  one  of  the  delegates
to  congress,  and  was  four  times  re-elected  to  a
seat  in  that  body. As  a  member  of  all  the  Vir-


^^


96


HARRISON


HARRISON


ginia  conventions  to  organize  resistance,  he  acted
with  the  party  led  by  Pendleton  in  favor  of  "  general
united  opposition."  On  10  June,  1776,  as  chair-
man of  the  committee  of  the  whole  house  of  con-
gress, he  introduced  the  resolution  that  had  been
offered  three  days  before  by  Richard  Henry  Lee,
declaring  the  independence  of  the  American  colo-
nies, and  on  4  July  he  reported  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  signers.
On  his  return  from  congress  he  became  a  member
of  the  Virginia  house  of  delegates  under  the  new
constitution,  was  chosen  speaker,  and  filled  that
office  until  1781,  when  he  was  twice  elected  gov-
ernor of  the  commonwealth.  As  a  delegate  to  the
Virginia  convention  of  1788,  he  opposed  the  rati-
fication of  the  Federal  constitution,  taking  the
ground  of  Patrick  Henry,  James  Monroe,  and
others,  that  it  was  a  national  and  not  a  Federal
government,  though  when  the  instrument  was
adopted  he  gave  it  his  hearty  support.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  a  member  of  the  Vir-
ginia legislature.  In  person  Benjamin  Harrison
was  large  and  fleshy;  in  spite  of  his  suffering
from  gout,  his  good  hUmor  was  unfailing.  Al-
though without  conspicuous  intellectual  endow-
ments, he  was  a  man  of  excellent  judgment  and
the  highest  sense  of  honor,  with  a  courage  and
cheerfulness  that  never  faltered,  and  a  "  downright
candor "  and  sincerity  of  character  which  concili-
ated the  affection  and  respect  of  all  who  knew
him.  —  His  third  and  youngest  son,  William
Henry,  ninth  president  of  the  United  States,  b.  in
Berkeley,  Charles  City  co.,  Va.,  9  Feb.,  1773 :  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  4  April,  1841,  was  educated  at
Hampden  Sidney  college,  Virginia,  and  began  the
study  of  medicine,  but  before  he  had  finished  it
accounts  of  the  Indian  outrages  that  had  been
committed  on  the  western  frontier  raised  in  him  a
desire  to  enter  the  army  for  its  defence.  Robert
Morris,  who  had  been  appointed  his  guardian  on
the  death  of  his  father  in  1791,  endeavored  to  dis-
suade him,  but  his  purpose  was  approved  by  Wash-
ington, who  had  been  his  father's  friend,  and  he
was  commissioned  ensign  in  the  1st  infantry  on  16
Aug.,  1791.  He  joined  his  regiment  at  Fort  Wash-
ington, Ohio,  was  appointed  lieutenant  of  the  1st
sub-legion,  to  rank  from  June,  1792,  and  afterward
joined  the  new  army  under  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne.
He  was  made  aide-de-camp  to  the  commanding
officer,  took  part,  in  December,  1793,  in  the  expe-
dition that  erected  Fort  Recovery  on  the  battle-
field where  St.  Clair  had  been  defeated  two  years
before,  and,  with  others,  was  thanked  by  name  in
general  orders  for  his  services.  He  participated  in
the  engagements  with  the  Indians  that  began  on
30  June,  1794,  and  on  19  Aug.,  at  a  council  of  war,
submitted  a  plan  of  march,  which  was  adopted  and
led  to  the  victory  on  the  Miami  on  the  following
day.  Lieut.  Harrison  was  specially  complimented
by  Gen.  Wayne,  in  his  despatch  to  the  secretary  of
war,  for  gallantry  in  this  fight,  and  in  May,  1797,
was  made  captain,  and  given  command  of  Fort
Washington.  Here  he  was  intrusted  with  the  duty
of  receiving  and  forwarding  troops,  arms,  and  pro-
visions to  the  forts  in  the  northwest  that  had  been
evacuated  by  the  British  in  obedience  to  the  Jay
treaty  of  1794.  and  was  also  instructed  to  report  to
the  commanding  general  on  all  movements  in  the
south,  and  to  prevent  the  passage  of  French  agents
with  military  stores  intended  for  an  invasion  of
Louisiana.  While  in  command  of  this  fort  he
formed  an  attachment  for  Anna,  daughter  of  John
Cleves  Symmes.  Her  father  refused  his  consent
to  the  match,  but  the  young  couple  were  married
in  his  house  during  his  temporary  absence,  and


Symmes  soon  became  reconciled  to  his  son-in-law.
Peace  having  been  made  with  the  Indians,  Capt.
Harrison  resigned  his  commission  on  1  June,  1798,
and  was  immediately  appointed  by  President  John
Adams  secretary  of  the  northwest  territory,  under
Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  as  governor,  but  in  October,
1799,  resigned  to  take  his  seat  as  territorial  dele-
gate in  congress.  In  his  one  year  of  service,  though
he  was  opposed  by  speculators,  he  secured  the  sub-
division of  the  public  lands  into  small  tracts,  and
the  passage  of  other  measures  for  the  welfare  of
the  settlers.  During  the  session,  part  of  the  north-
west territory  was  formed  into  the  territory  of  In-
diana, including  the  present  states  of  Indiana,  Illi-
nois, Michigan,  and  Wisconsin,  and  Harrison  was
made  its  governor  and  superintendent  of  Indian
affairs.  Resigning  his  seat  in  congress,  he  entered
on  the  duties  of  his  office,  which  inciuded  the  con-
firmation of  land-grants,  the  defining  of  townships,
and  others  that  were  equally  important.  Gov.
Harrison  was  reappointed  successively  by  Presi-
dent Jefferson  and  President  Madison.  He  organ-
ized the  legislature  at  Vincennes  in  1805,  and  ap-
plied himself  especially  to  improving  the  condition
of  the  Indians,  trying  to  prevent  the  sale  of  intoxi-
cating liquors  among  them,  and  to  introduce  in-
oculation for  the  small-pox.  He  frequently  held
councils  with  them,  and,  although  his  life  was  some-
times endangered,  succeeded  by  his  calmness  and
courage  in  averting  many  outbreaks.  On  30  Sept.,
1809,  he  concluded  a  treaty  with  several  tribes  by
which  they  sold  to  the  United  States  about  3,000,000
acres  of  land  on  Wabash  and  White  rivers.  This,
and  the  former  treaties  of  cession  that  had  been
made,  were  condemned  by  Tecumseh  (q.  v.)  and
other  chiefs  on  the  ground  that  the  consent  of  all
the  tribes  was  necessary  to  a  legal  sale.  The  dis-
content was  increased  by  the  action  of  speculators
in  ejecting  Indians  from  the  lands,  by  agents.of
the  British  government,  and  by  the  preaching  of
Tecumseh's  brother,  the  "  prophet "  (see  Ellsk-
watawa),  and  it  was  evident  that  an  outbreak  was
at  hand.  The  governor  pursued  a  conciliatory
course,  gave  to  needy  Indians  provisions  from  the
public  stores,  and  in  July,  1810,  invited  Tecumseh
and  his  brother,  the  prophet,  to  a  council  at  Vin-
cennes, requesting  them  to  bring  with  them  not
more  than  thirty  men.  In  response,  the  chief,  ac-
companied by  400  fully  armed  warriors,  arrived  at
Vincennes  on  12  Aug.  .  The  council,  which  was
held  under  the  trees  in  front  of  the  governor's
house,  was  nearly  terminated  by  bloodshed  on  the
first  day,  but  Harrison,  who  foresaw  the  impor-
tance of  conciliating  Tecumseh,  prevented,  by  his
coolness,  a  conflict  that  almost  had  been  precipi-
tated by  the  latter.  The  discussion  was  resumed
on  the  next  day,  but  with  no  result,  the  Indians
insisting  on  the  return  of  all  the  lands  that  had
recently  been  acquired  by  treaty.  On  the  day  after
the  council  Harrison  visited  Tecumseh  at  his  camp,
accompanied  only  by  an  interpreter,  but  without
success.  In  the  following  spring  depredations  by
the  savages  were  frequent,  and  the  governor  sent
word  to  Tecumseh  that,  unless  they  should  cease,
the  Indians  would  be  punished.  The  chief  prom-
ised another  interview,  and  appeared  at  Vincennes
on  27  July,  1811,  with  300  followers,  but,  awed
probably  by  the  presence  of  750  militia,  professed
to  be  friendly.  Soon  afterward,  Harrison,  con-
vinced of  the  chief's  insincerity,  but  not  approv-
ing the  plan  of  the  government  to  seize  him  as  a
hostage,  proposed,  instead,  the  establishment  of  a
military  post  near  Tippecanoe,  a  town  that  had
been  established  by  the  prophet  on  the  upper  Wa-
bash. The  news  that  the  government  had  given


fa/^/&6^^£<^


HARRISON


HARRISON


97


assent  to  this  scheme  was  received  with  joy,  and
volunteers  flocked  to  Vincennes.  Harrison  marched
from  that  town  on  26  Sept.,  with  about  900  men,
including  350  regular  infantry,  completed  Fort
Harrison,  near  the  site  of  Terre  Haute,  Ind.,  on  28
Oct.,  and,  leaving  a  garrison  there,  pressed  forward
toward  Tippecanoe.  On  6  Nov.,  when  the  army
had  reached  a  point  a  mile  and  a  half  distant  from
the  town,  it  was  met  by  messengers  demanding  a
parley.  A  council  was  proposed  for  the  next  day,
and  Harrison  at  once  went  into  camp,  taking,  how-
ever, every  precaution  against  a  surprise.  At  four
o'clock  on  the  following  morning  a  fierce  attack
was  made  on  the  camp  by  the  savages,  and  the
fighting  continued  till  daylight,  when  the  Indians
were  driven  from  the  field  by  a  cavalry  charge.
During  the  battle,  in  which  the  American  loss  was
108  killed  and  wounded,  the  governor  directed  the
movements  of  the  troops.  He  was  highly  compli-
mented by  President  Madison  in  his  message  of
18  Dec,  1811,  and  was  also  thanked  by  the  legis-
latures of  Kentucky  and  Indiana.  On  18  June,
1812,  war  was  declared  between  Great  Britain  and
the  United  States.  On  25  Aug.,  Gov.  Harrison,
although  not  a  citizen  of  Kentucky,  was  commis-
sioned major-general  of  the  militia  of  that  state,
and  given  command  of  a  detachment  that  was  sent
to  re-enforce  Gen.  Hull,  the  news  of  whose  surren-
der had  not  yet  reached  Kentucky.  On  2  Sept.,
while  on  the  march,  he  received  a  brigadier-gen-
eral's commission  in  the  regular  army,  but  with-
held his  acceptance  till  he  could  learn  whether  or
not  he  was  to  be  subordinate  to  Gen.  James  Win-
chester, who  had  been  appointed  to  the  command
of  the  northwestern  army.  After  relieving  Fort
Wayne,  which  had  been  invested  by  the  Indians,
he  turned  over  his  force  to  Gen.  Winchester,  and
was  returning  to  his  home  in  Indiana  when  he  met
an  express  with  a  letter  from  the  secretary  of  war,
appointing  him  to  the  chief  command  in  the  north-
west. "  You  will  exercise."  said  the  letter,  "  your
own  discretion,  and  act  in  all  cases  according  to
your  own  judgment."  No  latitude  as  great  as  this
had  been  given  to  any  commander  since  Washing-
ton. Harrison  now  prepared  to  concentrate  his
force  on  the  rapids  of  the  Maumee,  and  thence  to
move  on  Maiden  and  Detroit.  Various  difficulties,
however,  prevented  him  from  carrying  out  his  de-
sign immediately.  Forts  were  erected  and  sup-
plies forwarded,  but.  with  the  exception  of  a  few
minor  engagements  with  Indians,  the  remainder  of
the  year  was  occupied  merely  in  preparation  for
the  coming  campaign.  Winchester  had  been  or-
dered by  Harrison  to  advance  to  the  Rapids,  but
the  order  was  countermanded  on  receipt  of  infor-
mation that  Tecumseh,  with  a  large  force,  was  at
the  head-waters  of  the  Wabash.  Through  a  mis-
understanding, however,  Winchester  continued,
and  on  18  Jan.  captured  Frenchtown  (now  Mon-
roe, Mich.),  but  three  days  later  met  with  a  bloody
repulse  on  the  river  Raisin  from  Col.  Henry  Proc-
tor. Harrison  hastened  to  his  aid,  but  was  too
late.  After  establishing  a  fortified  camp,  which
he  named  Fort  Meigs,  after  the  governor  of  Ohio,
the  commander  visited  Cincinnati  to  obtain  sup-
plies, and  while  there  urged  the  construction  of  a
fleet  on  Lake  Erie.  On  2  March,  1813,  he  was
given  a  major-general's  commission.  Shortly  after-
ward, having  heard  that  the  British  were  preparing
to  attack  Fort  Meigs,  he  hastened  thither,  arriv-
ing on  12  April.  On  28  April  it  was  ascertained
that  the  enemy  under  Proctor  was  advancing  in
force,  and  on  1  May  siege  was  laid  to  the  fort.
While  a  heavy  fire  was  kept  up  on  both  sides  for
five  days,  re-enforcements  under  Gen.  Green  Clay
vol.  in. — 7


were  huiTied  forward  and  came  to  the  relief  of  the
Americans  in  two  bodies,  one  on  each  side  of  Mau-
mee river.  Those  on  the  opposite  side  from  the
fort  put  the  enemy  to  flight,  but,  disregarding  Har-
rison's signals,  allowed  themselves  to  be  drawn  into
the  woods,  and  were  finally  dispersed  or  captured.
The  other  detachment  fought  their  way  to  the  fort,
and  at  the  same  time  the  garrison  made  a  sortie
and  spiked  the  enemy's  guns.  Three  days  later
Proctor  raised  the  siege.  He  renewed  his  attack  in
July  with  5,000  men,  but  after  a  few  days  again  with-
drew. On  10  Sept.  Com.  Perry  gained  his  victory
on  Lake  Erie,  and  on  16  Sept.  Harrison  embarked
his  artillery  and  supplies  for  a  descent  on  Canada.
The  troops  followed  between  the  20th  and  24th,
and  on  the  27th  the  army  landed  on  the  enemy's
territory.  Proctor  burned  the  fort  and  navy-yard
at  Maiden  and  retreated,  and  Harrison  followed
on  the  next  day.  Proctor  was  overtaken  on  5  Oct.,
and  took  position  with  his  left  flanked  by  the
Thames,  and  a  swamp  covering  his  right,  which
was  still  further  protected  by  Tecumseh  and  his
Indians.  He  had  made  the  mistake  of  forming  his
men  in  open  order,  which  was  the  plan  that  was
adopted  in  Indian  fighting,  and  Harrison,  taking
advantage  of  the  error,  ordered  Col.  Richard  M.
Johnson  to  lead  a  cavalry  charge,  which  broke
through  the  British  lines,  and  virtually  ended  the
battle.  Within  five  minutes  almost  the  entire
British  force  was  captured,  and  Proctor  escaped
only  by  abandoning  his  carriage  and  taking  to  the
woods.  Another  band  of  cavalry  charged  the  In-
dians, who  lost  their  leader,  Tecumseh,  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  fight,  and  afterward  made  no  great
resistance.  This  battle,  which,  if  mere  numbers
alone  be  considered,  was  insignificant,  was  most
important  in  its  results.  Together  with  Perry's
victory  it  gave  the  United  States  possession  of  the
chain  of  lakes  above  Erie,  and  put  an  end  to  the
war  in  uppermost  Canada.  Harrison's  praises  wore
sung  in  the  president's  message,  in  congress,  and  in
the  legislatures  of  the  different  states.  Celebrations
in  honor  of  his  victory  were  held  in  the  principal
cities  of  the  Union,  and  he  was  one  of  the  heroes  of
the  hour.  He  now  sent  his  troops  to  Niagara,  and
proceeded  to  Washington,  where  he  was  ordered  by
the  president  to  Cincinnati  to  devise  means  of  pro-
tection for  the  Indiana  border.  Gen.  John  Arm-
strong, who  was  at  this  time  secretary  of  war,  in
planning  the  campaign  of  1814  assigned  Harrison
to  the  8th  military  district,  including  only  western
states,  where  he  could  see  no  active  service,  and  on
25  April  issued  an  order  to  Maj.  Holmes,  one  of
Harrison's  subordinates,  without  consulting  the
latter.  Harrison  thereupon  tendered  his  resigna-
tion, which,  President  Madison  being  absent,  was
accepted  by  Armstrong.  This  terminated  Harri-
son's military  career.  In  1814,  and  again  in  1815
he  was  appointed  on  commissions  that  concluded
satisfactory  Indian  treaties,  and  in  1816  he  was
chosen  to  congress  to  fill  a  vacancy,  serving  till
1819.  While  he  was  in  congress  he  was  charged
by  a  dissatisfied  contractor  with  misuse  of  the  pub-
lic money  while  in  command  of  the  northwestern
army,  but  was  completely  exonerated  by  an  inves-
tigating committee  of  the  house.  At  this  time  his
opponents  succeeded,  by  a  vote  of  13  to  11  in  the
senate,  in  striking  his  name  from  a  resolution  that
had  already  passed  the  house,  directing  gold  med-
als to  be  struck  in  honor  of  Gov.  Shelby,  of  Ken-
tucky, and  himself,  for  the  victory  of  the  Thames.
The  resolution  was  passed  unanimously  two  years
later,  on  24  March,  1818,  and  Harrison  received  the
medal.  Among  the  charges  that  were  made  against
him  was  that  he  would  not  have  pursued  Proctor


98


HARRISON


HARRISON


at  all,  after  the  latter's  abandonment  of  Maiden,
had  it  not  been  for  Gov.  Shelby;  but  the  latter  de-
nied this  in  a  letter  that  was  read  before  the  sen-
ate, and  gave  Gen.  Harrison  the  highest  praise  for
his  promptitude  and  vigilance.  While  in  congress,
Harrison  drew  up  and  advocated  a  general  militia


bill,  which  was  not  successful,  and  also  proposed  a
measure  for  the  relief  of  soldiers,  which  was  passed.
In  1819  Gen.  Harrison  was  chosen  to  the  senate  of
Ohio,  and  in  1822  was  a  candidate  for  congress,  but
was  defeated  on  account  of  his  vote  against  the  ad-
mission of  Missouri  to  the  Union  with  the  restric-
tion that  slavery  was  to  be  prohibited  there.  In
1824  he  was  a  presidential  elector,  voting  for  Henry
Clay,  and  in  the  same  year  he  was  sent  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  where  he  succeeded  Andrew  Jackson  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs,  in-
troduced a  bill  to  prevent  desertions,  and  exerted
himself  to  obtain  pensions  for  old  soldiers.  He  re-
signed in  1828,  having  been  appointed  by  Presi-
dent John  Quincy  Adams  U.  S.  minister  to  the
United  States  of  Colombia.  While  there  he  wrote
a  letter  to  Gen.  Siihon  Bolivar  urging  him  not  to
accept  dictatorial  powers.  He  was  recalled  at  the
outset  of  Jackson's  administration,  as  is  asserted
by  some,  at  the  demand  of  Gen.  Bolivar,  and  re-
tired to  his  farm  at  North  Bend,  near  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  where  he  lived  quietly,  filling  the  offices  of
clerk  of  the  county  court  and  president  of  the
county  agricultural  society.  In  1835  Gen.  Harri-
son was  nominated  for  the  presidency  by  meetings
in  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  Ohio,  and  other  states ;
but  the  opposition  to  Van  Buren  was  not  united  on
him,  and  he  received  only  73  electoral  votes  to  the
former's  170.  Four  years  later  the  National  Whig
convention,  which  was  called  at  Harrisburg,  Pa.,
for  4  Dec,  1839,  to  decide  between  the  claims  of
several  rival  candidates,  nominated  him  for  the
same  office,  with  John  Tyler,  of  Virginia,  for  vice-
president.  The  Democrats  renominated  President
Van  Buren.  The  canvass  that  followed  has  been
often  called  the  "log-cabin  and  hard-cider  cam-
paign." The  eastern  end  of  Gen.  Harrison's  house
at  North  Bend  consisted  of  a  log-cabin  that  had
been  built  by  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Ohio,  but
which  had  long  since  been  covered  with  clapboards.
The  republican  simplicity  of  his  home  was  extolled
by  his  admirers,  and  a  political  biography  of  that
time  says  that  "  his  table,  instead  of  being  covered
with  exciting  wines,  is  well  supplied  with  the  best
cider."  Log-cabins  and  hard  cider,  then,  became
the  party  emblems,  and  both  were  features  of  all
the  political  demonstrations  of  the  canvass,  which
witnessed  the  introduction  of  the  enormous  mass-
meetings  and  processions  that  have  since  been
common  just  before  presidential  elections.  The
result  of  the  contest  was  the  choice  of  Harrison,
who  received  234  electoral  votes  to  Van  Buren's
60.  He  was  inaugurated  at  Washington  on  4
March,  1841.  and  immediately  sent  to  the  senate
his  nominations  for  cabinet  officers,  which  were
confirmed. They  were  Daniel  Webster,  of  Mas-


sachusetts, secretary  of  state ;  Thomas  Ewing,  of
Ohio,  secretary  of  the  treasury ;  John  Bell,  of  Ten-
nessee, secretary  of  war;  George  E.  Badger,  of
North  Carolina,  secretary  of  the  navy;  Francis
Granger,  of  New  York,  postmaster-general ;  and
John  J.  Crittenden,  of  Kentucky,  attorney-general.
The  senate  adjourned  on  15  March,  and  two  days
afterward  the  president  called  congress  together  in
extra  session  to  consider  financial  measures.  On
27  March,  after  several  days  of  indisposition,  he
was  prostrated  by  a  chill,  which  was  followed  by
bilious  pneumonia,  and  on  Sunday  morning,  4
April,  he  died.  The  end  came  so  suddenly  that
his  wife,  who  had  remained  at  North  Bend  on  ac-
count of  illness,  was  unable  to  be  present  at  his
death-bed.  The  event  was  a  shock  to  the  country,
the  more  so  that  a  chief  magistrate  had  never  be-
fore died  in  office,  and  especially  to  the  Whig
party,  who  had  formed  high  hopes  of  his  adminis-
tration. His  body  was  interred  in  the  congres-
sional cemetery  at  Washington;  but  a  few  years
later,  at  the  request  of  his  family,  it  was  removed
to  North  Bend,  where  it  was  placed  in  a  tomb
overlooking  the  Ohio  river.  This  was  subsequent-
ly allowed  to  fall  into  neglect,  but  afterward  Gen.
Harrison's  son,  John  Scott,  deeded  it  and  the  sur-
rounding land  to  the  state  of  Ohio,  on  condition
that  it  should  be  kept  in  repair.  In  1887  the  legis-
lature of  the  state  voted  to  raise  money  by  taxa-
tion for  the  purpose  of  erecting  a  monument  to
Gen.  Harrison's  memory.  He  was  the  author  of
a  "  Discourse  on  the  Aborigines  of  the  Valley  of
the  Ohio "  (Cincinnati,  1838).  His  life  has  been
written  by  Moses  Dawson  (Cincinnati,  1834);  by
James  Hall  (Philadelphia,  1836) ;  by  Richard  Hil-
dreth  (1839) ;  by  Samuel  J.  Burr  (New  York,  1840) ;
by  Isaac  R.  Jackson ;  and  by  H.  Montgomery
(New  York,  1853). — His  wife,  Anna,  b.  near  Mor-
ristown,  N.  J.,  25
July,  1775;  d.  near
North Bend,  Ohio,

25  Feb.,  1864,  was  a
daughter  of  John
Cleves  Symmes,  and
married  Gen.  Har-
rison 22  Nov.,  1795.
After  her  husband's
death  she  lived  at
North  Bend  till
1855,  when  she  went
to  the  house  of  her
son,  John  Scott  Har-
rison, a  few  miles
distant.  Her  fu-
neral sermon  was
preached  by  Horace
Bushnell,  and  her
body  lies  by  the  side
of  her  husband  at
North  Bend. — Their  son,  John  Scott,  b.  in  Vin-
cennes,  Ind.,  4  Oct.,  1804;  d.  near  North  Bend,  Ohio,

26  May,  1878,  received  a  liberal  education,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  5  Dec,
1853,  till  3  March,  1857.— A  daughter,  Lucy,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va. ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  7  April,
1826,  became  the  wife  of  David  K.  Este,  of  the  lat-
ter city,  and  was  noted  for  her  piety  and  benevo-
lence.— Benjamin,  son  of  John  Scott,  senator,  b.
in  North  Bend,  Ohio,  20  Aug.,  1833,  was  graduated
at  Miami  university,  Ohio,  in  1852,  studied  law  in
Cincinnati,  and  in  1854  removed  to  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He  was  elected
reporter  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1860,  and  in
1862  entered  the  army  as  a  2d  lieutenant  of  Indi-
ana volunteers. After  a  short  service  he  organized


(Ipb. "^tf^Z^-O  <^"A>-


HARRISON


HARRISON


99


a  company  of  the  70th  Indiana  regiment,  was
commissioned  colonel  on  the  completion  of  the
regiment,  and  served
through  the  war,  re-
ceiving the  brevet  of
brigadier  -  general  of
volunteers  on  23  Jan..
1865.  He  then  re-
turned to  Indian-
apolis, and  resumed
his  office  of  supreme
court  reporter,  to
which  he  had  been
re-elected  during  his
absence  in  1864.  In
1876  he  was  the  Re-
publican candidate
for  governor  of  In-
diana, but  was  defeat-
ed by  a  small  plural-
ity. He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Mississippi  river  commission  in  1879,
and  in  1880  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  taking  his
seat  on  4  March,  1881. (See  Supplement.)

HARRISON,  Carter  Henry,  politician,  b.  in
Fayette  county,  Ky.,  15  Feb.,  1825.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1845,  read  law,  engaged  in  farming,
travelled  for  two  years  in  foreign  countries,  and,
after  receiving  his  degree  from  Transylvania  law-
school,  Lexington,  Ky.,  settled  in  Chicago,  where
he  engaged  in  real-estate  operations.  After  the
great  fire  of  1871  he  served  as  county  commissioner
for  three  years.  After  returning  from  a  second
European  journey,  in  1874,  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, as  a  Democrat,  by  so  close  a  vote  that  his
competitor,  who  had  defeated  him  in  the  preced-
ing election,  gave  notice  of  contest.  He  was  re-
elected, and  when  his  second  term  was  ended,  in
1879,  was  chosen  mayor  of  Chicago,  in  which  office
he  was  continued  for  four  biennial  terms.

HARRISON,  Constance  Cary,  author,  b.  in
Vaucluse,  Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  about  1835.  She  mar-
ried Burton  Harrison,  a  lawyer  of  Virginia,  in
1867,  and  several  years  later  removed  with  him  to
New  York  citv,  where  she  now  (1887)  resides.  She
has  published  "Golden  Rod"  (New  York,  1880);
"Helen  Troy"  (1881);  "Woman's  Handiwork  in
Modern  Homes"  (1881);  "Old-Fashioned  Fairv-
Book"  (1885);  and  "  Bric-a-Brac  Stories"  (1886).
She  has  written  plays,  chiefly  adapted  from  the
French,  among  them  "  The  Russian  Honeymoon,"
produced  at  Madison  Square  theatre  in  1883.

HARRISON,  Gabriel,  dramatic  author,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  25  March,  1825.  When  he  was  six
years  old  his  father,  a  man  of  classical  education
and  a  bank-note  engraver,  removed  to  New  York,
where  his  house  soon  became  a  favorite  resort  of
the  literary  people  and  artists  of  the  city.  The
son's  love  of  dramatic  art  was  determined  by  wit-
nessing Edwin  Forrest  at  the  Park  theatre  in
1832.  He  soon  became  a  member  of  the  American
histrionic  society,  and  in  November,  1838,  made
his  first  public  appearance  at  Wallack's  national
theatre,  Washington,  D.  C,  as  Othello.  In  1841,
two  years  after  Daguerre's  discovery,  Mr.  Harrison
produced  pictures  by  the  former's  process  which
won  the  inventor's  warmest  praise,  and  which  took
various  prize  medals.  They  were  remarkable  for
their  tone,  and  of  a  size  that  had  been  previously
untried.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Park  theatre.
New  York,  in  1845,  being  a  favorite  support  of
Charles  Kean  in  his  Shakespearian  revivals,  and  in
1851  he  organized  the  Brooklyn  dramatic  acad-
emy, a  private  association.  He  was  manager  of
the  Adelphi  theatre,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1859,  and  in


1863  opened  the  Park  theatre,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
where  he  successfully  organized  an  English  opera
troupe.  But  his  high  ideal  of  every  detail  con-
nected with  the  setting  and  production  of  pieces
upon  the  stage  was  a  source  of  financial  disaster
to  him,  and  he  finally  retired  from  the  practice  of
his  profession.  He  was  afterward  for  a  time  lessee
and  manager  of  the  Brooklyn  academy  of  music.
In  1867,  as  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Brooklyn
academy  of  design,  he  raised  the  funds  to  pay  its
debts,  and  brought  its  free-art  schools  to  a  state  of
great  prosperity.  In  1872  he  was  one  of  the  chief
organizers  of  the  Faust  club  of  Brooklyn,  and
to  his  efforts  that  city  is  largely  indebted  for  the
fine  bronze  bust  of  John  Howard  Payne  that  was
placed  by  the  club  in  Prospect  park.  Mr.  Har-
rison has  done  some  good  work  as  an  artist,
both  in  landscape  and  portraiture,  including  a
picture  of  Edwin  Forrest  as  Coriolanus.  He  is
now  (1887),  after  many  years  of  nervous  prostra-
tion, a  teacher  of  elocution  and  acting  in  Brook-
lyn. He  has  published  "  The  Life  and  Writings
of  John  Howard  Payne  "  (Albany,  1873),  and  vari-
ous pieces  for  the  stage,  including  a  dramatization
of  Hawthorne's  "  Scarlet  Letter"  (privately  print-
ed, 1876).  which  was  successfully  put  upon  the
stage  in  February,  1878  ;  "  Melanthia,"  a  tragedy,
written  for  Matilda  Heron  ;  "  The  Author  "  ;  "  Dart-
more  "  ;  "  The  Thirteenth  Chime  "  ;  and  "  Magna,"
besides  an  adaptation  to  the  English  stage  of
Schiller's  "  Fiesco  "  and  "  Don  Carlos."  He  is  the
author  of  the  critical  essays  on  Forrest's  acting,  in
Alger's  life  of  that  actor,  of  whom  he  was  a  warm
personal  friend  and  admirer,  and  has  contributed
poetry  to  the  public  press.  His  latest  work  is  the
chapter  on  "  The  Progress  of  Drama.  Music,  and
the  Fine  Arts  in  Brooklvn"in  the  "Historv  of
Kings  County  "  (New  York.  1884).

HARRISON,  Georsre  Leib,  philanthropist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,  1811 ;  d.  there,  9
Sept.,  1885.  He  entered  Harvard,  but  owing  to
feeble  health  was  not  able  to  complete  his  course.
He  subsequently  read  law  and  was  admitted  to  the
Philadelphia  bar.  but  never  practised.  He  then
engaged  in  sugar-refining,  and  amassed  a  large
fortune,  of  which  he  gave  liberally.  He  was  a
trustee  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  divinity-school
of  Philadelphia,  and  was  several  times  a  delegate
to  the  general  convention  of  his  church.  He  was
appointed  a  member  of  the  board  of  state  charities
in  1869,  and  was  for  several  years  the  president  of
that  body.  In  1874  he  was  president  of  the  first
general  convention  of  the  board  of  public  charities
held  in  New  York,  and  afterward  sent  to  the  Brit-
ish government,  by  request,  much  information  on
the  subject  of  public  charities,  for  which  he  re-
ceived the  thanks  of  that  government.  By  ap-
pointment of  the  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  he
went  to  England  to  solicit  the  removal  of  the  re-
mains of  William  Penn  to  Philadelphia,  but  his
mission  was  unsuccessful.  On  his  return  he  pub-
lished an  account  of  it.  He  also  wrote  "  Chapters
on  Social  Science  as  connected  with  the  Adminis-
tration of  State  Charities"  (Philadelphia.  1877),
and  compiled  "  Legislation  on  Insanity,"  a  collec-
tion of  lunacv  laws  (1884).

HARRISON,  Gessner,  educator,  b.  in  Harri-
sonburg, Va.,  26  June,  1807;  d.  near  Charlottes-
ville, Va.,  7  April.  1862.  In  1825  he  entered  the
University  of  Virginia  and  received  degrees  from
the  schools  of  ancient  languages  and  medicine  in
1828.  He  was  then  appointed  professor  of  ancient
languages  on  the  retirement  of  Prof.  George  Long,
and  served  till  1848,  when  he  established  at  Bel-
mont, Va.,  a  classical  school,  which  had  a  wide


100


HARRISON


HARRISON


influence  throughout  the  south.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  an  "  Exposition  of  Some  of  the  Laws  of
Latin  Grammar  (New  York,  1852),  and  "  On  Greek
Prepositions"  (Philadelphia,  1848).

HARRISON,  Hall,  clergyman,  b.  in  Anne
Arundel  county,  Md.,  11  ^iov.,  1837.  He  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  St.  James,  Md.,  in
1854,  and  was  an  instructor  there  from  that  year  till
1863.  In  1865  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  at  Concord,  N.
H.,  and  was  appointed  assistant  master  in  St.
Paul's  school,  where  he  remained  until  1879.  In
that  year  he  became  rector  of  St.  John's  church,
Ellicott  City,  Md.,  which  charge  he  has  since  re-
tained. He  edited  "  Evans  on  the  Christian  Doc-
trine of  Marriage "  (New  York,  1870),  and  pub-
lished a  "  Memoir  of  Hugh  Davey  Evans  "  (Hart-
ford, 1870),  and  a  life  of  John  B.  Kerfoot,  first
bishop  of  Pittsburg  (New  York,  1886).

HARRISON,  James  Albert,  philologist,  b.  in
Pass  Christian,  Miss.,  21  Aug.,  1848.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1866,
and  went  to  Germany  in  1871.  He  was  professor
of  Latin  and  modern  languages  in  Randolph-
Macon  college,  Va.,  from  1871  till  1876,  when  he
was  appointed  to  the  chair  of  English  and  mod-
em languages  in  Washington  and  Lee  university,
Lexington,  Va.,  which  he  now  holds  (1887).  In
1883  he  delivered  ten  lectures  on  Anglo-Saxon  po-
etry at  Johns  Hopkins  university.  He  received
the  degree  of  doctor  of  letters  at  the  Columbia  col-
lege centennial  anniversary  in  1887.  He  is  chair-
man of  the  editorial  committee  of  the  Modern  lan-
guage association,  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
logical association,  and  the  originator  and  editor  of
the  "  Library  of  Anglo-Saxon  Poetry."  His  publi-
cations include  "  Greek  Vignettes  "  (1875) ;  "  Spain
in  Profile  "  (1878) ;  "  History  of  Spain  "  (Boston,
1881) ;  "  Beowulf,"  with  Robert  Sharp  (Boston,
1883;  2d  ed.,  revised,  1886);  "Exodus  and  Dan-
iel," with  Prof.  Theodore  W.  Hunt  (Boston,  1885) ;
"  Story  of  Greece  "  (New  York,  1885) ;  and  a  •'  Han-
dy Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,"  with  Dr.  William  M.
Baskervill  (New  York,  1886).

HARRISON,  James  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  near
Pendleton,  S.  C,  30  Nov.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Columbus,
Miss.,  22  May,  1879.  His  father,  Thomas,  a  de-
scendant of  Benjamin  Harrison,  served  as  captain
of  a  battery  in  the  war  of  1812,  after  which  he  was
comptroller-general  of  the  state.  The  son  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  South  Carolina  in
1829,  and  studied  law  under  James  L.  Pettigru.
He  removed  to  Macon,  Miss.,  in  1834,  and  in  1836
settled  permanently  in  Columbus.  In  1861  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  of  southern
states  in  Montgomery,  and  served  also  in  the  Con-
federate congress  during  the  entire  period  of  its
existence.  On  the  reconstruction  of  Mississippi
he  was  elected  to  congress,  but  was  refused  admis-
sion, and  returned  to  his  practice.

HARRISON,  John  Hoffman,  physician,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  30  Aug.,  1808 ;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, l9  March,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Maryland  in  1831,  and  was  resident-
surgeon  of  its  charity  hospital  from  1833  till
1836.  In  1845  he  established  the  "  New  Orleans
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"  which  he  edited
four  years.  He  published  an  "Essay  toward  a
Correct  Theory  of  the  Nervous  System  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1844),  and  contributed  important  articles  to
medical  journals.  Dr.  Drake  has  noted  his  experi-
ments with  regard  to  yellow  fever  in  his  "  Diseases
of  the  Mississippi  Valley  "  (Philadelphia,  1850-'4).

HARRISON,  Joseph,  engineer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  20  Sept.,  1810 ;  d.  there,  27  March,


1874.  He  had  received  but  a  partial  common-
school  education,  when  his  strong  inclination  for
mechanical  pursuits  led  his  father  to  indenture
him  to  learn  steam-engineering.  He  began  to
build  locomotives  in  1834,  and  in  1840  designed
for  the  Reading  railroad  an  eleven-ton  engine.  Two
Russian  engineers,  Col.  Melnekoff  and  Col.  Kraft,
who  were  in  this  country  to  investigate  its  rail-
way system,  saw  this  engine,  took  traces  of  it,  and
introduced  it  into  general  use  in  Russia,  where
its  value  led  to  an  official  inquiry  for  its  builder.
The  result  was  that  Mr.  Harrison  was  invited  to
Russia,  and  there  in  1843  he,  with  Andrew  M.  East-
wick,  of  Philadelphia,  and  Thomas  Winans,  of
Baltimore,  concluded  a  contract  with  the  govern-
ment to  build  the  locomotives  and  rolling  stock
for  the  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow  railway  for
$3,000,000.  The  Emperor  Nicholas  made  the  part-
ners costly  presents,  and  also  gave  Mr.  Harrison
the  ribbon  of  the  order  of  St.  Ann,  to  which  was
attached  a  massive  gold  medal,  at  the  time  of  the
completion  of  the  bridge  across  the  Neva.  After
executing  other  extensive  contracts  with  the  Rus-
sian government,  Mr.  Harrison  returned  to  Phila-
delphia in  1852,  built  a  fine  mansion,  and  col-
lected in  it  many  paintings  and  other  works  of
art.  Later  he  designed  and  patented  the  "Har-
rison Safety-Boiler,"  and  was  awarded  the  gold
and  silver  Rumford  medals  by  the  American  acad-
emy of  arts  and  sciences.  He  wrote  "The  Iron-
Worker  and  King  Solomon,"  and  published  a
folio  containing  this  poem  and  some  fugitive
pieces,  his  autobiography,  and  many  incidents  of
life  in  Russia  (Philadelphia,  1869).  He  also  wrote
a  paper  on  the  part  taken  by  Philadelphians  in  the
invention  of  the  locomotive,  an  account  of  the
Neva  bridge  in  Russia,  and  a  paper  on  steam-
boilers.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  and  of  other  learned  societies.

HARRISON,  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Virginia,  19  Feb.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Key
West,  Fla..  27  Oct..  1870.  He  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman  on  26  Sept.,  1838,  served  in  the
Pacific  squadron  in  1847-8,  and  was  in  California
during  the  Mexican  war,  serving  as  a  volunteer
in  the  expedition  that  rescued  Gen.  Kearny's  com-
mand. In  1850  he  was  in  the  observatory  in
Washington,  D.  C,  and  in  1851-'2  was  engaged  .in
the  coast  survey.  He  was  made  lieutenant,  6  Jan.,
1853,  and  appointed  to  the  East  Indian  squad-
ron. In  1862  he  commanded  the  "Cayuga,"  the
flag-ship  of  Captain  Bailey,  of  the  West  Gulf
blockading  squadron,  and  led  the  fleet  in  the
passage  of  Fort  Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip,  for
which  action  he  was  commended  in  the  official  re-
ports. He  became  commander  on  16  July,  1862,
and  had  charge  of  the  "  Mahaska,"  of  the  James
river  flotilla,  during  the  operations  of  Gen.  Mc-
Clellan  before  Richmond,  and  his  retreat  to  Harri-
son's landing.  In  1862-'3  he  held  command  of
the  flag-ship  "  Minnesota,"  of  the  North  Atlantic
blockading  squadron,  and  subsequently  was  at-
tached to  the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron, taking  part  in  the  attacks  on  the  South  Caro-
lina coast  until  the  fall  of  Charleston.  From  1866
till  1868  he  was  stationed  in  the  navy-yard  at
Portsmouth,  N.  H.  He  was  made  captain  on  28
April,  1868,  and  in  1868-'9  was  commandant  of
cadets  in  the  U.  S.  naval  academy.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  commanded  the  "Congress,"  of  the
North  Atlantic  fleet.

HARRISON,  Richard,  auditor  of  the  treasury,
b.  in  1750 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  10  July,  1841.
He  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Cadiz  for  five  years.  Presi-
dent Washington  appointed  him  auditor  on  29  Nov.,


HARRISON


HARSHA


101


1791,  and  he  was  continued  as  first  auditor  through
the  successive  administrations  till  1  Nov.,  1836.

HARRISON,  Robert  Alexander,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Montreal,  4  Aug.,  1833 ;  d.  in  Toronto
in  1878.  He  was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  and
Trinity  colleges,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1855.  He  was  appointed  chief  clerk  of  the
Crown  lands  department  in  the  same  year,  an
office  that  he  held  for  four  years,  represented  West
Toronto  in  parliament  from  1867  till  1872,  and  be-
came chief  justice  of  Ontario  in  1875.  During  his
career  in  the  legislature  he  promoted  important
legal  measures,  and  as  a  lawyer  was  retained  as
counsel  in  many  cases.  He  was  editor  of  the
"  Upper  Canada  Law  Journal,"  being  at  one  time  a
contributor  of  poetry  to  the  "  Daily  Colonist,"  of
Toronto,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Digest  of  Cases  in
the  Queen's  Bench,  Upper  Canada,  from  1823  to
1851"  (1853);  "Common  Law  Procedure  Act"
(1856) ;  "  Statutes  of  Upper  Canada  "  to  1856 ;
"  Sketch  of  the  Legal  Profession  in  Upper  Cana-
da "  (1857) ;  "  Manual  of  Costs  in  County  Courts  "
(1857) ;  "  Rules  of  Practice  and  Pleading  in  the
Courts  of  Upper  Canada  "  (1858) ;  and  "  Municipal
Manual  of  Upper  Canada  "  (1859).

HARRISON,  Robert  Hanson,  jurist,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1745 ;  d.  in  Charles  county,  Md.,  2
April,  1790.  He  was  educated  for  the  law,  suc-
ceeded Joseph  Reed  as  secretary  to  Gen.  Washing-
ton on  6  Nov.,  1775,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  remained  in  the  military  family  of
the  commanding  general  till  the  spring  of  1781.
He  was  appointed  by  congress  in  November,  1777,
a  member  of  the  board  of  war.  but  declined  the
office.  He  became  chief  justice  of  the  general
court  of  Maryland  on  10  March,  1781,  but  declined
the  appointment  of  judge  of  the  United  States
supreme  court  in  1789.

HARRISON,  Samuel  Bealy,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Manchester,  England,  4  March,  1802 ;  d.
23  July,  1867.  He  was  distinguished  as  a  lawyer,
represented  Kingston  in  the  1st  parliament  of
United  Canada  from  1  July,  1841,  till  23  Sept.,  1844,
and  in  the  2d  parliament  was  member  for  Kent
from  12  Nov.,  1843,  till  3  Jan.,  1845.  He  was  a
member  of  the  executive  council  of  Canada  from  10
March,  1841,  till  30  Sept.,  1843  ;  during  this  period
was  provincial  secretary,  and  from  21  Dec,  1841,
till  3  Oct.,  1844,  was  a  member  of  the  board  of
works.  While  in  parliament  he  greatly  aided  Lord
Sydenham  in  carrying  out  the  union  act.  He  was
for  many  years  a  county  and  surrogate  judge.

HARRISON,  Sarah,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Delaware  county,  Pa.,  about  1748 ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  29  Dec,  1812.  She  was  the  daughter
of  Rowland  Richards,  and  after  her  marriage  to
Thomas  Harrison  settled  in  Philadelphia.  She
first  preached  in  the  Quaker  meetings  during  the
Revolution,  and  was  acknowledged  a  minister  in
1781.  Accompanied  by  Mary  England  she  at-
tended the  yearly  meeting  of  Friends  in  Virginia
in  1786,  and  was  afterward  liberated  by  her  monthly
meeting  to  attend  the  meetings  of  Friends  in  the
southern  states.  In  1787  she  attended  the  North
Carolina  yearly  meeting,  in  which  the  question  of
slavery  was  discussed,  and  a  committee  appointed
to  visit  slave-holders.  She  returned  to  Philadelphia
in  1788,  and  in  1792  visited  London  and  Dublin
and  travelled  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  where
she  was  held  prisoner  for  several  days  by  the
French  on  suspicion  of  being  an  English  spy. —
Her  son,  John,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  17  Dec,  1738 ;  d.  there,  19  May,  1833.  His
early  education  was  obtained  in  Philadelphia,  after
which  he  spent  two  years  in  Europe,  devoting  his


attention  to  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  processes
used  by  chemists  in  manufacturing,  and  also  in
studying  chemistry  under  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley.
In  1793  he  began  in  Philadelphia  the  manufac-
ture of  chemicals,  and  was  the  first  successful
maker  of  sulphuric  acid  in  the  United  States.  He
had  a  lead  chamber  capable  of  producing  300
carboys,  and  in  1807  so  increased  his  plant  that
an  annual  output  of  3,500  carboys  was  possible.
The  use  of  glass  retorts  for  the  concentration  of
the  acid  was  then  prevalent,  and  Dr.  Eric  Boll-
man,  who  was  familiar  with  the  metallurgy  of
platinum,  constructed  for  Mr.  Harrison  the  first
platinum  stills  that  were  used  in  the  United  States
in  connection  with  the  manufacture  of  sulphuric
acid.  Subsequently  the  plant  was  again  increased
by  the  building  of  white-lead  works,  resulting  in
the  production  of  various  lead  compounds  and
other  chemicals.  Mr.  Harrison  is  credited  with
doing  more  to  influence  the  establishment  of
chemical  industries  in  Philadelphia  than  any  man
of  his  time.  The  business  is  now  carried  on  bv  his
grandsons.  From  1821  till  1824  he  held  the  office
of  recorder  of  deeds  in  Philadelphia.

HARRISON,  Thomas,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in  Sheffield,  Sunbury  co.,  New  Brunswick,  24  Oct.,
1839.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Dub-
lin, in  1864,  and  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
that  institution  in  1870.  He  became  professor  of
the  English  language  and  literature  and  of  mental
and  moral  philosophy  in  the  University  of  New
Brunswick  in  1870,  and  president  of  the  university
and  professor  of  mathematics  in  1885.  Prof.  Har-
rison has  been  superintendent  of  the  meteorological
chief  station  at  Fredericton,  N.  B„  since  1874,  and
is  the  author  of  the  reports  of  tri-hourly  observa-
tions published  in  "  Meteorological  Observations
of  the  Dominion  of  Canada."

HARROD,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1746 ;  d.  near  Harrodsburg,  Kv.,  about  1825.  He
emigrated  to  Kentucky  in  1774.  and  built  the  first
log  cabin  on  the  present  site  of  Harrodsburg.  He
was  one  of  the  most  efficient  of  the  early  military
leaders,  a  successful  farmer,  and  an  expert  with
the  rifle.  He  was  distinguished  at  the  battle  of
Point  Pleasant  in  1774,  and  afterward  represented
Harrodsburg  (which  was  named  in  his  honor)  in  the
Transylvania  assembly.  He  was  in  the  habit  of
making  solitary  excursions  into  the  forest,  and  from
one  of  these  trips,  which  was  undertaken  at  an  ad-
vanced age,  he  never  returned,  nor  was  any  trace
of  him  ever  discovered.

HARROW,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Indiana
about  1820.  He  was  engaged,  as  colonel  of  the
14th  Indiana  infantry,  at  the  battle  of  Antietam,
where  more  than  half  of  his  regiment  were  killed
or  wounded.  He  was  commissioned  as  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  re-
signed on  20  April,  1865.

HARSHA,  'David  Addison,  author,  b.  in
Argyle,  N.  Y.,  15  Sept.,  1827.  He  received  a  classi-
cal education  and  studied  theology,  but  was  pre-
vented from  entering  the  ministry  by  a  chronic
bronchial  affection.  "  Mr.  Harsha  is  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  press,  and  has  spent  most  of  his  life
in  his  native  town,  engaged  in  literary  pursuits.
Among  his  works  are  "  The  Heavenlv  Token "
(New  York,  1856);  "The  Star  of  Bethlehem"
(Chicago,  1864) ;  "  Manual  of  Sacred  Literature  "
(New  York,  1866);  "Lives  of  Charles  Sumner,
Doddridge,  Baxter,  Addison,  and  Bunyan"  (1868);
"  Lives  and  Selected  Works  of  Isaac  Watts,  George
Whitefield,  James  Harvey,  and  Abraham  Booth  "
(1869) ;  "  Devotional  Thoughts  of  Eminent  Di-
vines "  (1869) ;  "  The  Golden  Age  of  English  Lit-


102


HARSTON


HART


erature"  (1872) ;  and  "  The  Life  and  Times  of  Vir-
gil," now  (1887)  in  course  of  preparation.

HARSTON,  Charles  Grenville,  Canadian  in-
ventor, b.  in  Tain  worth,  Staffordshire,  England,
10  Aug.,  1844.  He  served  in  the  Royal  marines  un-
til 1876,  when  he  retired  with  the  rank  of  captain
and  came  to  Canada.  He  brought  with  him  from
England  twenty-rive  young  men  and  an  Episcopal
clergyman,  and  with  them  founded  a  settlement  in
Muskoka  district,  which  he  named  Ilfracombe.  In
1884  he  removed  to  Toronto  and  assumed  the
management  of  the  Standard  life  assurance  com-
pany of  Ontario.  He  fought  during  the  Riel
rebellion,  and  led  the  charge  at  Batoche  on  12
May,  1885.  He  has  invented  the  "  Harston  "  rifle,
which  some  claim  is  superior  to  the  Martini-Henry.
He  is  active  as  a  sportsman,  and  secretary  of  the
Dominion  kennel  club.

HART,  Abraham,  publisher,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  15  Dec,  1810 ;  d.  in  Long  Branch,  N.  J.,  22
July,  1885.  He  was  of  Dutch  parentage.  When  a
mere  boy  he  was  taken  into  the  employ  of  the  pub-
lishing firm  of  Carey,  Lea  and  Carey.  In  1829
the  firm  divided  its  business ;  a  partnership  was
formed  between  Mr.  Hart  and  Edward  L.  Carey,
the  junior  member  of  the  old  firm,  and  the  house
of  Carey  and  Hart  became  the  best-known  publish-
ing house  in  the  country.  It  was  the  first  to  col-
Jsct  the  fugitive  essays  of  Macaulay,  Jeffrey,
Mackintosh,  Carlyle,  and  others  and  publish  them
in  separate  volumes.  Mr.  Carey  died  in  1845,  and
Mr.  Hart  continued  the  publishing  business  until
1854,  when  he  retired  with  a  handsome  fortune.
Mr.  Hart  was  a  member  of  the  Jewish  community,
and  took  a  chief  part  in  its  worthiest  projects.

HART,  Charles  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  4  Feb.,  1847.  He  received  a  classical
and  scientific  education,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  18  Nov.,  1868.  Since  then,
although  in  active  practice,  he  has  devoted  much
time  to  literature.  He  has  paid  special  attention
to  historical  investigation  and  art  matters,  until  he
has  become  recognized  as  an  authority  on  the  lat-
ter subject.  He  is  a  member  of  numerous  histori-
cal and  scientific  associations,  was  elected  corre-
sponding secretary  of  the  Numismatic  and  anti-
quarian society  of  Philadelphia,  in  1865,  and  three
years  later  became  its  historiographer.  Much  of
his  literary  work  has  been  done  in  connection  with
this  society.  Mr.  Hart's  separate  publications  in-
clude "  Remarks  on  Tabasco,  Mexico "  (1865) :
"Historical  Sketch  of  National  Medals"  (1866);
"  Memoir  of  William  Hickling  Prescott "  (1868) ;
"  Bibliographia  Lincolniana"  with  notes,  and  an
introduction,  which  was  subsequently  reprinted  as
"  Biographical  Sketch  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (Al-
bany, 1870) ;  "  Turner,  the  Dream  Painter  "  (1879) ;
"  Bibliographia  Websteriana  '*  (1883) ;  and  memoirs
of  William  Willis  (1870).  George  Ticknor  (1871),
Samuel  S.  Haldeman  (1881),  Lewis  II.  Morgan
(1883),  Lucius  Q.  C.  Elmer  (1884),  and  others.  In
May,  1870,  he  delivered  a  "  Discourse  on  the  Life
and  Services  of  Gulian  C.  Verplanck,"  which  was

Erinted.  He  has  in  preparation  a  "Treatise  on  the
•octrine  of  Equitable  Conversion,"  based  on  the
English  work  of  Leigh  and  Dalzell  (London,  1825).
HART,  Emanuel  Bernard,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1809.  He  was  prepared'  for  Columbia
college,  but  entered  business  in  his  fourteenth  year.
After  taking  an  active  part  in  politics  as  a  Demo-
crat and  serving  as  alderman,  he  was  elected  to
congress  in  1850,  and  in  1856  was  appointed  sur-
veyor of  the  port  of  New  York  by  President  Bu-
chanan. In  1868  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
became  interested  in  railway  practice. In  1880-'3


Mr.  Hart  was  an  excise  commissioner,  and  since
then  he  has  devoted  his  time  to  law.  He  was  at
one  time  president  of  Mt.  Sinai  hospital.

HART,  Joel  T.,  sculptor,  b.  in  Clark  county,
Ky.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Florence,  Italy,  1  March,  1877.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  and  was
apprenticed  to  a  stone-cutter  in  Lexington,  Ky.,
where  he  began  to  model  busts  in  clay.  In  1849
he  went  to  Italy  for  study,  and  there,  under  the
patronage  of  the  Ladies'  Clay  association,  modelled
a  statue  of  Henry  Clay,  which  is  now  in  Richmond,
Va.  His  next  work  was  a  colossal  bronze  statue  of
Mr.  Clay,  which  is  now  in  New  Orleans,  and  the
marble  statue  of  that  statesman  in  the  Louisville
court-house.  Thirty  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in
Florence,  during  which  time  he  finished  busts  and
statues  of  many  distinguished  men.  His  best  com-
positions are  "Charity,"  "Woman  Triumphant,"
and  "Penserosa."  He  invented  an  apparatus  for
obtaining  mechanically  the  outline  of  a  head  from
life.  It  consisted  of  a  metallic  shell,  which  sur-
rounded the  head,  with  a  space  between,  perforated
for  a  large  number  of  pins.  Each  pin  was  pushed
inward  till  it  touched  the  head,  and  there  fastened.
The  shell  was  then  filled  with  plaster,  which  was
cut  away  till  the  points  of  the  pins  were  reached,
thus  forming  a  rough  mould.

HART,  John,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence, b.  in  Hopewell  township,  N.  J.,  in
1708 ;  d.  there  in  1780.  He  was  the  son  of  Ed-
ward Hart,  who  commanded  the  New  Jersey  blues,
a  corps  of  volun-
teers that  served
in  the  French-
Canadian  wars.
John  was  a  farm-
er, without  mili-
tary ambition,
and  took  no  ac-
tive part  in  the
French  wars.  He
served  for  several
terms  in  the  pro-
vincial legisla-
ture, and  was  the
promoter  of  laws
for  the  improve-
ment of  roads,
the  founding  of
schools,  and  the
administration  of
justice.  He  was
known  in  the  community  as  "  Honest  John  Hart."
In  1765,  on  the  passage  of  the  stamp-act,  he  was
one  of  the  first  to  recognize  the  tyrannical  charac-
ter of  that  measure,  and  assisted  in  the  selection
of  delegates  to  the  congress  that  was  held  in  New
York  in  October  of  that  year.  He  served  in  the
congress  of  1774  and  that  of  1775.  and  in  1776
was  elected  with  four  others  to  fill  the  vacancies
caused  by  the  resignation  of  the  New  Jersey  dele-
gation, who  were  unwilling  to  assume  the  respon-
sibility imposed  by  Lee's  resolution  of  independ-
ence. John  Hart,  the  signer  of  the  Declaration,
has  frequently  been  confounded  with  John  de
Hart,  who  was  one  of  the  number  that  resigned.
In  1777-8  he  was  chairman  of  the  New  Jersey
council  of  safety,  and  when  that  state  was  in-
vaded by  the  British  his  stock  and  farm  were
destroyed  by  the  Hessians,  his  family  forced  to
fly,  and  every  effort  made  to  capture  the  aged
patriot.  He  hid  in  the  forest,  and  suffered  pri-
vation and  distress,  including  the  death  of  his
wife,  until  the  battles  of  Trenton  and  Princeton,
in  December,  1777,  secured  the  evacuation  of  the


oJfwt  A%2~


HART


HART


103


greater  part  of  New  Jersey.  He  then  returned  to
his  farm,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his  life  in  agricul-
tural pursuits.  In  person,  Mr.  Hart  was  tall  and
well  proportioned,  with  very  black  hair  and  blue
eves.  His  disposition  was  affectionate  and  just,
and  he  was  held  in  high  esteem  in  the  community
in  which  he  lived.

HART,  John  Seely,  author,  b.  in  Stockbridge,
Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26
March,  1877.  His  family  removed  to  Pennsyl-
vania, and  settled  at  Wilkesbarre.  John  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1830,  and  after  teach-
ing a  year  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  became  tutor  in
Princeton  in  1832,  and  in  1834  adjunct  professor
of  ancient  languages.  From  1836  till  1841  he  was
in  charge  of  the  Edgehill  school.  From  1842  till
1859  he  was  principal  of  the  Philadelphia  high-
school,  and  in  1863-'71  of  the  New  Jersey  state
normal  school  at  Trenton.  In  1872  he  became
professor  of  rhetoric  aud  the  English  language
at  Princeton.  In  1848  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Miami  university.  Mr.  Hart  con-
tributed, largely  to  religious  and  educational  lit-
erature. He  edited  the  '*  Pennsylvania  Common
School  Journal "  in  1844,  "  Sartains  Magazine  "
in  1849-'51,  founded  the  " Sundav-School  Times"
in  1859,  and  edited  it  until  1871,  "and  in  1860  ed-
ited the  publications  of  the  Sunday-school  union.
He  published  "  Reports  of  the  Philadelphia  High
School"  (Philadelphia,  1842-'59) ;  "Class-Book  of
Poetry"  and  "Class-Book  of  Prose "  (1844) ;  "Es-
say on  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Edmund  Spen-
ser "  (New  York  and  London,  1847) :  the  philo-
logical volume  of  the  reports  of  the  Wilkes
exploring  expedition  (1849—51) ;  "  In  the  School-
Room  "  (Philadelphia,  1868) ;  "  Manual  of  Compo-
sition and  Rhetoric  "  (1870) ;  "  Manual  of  English
Literature "  (1872) ;  "  Manual  of  American  Lit-
erature "  (1873) ;  and  "  Short  Course  in  English
and  American  Literature  "  (1874).

HART,  or  HEART,  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in
Kensington,  Conn.,  in  1748;  d.  on  Miami  river,
Ohio,  4  Nov.,  1791.  His  father,  Ebenezer  Hart,
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  Connecticut.  Jona-
than was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1768,  went  to
Farmington  in  1773,  and  engaged  in  business.  He
enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  in  the  Continental
army  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  and
served  throughout  the  struggle  as  a  member  of  the
1st  Connecticut  regiment,  attaining  the  rank  of
captain.  When  peace  was  established  he  engaged
in  surveying,  and  in  1785  was  appointed  captain  of
the  1st  U.  S.  infantry.  He  was  stationed  on  the
western  frontier,  and  served  in  the  Indian  cam-
paigns under  Gen.  Charles  Scott  and  Gen.  Josiah
Harmar.  In  1791  he  was  appointed  major  of  the
2d  infantry,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Arthur  St.
Clair's  expedition  against  the  Miami  Indians.
Maj.  Hart  commanded  the  regular  troops  in  the
disastrous  battle  of  4  Nov.,  1791,  near  the  source
of  Miami  river,  and  while  covering  the  retreat
with  the  shattered  remnant  of  the  army,  was  or-
dered to  charge  with  the  bayonet.  In  performing
this  dutv  he  and  nearly  all  his  command  were
killed.  He  published  in  the  transactions  of  the
American  society  (vol.  iii.) "  The  Native  Inhabitants
of  the  Western  Country,"  and  a  paper  on  "The
Ancient  Works  of  Art."

HART,  Luther,  clergyman,  b.  in  Goshen,
Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  in  July,  1783;  d.  in  Plym-
outh, Conn.,  25  April,  1834.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1807,  taught  for  a  year  in  the  acade-
my at  Litchfield,  began  the  study  of  theology  in
1808  under  Rev.  Ebenezer  Potter,  of  Washington,
Conn.,  and  was  graduated  with  the  first  class  at


Andover  seminary.  In  1809  he  was  licensed  to
preach  in  Massachusetts,  and  in  1810  was  called  to
the  Congregational  church  at  Plymouth,  Conn.,
where  he  continued  until  his  death.  Five  hundred
persons  were  admitted  to  the  membership  of  this
church  during  his  ministrations.  His  works  in-
clude "Christmas  Sermons"  (1818);  "Sermons"
(1826) ;  and  "  Memoir  of  Amos  Pettengill "  (1834).

HART,  Nancy,  Revolutionary  heroine,  b.  in
Elbert  county,  Ga.,  about  1755;*  d.  there  about
1840.  She  was  without  education  or  refinement,
but  a  zealous  patriot.  Although  illiterate  and  of
unprepossessing  appearance,  she  supported  the
cause  with  many  deeds  of  bravery,  and  was  well
known  to  the  Tories,  who  stood  somewhat  in  fear
of  her.  On  the  occasion  of  an  excursion  of  the
British  from  the  camp  at  Augusta  into  the  in-
terior, a  party  of  five  of  the  enemy  came  to  her
cabin  to  pillage.  While  they  were  eating  and
drinking  at  her  table  she  contrived  to  conceal
their  arms,  and  when  they  sprang  to  their  feet  at
the  sound  of  the  approaching  neighbors  she  ordered
them  to  surrender  or  pay  the  forfeit  with  their
lives.  One  man  stirred,  and  was  shot  dead.  Ter-
ror of  capture  induced  another  to  attempt  escape,
but  he  met  with  the  same  fate.  When  the  neigh-
bors arrived  they  found  the  woman  posted  in  the
doorway,  two  men  dead  on  the  floor,  and  the  others
kept  at  bay. Hart  county,  Ga.,  is  named  for  her.

HART,  Oliver,  clergyman,  b.  in  Warminster,
Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  5  July,  i723;  d.  in  Hopewell,  N.
J.,  31  Dec,  1795.  He  was  a  Baptist  minister  of
Charleston,  S.  C,  from  1749  till  February,  1780,
and  at  the  latter  date  settled  at  Hopewell.  He
was  an  active  patriot,  and  was  sent  with  William
Tennant  by  the  council  of  safety  to  reconcile  some
of  the  disaffected  frontier  settlers  to  the  change  in
public  affairs  consequent  upon  the  Revolution.
He  had  some  ability  as  a  writer  of  verse,  and  pub-
lished a  "  Discourse  on  the  Death  of  William  Ten-
nant," "  Dancing  Exploded."  "  The  Christian
Temple."  and  "  A  Gospel  Church  Portraved."

HART,  William,  artist,  b.  in  Paisley,"  Scotland,
31  March,  1823.  His  parents  removed  to  Albany,
N.  Y.,  when  he  was  a  child,  and  in  1831  he  was
apprenticed  to  a  coach-maker,  for  whom  he
painted  panel  and  other  carriage  decorations.  His
tastes  soon  led  him  to  adopt  the  career  of  an  art-
ist, and  in  1848  he  exhibited  some  of  his  first
work  at  the  National  academy  of  design,  which
met  with  favorable  comment.  He  visited  Scot-
land in  1850,  spent  three  years  in  study,  and  on
his  return  opened  a  studio  in  New  York  city.  In
1855  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy,  and  in  1858  an  academician.  At  the  or-
ganization of  the  Brooklyn  academy  of  design  in
1865,  he  became  its  president,  and  continued  in
that  office  several  years.  He  was  one  of  the  origi-
nal members  of  the  American  society  of  water-
colorists,  and  its  president  from  1870  till  1873.
He  has  exhibited  at  the  National  academy  "  The
September  Snow  "  and  "  Autumn  in  the  Woods  of
Maine"  (1867);  "Scene  on  the  Peabody  River,"  in
water-colors  (1868);  "Twilight  on  the  Brook"
(1869);  "Goshen,  N.  H.,"  in  water-colors,  " Twi-
light," and  "A  Brook  Studv"  (1870);  "Easter
Skv  at  Sunset,"  in  water-colors  (1871);  "The
Golden  Hour"  (1872);  "Morning  in  the  Clouds"
(1874);  "Keene  Valley"  (1875);  "Cattle  Scenes"
(1876);  "Landscape  with  Jersev  Cattle"  (1877);
"  The  Ford  "  (1878) ;  "  Scene  on  Napanock  Creek  "
(1884);  "A  Modern  Cinderella'*  (1885);  and
"After  a  Shower"  (1886).— His  brother.  James
McPougal,  artist,  b.  in  Kilmarnock,  Scotland,  in
December,  1828,  also  served  an  apprenticeship  to  a


104


HARTE


HARTLEY


coach-maker  in  Albany  as  a  decorator  of  carriage-
panels.  In  1851  he  went  to  Diisseldorf  and
studied  with  Schirmer.  He  opened  a  studio  in
Albany,  and  worked  for  four  years,  but  in  1857
removed,  to  New  York,  where  he  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy,  and  in  1859  an
academician.  Mr.  Hart  is  noted  for  his  treatment
of  cattle  in  landscape  and  his  rendition  of  pasto-
ral scenes.  Among  his  works  are  "  Cattle  Going
Home "  and  "  Moonrise  in  the  Adirondacks "
(1871) ;  "  In  the  Orchard  "  and  "  A  Breezy  Day  on
the  Road  "  (1874) ;  "  Landscape,  Road  and  Cattle  "
(1875) :  "  A  Misty  Morning,"  exhibited  at  the  Cen-
tennial (1876) ;  "  In  the  Pasture  "  (1877) ;  "  Sum-
mer Memory  of  Berkshire,"  and  "  Indian  Summer,"
both  exhibited  at  the  Paris  salon  (1878) ;  "  Princess
Lily"  (1882);  "Boughs  for  Christmas"  (1884);
"  At  the  Watering-Trough  "  (1885) :  "  Three  Little
Maids  "  and  "  On  the  North  Shore  "  (1886).

HARTE,  Francis  Bret,  author,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  25  Aug.,  1839.  His  father  was  a  teacher  in
the  Albany  female  seminary,  a  scholar  of  ripe  cul-
ture, who  died  leav-
ing his  family  with
but  little  means.
After  an  ordinary
school  education,  the
son  went  in  1854  to
California  with  his
mother.  Prom  San
Francisco  he  walked
to  Sonora,  and  there
opened  a  school ;
but  this  proved  un-
successful, and  he
turned  his  energies
to  mining.  Fortune
was  not  there,  and
he  became  a  com-
positor in  a  print-
ing-office, beginning
his  literary  career
by  composing  his
first  articles  in  type
while  working  at
the  case.  During  the  absence  of  the  editor  he  con-
ducted the  journal  for  a  short  time,  but  his  arti-
cles were  not  in  sympathy  with  the  mining  popu-
lation, and  his  editorial  experiences  terminated
abruptly.  He  drifted  back  to  San  Francisco,  and
in  1857  became  a  compositor  in  the  office  of  the
"  Golden  Era."  The  experience  of  his  frontier  life
had  been  impressive,  and  his  literary  talents  soon
put  to  profitable  use  the  vivid  scenes  of  the  past
three  years.  Clever  sketches,  contributed  at  first
anonymously,  attracted  the  attention  of  the  editor,
and  Harte  was  invited  to  join  the  corps  of  writers.
Soon  afterward  he  became  associated  in  the  man-
agement of  "  The  Californian,"  a  literary  weekly,
short-lived,  but  of  interest  as  containing  his  "  Con-
densed Novels."  In  1864  he  was  appointed  secre-
tary of  the  U.  S.  branch  mint,  having  previously
held  several  minor  political  appointments,  and
filled  this  office  for  six  years,  during  which  time
he  wrote  for  San  Francisco  journals  "  John  Burns
of  Gettysburg,"  "  The  Pliocene  Skull,"  "  The  So-
ciety upon  the  Stanislau,"  and  other  poems,  which
were  widely  copied  and  universally  admired.  In
July,  1868,  the  publication  of  "  The  Overland
Monthly  "  was  begun,  with  Mr.  Harte  as  its  organ-
izer and  editor.  The  second  issue  contained  "  The
Luck  of  Roaring  Camp,"  a  story  of  mining  life,
which  marks  the  beginning  of  his  higher  and  more
artistic  work.  It  was  the  first  of  those  sketches  of
American  border  experience  of  which  he  was  the


/Jt^£^r^~~^c — ^^^


pioneer  writer,  and  in  which  he  originated  that
peculiar  pseudo-dialect  of  western  mining  life.
The  next  number  contained  "The  Outcasts  of
Poker  Flat,"  a  realistic  story,  considered  by  many
his  best  production.  It  established  his  reputa-
tion, and  was  followed  in  quick  succession  by
"  Miggles,"  "  Tennessee's  Partner,"  and  "  The  Idyl
of  Red  Gulch."  The  "  Etc."  of  the  early  issues  of
the  magazine  were  by  him.  In  September,  1870,
appeared  his  "  Plain  Language  from  Truthful
James  "  (popularly  known  as  "  The  Heathen  Chi-
nee "),  a  satire  against  the  hue  and  cry  that  the
Chinese  were  shiftless  and  weak-minded.  He  re-
ceived the  appointment  of  professor  of  recent  lit-
erature in  the  University  of  California  in  1870,  but
in  the  spring  of  1871  resigned  that  chair,  and  also
his  editorial  appointment,  and  settled  in  New  York.
An  effort  was  made  to  found  a  literary  periodical
under  his  management  in  Chicago,  but  this  failed,
and  he  became  a  regular  contributor  to  the  "  At-
lantic Monthly,"  and  lectured  on  "  The  Argonauts
of  '49  "  in  various  cities.  In  1878  he  was  appointed
IT.  S.  consul  to  Crefeld,  Germany,  whence  he  was
transferred  in  1880  to  Glasgow,  Scotland,  and  con-
tinued in  that  office  until  the  advent  of  a  new  ad-
ministration in  1885.  At  present  (1887)  he  is  re-
siding abroad,  engaged  in  literary  pursuits.  His
publications  include  "Condensed  Novels"  (New
York,  1867;  Boston,  1871);  "Poems"  (Boston,
1871)  ;  "  Luck  of  Roaring  Camp  and  Other
Sketches"  (1871);  "East  and  West  Poems"  (1871);
"Poetical  Works"  (1871);  "Mrs.  Skaggs's  Hus-
bands "  (1872) ;  "  Tales  of  the  Argonauts  and  Other
Stories"  (1875);  "Thankful  Blossom"  (1876);
"Two  Men  of  Sandy  Bar"  (1876);  "Gabriel  Con-
roy"  (Hartford,  1876);  "The  Story  of  a  Mine"
(Boston,  1877) ;  "  Echoes  of  the  Foot  Hills  "  (1879) ;
"  Drift  from  Two  Shores  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Twins  of
Table  Mountain  "  (1879) ;  "  Flip  and  Found  at  Blaz-
ing Star  "  (1882) ;  "  In  the  Carquinez  Woods  "  (1883) ;
"  On  the  Frontier  "  (1884) ;  "  By  Shore  and  Sedge  "
(1885) ;  "  Maruja,  a  Novel "  (1885) ;  "  Snow-Bound
at  Eagle's  "  (1886) :  "  A  Millionaire  of  Rough  and
Ready"  (1887);  "The  Crusade  of  the  Excelsior"
(1887) ;  also  his  collected  "  Works  "  (5  vols.,  1882).

HARTLEY,  David,  English  politician,  b.  in
1729 ;  d.  in  Bath,  England,  19  Dec,  1813.  He  was
the  son  of  the  famous  writer  on  metaphysics,  was.
educated  at  Oxford,  and  became  a  member  of  par-
liament. He  opposed  the  war  with  the  American
colonies,  was  appointed  British  minister  to  treat
with  Benjamin  Franklin  at  Paris,  and  signed  the
treaty  of  peace  on  behalf  of  Great  Britain  in  1783.
Some  of  his  letters  were  published  in  Frank-
lin's correspondence  in  1817,  and  it  has  been  sur-
mised that  he  procured  for  Franklin  the  letters  of
Hutchinson  and  others.  He  was  possessed  of  great
scientific  attainments,  and  made  many  useful  in-
ventions. He  published  "  Letters  on  the  American
War"  (1776),  and  other  political  pamphlets.

HARTLEY,  Jonathan  Scott,  sculptor,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  23  Sept.,  1845.  He  was  educated
at  the  Albany  academy  and  began  his  professional
life  as  a  worker  in  marble.  Subsequently  he  went
to  England,  where  he  passed  three  years,  entered
the  Royal  academy,  and  gained  a  silver  medal  in
1869.  After  residing  for  a  year  in  Germany,  he
returned  to  the  United  States,  and  after  another
visit  to  Europe,  when  he  went  to  Paris  and  Rome,
he  became  a  resident  of  New  York.  He  is  one  of
the  original  members  of  the  Salmagundi  sketch
club,  and  was  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  schools
of  the  Art  students'  league  in  1878-'84,  and  presi-
dent of  the  league  in  1879-80.  His  works  include
"The  Young  Samaritan,"  "King  Rene's  Daugh-


HARTLEY


HARTSHORNE


105


ter  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Whirlwind  "  (1878) ;  a  statue  of
Miles  Morgan,  erected  at  Springfield,  Mass.,  in
1882,  and  bas-reliefs  on  the  monument  at  Saratoga
that  commemorates  the  defeat  of  Burgoyne.

HARTLEY,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Reading.
Pa.,  7  Sept.,  1748 :  d.  in  York.  Pa.,  21  Dec,  1800.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  prac-
tised in  York,  Pa.  He  served  in  the  Revolutionary
war,  and  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of
Irvine's  regiment,  9  Jan.,  1776,  and  was  colonel  of
the  6th  Pennsylvania  in  the  same  year.  Col.
Hartley  commanded  an  expedition  in  October,
1778,  against  the  savages  who  had  been  concerned
in  the  Wyoming  massacre,  destroyed  their  settle-
ment, killed  many  of  them,  and  recovered  part  of
the  property  that  they  had  carried  away.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  house  of  repre-
sentatives in  1778,  and  was  elected  a  representative
in  congress  from  Pennsylvania,  serving  by  con-
tinuous re-elections  from  4  March,  1789.  to  21
Dec,  1800.  He  was  one  of  the  council  of  censors
in  1783,  and  a  delegate  to  the  Pennsylvania  con-
vention that  adopted  the  national  constitution.

HARTMAN,  William  Dell,  naturalist,  b.  in
Chester  county,  Pa.,  24  Dec,  1817.  His  grand-
father and  great-grandfather  were  Revolutionary
soldiers.  His  father  was  George  Hartman,  who
was  an  officer  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  afterward  a
major-general  of  Pennsylvania  militia.  The  son
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1839,  and  has  since  practised  this
profession  with  success.  When  at  school  he  showed
a  fondness  for  the  natural  sciences,  and  at  the  age
of  fifteen  was  mentioned  by  Dr.  William  Darling-
ton in  his  "  Flora  Cestrica "  as  "  a  zealous  and
promising  young  botanist."  He  successively  made
himself  acquainted  with  all  the  branches  of  natural
history,  but  paid  special  attention  to  conchology.
He  has  made  a  large  collection  of  shells,  which  is
especially  rich  in  partulae  and  achatinella?.  His
collection  of  the  latter  excels  those  in  the  British
museum  and  the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  and  he  has
published  bibliographic  and  synonymic  catalogues
of  it.  In  connection  with  Dr.  Ezra  Michener,  he
issued  an  illustrated  and  descriptive  catalogue
of  the  fresh  -  water  and  land  shells  of  Chester
county,  Pa.  (1870).  He  has  also  contributed  to
scientific  publications,  and  for  years  has  corre-
sponded with  scientists  in  America  and  Europe.

HARTRANFT,  John  Frederick,  soldier,  b.
in  New  Hanover,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  16  Dec,
1830 ;  d.  in  Norristown,  Pa.,  17* Oct.,  1889.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  college,  Schenectady,  in  1853,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  the  4th
Pennsylvania  regiment,  and  commanded  it  during
the  three  months  of  its  enlistment,  which  expired
the  day  before  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run.  As  his
regiment  had  been  ordered  to  Harrisburg  to  be
mustered  out,  he  asked  and  obtained  leave  to  serve
as  a  volunteer  on  Gen.  William  B.  Franklin's  staff
in  that  battle.  He  then  organized  the  51st  Penn-
sylvania regiment,  was  commissioned  its  colonel,
27  July,  1861,  and  with  it  accompanied  Gen.  Burn-
side  in  his  expedition  to  North  Carolina  in  March,
1862.  He  took  part  in  all  the  engagements  of  the
9th  corps,  led  the  charge  that  carried  the  stone
bridge  at  Antietam,  and  commanded  his  regiment
at  Fredericksburg.  He  was  then  ordered  to  Ken-
tucky, and  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Campbell's
Station  and  the  successful  defence  of  Knoxville.
He  was  with  the  9th  corps  in  June,  1863,  as  cover-
ing army  to  the  troops  besieging  Vicksburg,  and
after  the  fall  of  that  place  with  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman  in  his  advance  to  Jackson,  Miss. He


commanded  a  brigade  in  the  battles  of  the  Wilder-
ness and  Spottsylvania,  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  on  12  May.  1864,  and
took  part  in  all  the  movements  before'  Petersburg.
He  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a  division  in
August,  1864,  and  brevetted  major-general  for  his
services  in  re-capturing  Fort  Steadman  on  25
March.  1865.  He  was  elected  auditor-general  of
Pennsylvania  in  October,  1865,  and  on  29  Aug.,
1866,  the  president  offered  him  a  colonelcy  in  the
regular  army,  which  he  declined.  Gen.  Hartranft
was  re-elected  auditor-general  in  1868,  and  in
1872-'8  was  governor  of  Pennsylvania.  The  mili-
tia of  Pennsylvania  was  entirely  reorganized  on  a
military  basis  during  his  two  "terms  as  governor.
The  plan  of  municipal  reform  that  was  suggested
by  him  in  1876  was  adopted  in  1885,  the  mayor  of
Philadelphia  being  elected  under  its  provisions  in
1887.  Immediately  after  the  close  of  his  second
term  as  governor  he  removed  to  Philadelphia.  He
was  appointed  postmaster  of  that  city  in  June,
1879,  and  collector  of  the  port  in  August,  1880.
He  was,  in  1879,  appointed  to  the  command  of  the
National  guard  of  Pennsylvania,  which  post  he
still  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

HARTSHORNE,  Joseph,  physician,  b.  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  12  Dec,  1779;  d.  near  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  20  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  descended  from
Richard  Hartshorne,  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  who  emigrated  from  England  in  1669 "and
settled  in  New  Jersey,  and  his  father,  William,
was  treasurer  of  the  first  internal  improvement  so-
ciety in  the  country,  of  which  George  Washington
was  president.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1805,  and  after
two  voyages  in  1806  to  India  as  surgeon  and  su-
percargo, and  a  three  months'  residence  in  Bata-
via,  Java,  he  began  practice  in  Philadelphia.  He
was  surgeon  of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  in
1815— '21,  and  prepared  and  published  Boyer  on
"  The  Bones,"  with  an  appendix  and  notes  (1806).
— His  son,  Edward,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
14  May,  1818;  d.  22  June,  1885,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1837,  and  in  medicine  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1840.  He  began  practice
in  Philadelphia  in  1848,  and  was  elected  one  of
the  surgeons  in  Will's  eye  hospital,  and  later  in
the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  as  consulting  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army
medical  service ;  also  as  member  and  secretary  of
the  executive  committee  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  com-
mission in  Philadelphia.  He  was  for  a  short  pe-
riod editor  of  the  "  Journal  of  Prison  Discipline
and  Philanthropy,"  and  was  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  medical  periodicals.  He  is  the  author  of
"Separate  System"  for  criminals,  translated  into
several  languages  in  Europe ;  notes  to  Taylor's
'•  Medical  Jurisprudence  "  (1854) ;  and  "  Ophthal-
mic Medicine  and  Surgery  "  (1856). — Another  son,
Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  16  March,
1823,  was  graduated  at  Haverford  college  in  1839,
and  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1845.  He  was  elected  professor  of  the  institutes
of  medicine  in  the  Philadelphia  college  of  medi-
cine in  1853,  and  in  June,  1855,  he  was  selected  as
one  of  the  consulting  physicians  and  lecturers  on
clinical  medicine  in  Philadelphia  hospital.  He
was  elected  professor  of  the  practice  of  medicine
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1859,  became
professor  of  hygiene  in  the  same  institution  in
1866,  and  in  1867  was  given  the  chair  of  organic
science  and  philosophy  in  Haverford  college.  He
has  also  held  professorships  in  the  Pennsylvania
college  of  dental  surgery,  Girard  college,  and  the
Woman's  medical  college  of  Pennsylvania. He


106


HARTSTENE


HARTWELL


rendered  important  aid  to  the  cause  of  the  medical
education  of  women  in  1867-75.  He  was  the  first
to  ascertain  by  experiments  on  himself  and  others,
in  1848,  the  safety  and  effects  of  the  internal  use
of  chloroform,  and  also  proposed  and  proved  to
his  own  satisfaction  in  1876,  though  not  to  the
satisfaction  of  men  of  science  generally,  a  new  the-
ory of  complementary  color  spectra.  He  has  been
one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Friends'  Review  "  since
1872,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Water  vs.  Hydrop-
athy" (Philadelphia,  1846);  a  prize  essay  on
"  The  Arterial  Circulation  "  (1856) ;  "  Essentials  of
Practical  Medicine  "  (1869) ;  the  divisions  of  anato-
my, physiology,  and  practice  of  medicine  in  "  A
Conspectus  of  the  Medical  Sciences  "  (1869) ;  edited,
with  additions,  Sir  Thomas  Watson's  "  Lectures
on  the  Practice  of  Medicine,"  and  has  contributed
numerous  papers  to  medical  and  scientific  jour-
nals. He  also  wrote  "  Woman's  Witchcraft,  or
the  Curse  of  Coquetry,"  a  dramatic  romance,  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Corinne  L'Estrange "  (1854),
and  "  Summer  Songs,"  under  that  of  "  H.  H.  M."
(1865). — Another  son,  Charles,  railroad  president,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Sept.,  1829,  was  educated
at  Haverford  college,  and  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1847.
He  early  embarked  in  railroad  enterprises,  and
has  continued  active  in  them  to  the  present  time.
In  1857  he  became  president  of  the  Quakake  rail-
road company,  in  1862  of  the  Lehigh  and  Maho-
ning, in  1868  vice-president  of  the  Lehigh  valley,
and  in  1880  its  president,  but  in  1883  resumed
the  vice-presidency.  Besides  his  railroad  enter-
prises, he  is  connected  with  many  other  commer-
cial organizations,  and  with  numerous  educational
and  charitable  interests,  among  which  .are  Haver-
ford and  Bryn  Mawr  colleges,  and  the  Pennsylva-
nia hospital,  of  each  of  which  he  is  a  member  of
the  board  of  managers.

HARTSTENE,  Henry  J.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
North  Carolina;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  31  March,
1868.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  midshipman
in  1828,  and  became  a  lieutenant,  23  Feb.,  1840.
In  1838  he  was  attached  to  the  Wilkes  exploring
expedition,  but  did  not  proceed  farther  with  it
than  Calloa,  and  in  1851  he  was  attached  to  the
coast  survey,  and  afterward  commanded  the  steam-
er "  Illinois."  In  1855  he  was  made  a  commander,
and  was  sent  to  the  arctic  regions  in  search  of  Dr.
Kane  and  his  party,  whom  he  rescued  and  brought
to  New  York,  in  1856  he  was  ordered  to  convey
to  England  the  British  exploring  bark  "  Resolute,"
which,  after  having  been  abandoned  in  the  arctic
ice,  had  been  rescued  by  Capt.  Buddington,  a  New
London  whaler,  and  purchased  by  congress  as  a
present  to  the  British  government.  He  was  after-
ward employed  in  taking  soundings  for  the  Atlan-
tic telegraph-cable.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  resigned,  entered  the  Confederate  navy,
and  in  the  summer  of  1862  became  insane.

HARTSUFF,  George  Lucas,  soldier,  b.  in
Tyre,  Seneca  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  May,  1830 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  16  May,  1874.  When  he  was  a  child
his  parents  removed  to  Michigan  and  he  entered
the  U.  S.  military  academy  from  that  state,  being
graduated  in  1852,  and  assigned  to  the  4th  artil-
lery. He  served  in  Texas  and  in  Florida,  where  he
was  wounded,  and  was  then  appointed  instructor
in  artillery  and  infantry  tactics  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1856.  He  became  assistant  adju-
tant-general, with  the  rank  of  captain,  on  22
March,  1861,  and  major,  17  July,  1862.  He  served
at  Fort  Pickens,  Florida,  from  April  till  16  July,
1861 ;  then  in  West  Virginia  under  Gen.  Rose-
crans,  and  became  a  brigadier-general  of  volun-


teers, 15  April,  1862,  soon  afterward  taking  charge
of  Abercrombie's  brigade,  which  he  commanded  at
Cedar  Mountain  and  Antietam,  where  he  was  se-
verely wounded.  He  was  appointed  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers.  29  Nov.,  1862,  served  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  to  revise  rules  and  articles  of  war
and  to  prepare  a  code  for  the  government  of  the
armies  in  the  field,  and  on  27  April,  1863,  was  or-
dered to  Kentucky,  where  he  was  assigned  to  com-
mand the  23d  corps.  He  was  appointed  lieuten-
ant-colonel and  assistant  adjutant-general,  U.  S.
army,  1  June,  1864,  was  in  command  of  works  in
the  siege  of  Petersburg  in  March  and  April,  1865,
and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  and  major-
general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865.  After  the
war  he  was  adjutant-general  of  the  5th  military
division,  comprising  Louisiana  and  Texas,  in
1867-'8,  and  of  the  division  of  the  Missouri  from
1869  till  29  June,  1871,  when  he  was  retired  for
disability  from  wounds  received  in  battle.

HARTT,  Charles  Frederick,  naturalist,  b.  in
Fredericton,  N.  B.,  23  Aug.,  1840 ;  d.  in  Rio  Ja-
neiro, Brazil,  18  March,  1878.  He  was  graduated
at  Acadia  college,  Wolf  ville,  N.  S.,  in  1860,  but  be-
fore completing  his  course  had  made  extensive
geological  explorations  in  Nova  Scotia.  In  1860
he  accompanied  his  father,  Jarvis  William  Hartt,
to  St.  John,  N.  B.,  where  they  established  a  college
high -school.  He  at  once  began  to  study  the  geol-
ogy of  New  Brunswick,  and  devoted  special  atten-
tion to  the  Devonian  shales,  in  which  he  discovered
an  abundance  of  land  plants  and  insects.  The  lat-
ter still  remain  the  oldest  known  to  science.  His
work  met  the  notice  of  Louis  Agassiz,  by  whose
invitation  he  entered  the  Museum  of  comparative
anatomy  in  Cambridge  as  a  student.  He  received
an  appointment  on  the  geological  survey  of  New
Brunswick  in  1864,  and  discovered  the  first  proof
of  primordial  strata  in  that  province.  He  was
one  of  the  geologists  of  the  Thayer  expedition  to
Brazil  in  1865,  and  since  then  has  been  the  chief
modern  investigator  of  South  American  natural
history.  He  explored  the  neighborhood  of  the
coast  from  Rio  Janeiro  to  Bahia  while  on  this
expedition,  making  large  zoological  collections,
and  with  the  material  collected  prepared  his  "  Ge-
ology and  Physical  Geography  of  Brazil  "  (Boston,
1870).  In  1868  he  was  elected  professor  of  natu-
ral history  in  Vassar,  but  later  in  the  same  year
he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  geology  and  physical
geography  in  Cornell.  Two  years  afterward,  and
again  in  1871,  he  made  trips  of  exploration  to  the
valley  of  the  Amazon.  At  the  request  of  the
Brazilian  minister  of  agriculture  he  visited  Rio
Janeiro  in  August,  1874,  and  submitted  plans  for
the  organization  of  a  Brazilian  geological  commis-
sion. He  was  appointed  in  May,  1875,  chief  of  the
geological  surveys  of  the  empire,  and  continued  in
that  office  till  his  death.  His  collections  are  dis-
played in  the  National  museum,  of  which  in  1876
he  was  made  director,  and  form  the  most  com-
plete repository  of  South  American  geology  in  the
world.  Prof.  Hartt  was  a  member  of  various  sci-
entific societies,  and  in  1869  was  elected  general
secretary  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science.  He  contributed  occasional
articles  to  scientific  journals,  and,  besides  the  book
mentioned  above,  published  "  Contributions  to  the
Geology  and  Physical  Geography  of  the  Lower
Amazons  "  (Buffalo,  1874).

HARTWELL,  Alonzo,  artist,  b.  in  Littleton,
Mass.,  19  Feb.,  1805;  d.  in  Waltham.  Mass.,  17
Jan.,  1873.  In  1822  he  went  to  Boston,  and  soon
afterward  was  apprenticed  to  a  wood-engraver,
till  1826,  when he engaged in  the  business  for


HARTWICK


HARVEY


107


himself,  and  continued  it  till  1851.  In  1850  he  re-
ceived the  silver  medal  of  the  Charlestown,  Mass.,
mechanics'  association,  awarded  for  the  best  speci-
men of  the  art.  After  1851  he  achieved  a  reputa-
tion as  a  portrait-painter.

HARTWICK,  or  HARTWIG,  John  Christo-
pher, clergyman,  b.  in  Saxa-Gotha,  Germany,
6  June,  1714;  d.  in  Livingston  Manor,  N.  Y.,
17  July,  1796.  He  is  said  to  have  studied  at  the
University  of  Halle,  and  engaged  in  missionary
work  among  the  Jews,  at  the  age  of  twenty-five
years.  In  1745  he  was  called  to  this  country  in
order  to  take  charge  of  several  Lutheran  congre-
gations in  Dutchess  and  Columbia  counties.  N.  Y.,
and  was  ordained,  24  Nov..  in  the  German  Lu-
theran church  in  London.  In  the  spring  of  1746
he  arrived  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and,  after  visiting
several  of  the  Lutheran  pastors  in  Pennsylvania,
went  to  New  York  state  and  entered  on  his  duties
as  pastor  of  congregations  at  Germantown,  Liv-
ingston, Wirtemberg,  and  Rhinebeck.  Irt  1748  he
was  present  in  Philadelphia  at  the  organization  of
the  first  Lutheran  synod.  He  was  somewhat  ec-
centric, and  consequently  unfortunate  in  his  min-
istry ;  and  being  exceedingly  restless,  he  moved
from  place  to  place.  In  175i-'2  he  was  in  Penn-
sylvania, in  1755  in  New  York,  in  1757  at  Read-
ing, Pa.,  in  1761-'2  at  Trappe,  in  1764  in  Phila-
delphia, then  successively  in  Maryland,  Virginia,
Massachusetts,  Maine,  and  in  1783  in  New  York,
where  he  urged  the  Dutch  Lutherans  to  remain
in  the  city,  and  not  follow  their  pastor,  Hansihl,
who,  being  a  royalist  during  the  Revolution,  fled
with  many  of  his  parishioners  to  Nova  Scotia,
after  the  evacuation  of  New  York  by  the  British
forces.  Mr.  Hartwick  left  a  large  estate,  which
he  had  purchased  from  the  Mohawk  Indians —
"  a  certain  tract  of  land  on  the.  south  side  of  Mo-
hawk river,  between  Schoharie  and  Cherry  valley,
along  a  certain  small  -creek,  containing  nine  miles
in  length  and  four  miles  in  breadth,"  located  in
Otsego  county,  and  included  in  the  present  town
of  Hartwick.  His  sole  purpose  in  this  purchase
was  to  use  his  property  for  the  glory  of  God  and
the  spreading  of  his  kingdom  ;  and  he  made  his
bequest  accordingly.  In  his  will  he  directed  that
his  estate  should  be  used  for  the  establishment  of
a  college  and  theological  seminary.  For  a  time
after  his  death  the  income  of  the  estate  was  used
to  instruct  young  men  privately  in  the  classics  and
theology ;  and  in  1815  the  contemplated  institu-
tion was  opened,  under  the  name  of  Hartwick
seminarv.  The  present  buildings  are  valued  at
$30,000,"  and  the  endowments  at  $35,000.

HARVARD,  John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  South-
wark,.  London,  England,  in  November,  1607;  d.
in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  24  Sept.,  1638.  His  fa-
ther, Robert  Harvard,  was  a  butcher.  His  moth-
er, possessing  some  property,  sent  John  to  Em-
manuel college,  Cambridge,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1635.  Subsequently  he  was  ordained  as
a  dissenting  minister,  and  in  1637  married  Ann
Sadler,  the  daughter  of  a  Sussex  clergyman,  and
sailed  for  New  England,  where  he  was  made  a  free-
man of  Massachusetts  on  2  Nov.  of  that  year.  It
appears  on  the  town-records  that  in  1638  a  tract
of  land  was  deeded  to  him  in  Charlestown.  where
he  exercised  his  ministerial  functions.  In  April,
1638,  he  was  appointed  one  of  a  committee  "to
consider  of  some  things  tending  toward  a  body  of
laws."  At  his  death  his  property  was  worth  about
£1,500,  one  half  of  which  he  left  for  the  erec-
tion of  the  college  that  bears  his  name.  A  part
of  this  bequest  is  said  to  have  been  diverted  from
its  original  purpose. He  also  left  to  the  college  a


library  of  320  volumes,  which  indicated  the  taste  of
a  scholar.  The  alumni  erected  a  granite  monument
to  his  memory  in  the  burial-ground  of  Charles-
town, which  was  dedicated  with  an  address  by  Ed-
ward Everett.  26  Sept.,  1828. A  memorial  statue


of  Harvard,  the  gift  of  Samuel  James  Bridge  to
the  university,  was  unveiled,  15  Oct..  1884,  with  an
address  by  Rev.  George  Edward  Ellis  (Cambridge,
1884).  The  illustration  represents  the  first  Harvard
hall,  which  was  burned,  and  was  replaced  by  the
present  structure  in  1766.

HARVEY,  Arthur,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Halesworth,  Suffolk,  England,  in  1834.  He  was
educated  in  Holland  and  at  Trinity  college,  Dub-
lin, and  in  1856  emigrated  to  Canada,  where  subse-
quently he  became  editorially  connected  with  the
Hamilton  "  Spectator."  He  was  secretary  of  the
commission  that  was  appointed  to  negotiate  a  new
treaty  with  the  United  States,  and  some  time  after-
ward published  "  The  Year-Book  of  Canada."
Mr.  Harvey  suggested  and  rendered  effective  the
insurance  legislation  of  the  Dominion,  and  in  1870
assumed  the  management  of  the  Provincial  insur-
ance company  at  Toronto.

HARVEY^  James  Madison,  governor  of  Kan-
sas, b.  in  Monroe  county,  Va.,  21  Sept.,  1833.  He
was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Indiana,
Iowa,  and  Illinois,  and  practised  surveying  and
civil  engineering  until  he  removed  to  Kansas  in
1859,  when  he  became  a  farmer.  He  was  captain
in  the  4th  and  10th  regiments  of  Kansas  infantry
from  1861  till  1864,  a  member  of  the  lower  house  of
the  legislature  in  1865-6,  and  of  the  state  senate
in  1867-"8.  In  1869-71  he  was  governor  of  Kan-
sas, and  in  1874-'7  was  a  U.  S.  senator,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Republican  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  resignation  of  Alexander  Caldwell.

"  HARVEY,  Sir  John,  governor  of  Virginia.  He
was  appointed  to  this  office  after  Yeardley's  death
in  1627,  arrived  in  Virginia  in  1629,  and  met  his
first  assembly  of  burgesses  in  1630.  He  supported
those  who  desired  separate  jurisdictions  and  grants
of  land,  preferring  the  interest  of  individual  pa-
trons, especially  Lord  Baltimore,  to  the  claims  of
the  colony.  He  held  a  warrant  to  receive  for  him-
self all  fines  arising  from  any  sentence  in  the
judicial  courts,  and  many  such  were  accordingly
imposed  on  the  colonists.  In  1635  he  was  sus-
pended and  impeached  by  the  assembly.  He  at-
tempted to  make  terms  with  the  council,  which
would  yield  to  none  of  his  conditions,  and  elected
John  \Vest  in  his  place.  He  then  went  to  England,
his  cause  was  investigated  by  the  privy  council,
and  he  was  restored  by  the  king  in  1636,  and  re-
turned to  Virginia  in' 1637.  He  assembled  the
council  in  Elizabeth  City,  and  published  the  king's
proclamation,  pardoning  many  who  had  opposed
him.  He  continued  in  office  until  1639,  and  is  said
to  have  been  one  of  the  most  rapacious,  tyranni-
cal, and  unpopular  of  the  colonial  governors.


108


HARVEY


HARVIE


HARVEY,  Sir  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  1778;
d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  22  March,  1852.  He  entered
the  British  army  as  ensign  in  the  80th  regiment
under  Lord  Paget,  afterward  the  Marquis  of  An-
glesea,  whose  natural  son  he  was  believed  to  be.
After  serving  in  Holland,  France,  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  Ceylon,  and  Egypt,  he  returned  to  England
in  1807,  and  in  1808  became  assistant  quarter-
master-general under  Lord  Chatham,  at  Colchester.
From  1809  till  1812  he  commanded  a  regiment,  and
was  on  the  staff  of  the  adjutant-general's  depart-
ment in  Ireland.  In  1812  he  was  appointed  deputy
adjutant-general  to  the  army  in  Canada,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  led  the  attack  at
Stony  Creek,  where  he  captured  the  American  gen-
erals Chandler  and  Winder.  He  received  a  medal
for  gallantry  at  Chrysler's  Farm,  and  took  part  in
the  battles  of  Lundy's  Lane  and  Fort  Erie,  where
he  was  severely  wounded.  He  was  aide-de-camp
to  Wellington  during  his  Waterloo  campaign,  and
in  1837-'41  was  governor  of  New  Brunswick.  He
then  became  governor  and  commander-in-chief  of
Newfoundland,  and  in  1846  was  made  governor  of
Nova  Scotia,  holding  this  post  until  his  death.  He
was  nominated  knight  commander  of  the  Hano-
verian Guelphic  order  in  1824,  and  a  knight  com-
mander of  the  order  of  the  Bath  in  1838.

HARVEY,  Jonathan,  congressman,  b.  in  Mer-
rimack county,  N.  H.,  in  1780;  d.  in  Sutton,  N.  H.,
23  Aug.,  1859.  He  served  seven  years  in  the  legis-
lature, was  president  of  the  senate  from  1817  till
1823,  and  state  councillor  in  1823-5.  In  the  latter
year  he  took  his  seat  as  a  representative  to  con-
gress from  New  Hampshire,  serving  until  1831. —
His  brother,  Matthew,  jurist,  b.  in  Sutton,  N.  H.,
21  June,  1781 :  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  7  April,  1866,
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1806.  He  studied
law  under  John  Harris,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1809,  and  began  to  practise  in  Hopkinton,  which
town  he  represented  in  the  legislature  from  1814
till  1820,  holding  the  office  of  speaker  during  the
last  three  years  of  his  term.  He  was  then  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  in  1821-'5.
He  was  president  of  the  state  senate  in  1825-'8,
and  councillor  in  1828-'30. He  was  then  elected

fovernor  of  New  Hampshire,  and  served  one  year,
n  1831  he  was  appointed  by  President  Jackson
{'udge  of  the  IT.  S.  district  court,  which  office  he
leld  until  his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1855,  and  was  president
of  the  New  Hampshire  historical  society.

HARVEY,  Louis  Powell,  governor  of  Wis-
consin, b.  in  East  Haddam,  Conn.,  22  Julv,  1820 ;
d.  in  Savannah,  Tenn.,  19  April,  1862.  In  "1828  he
removed  with  his  pai'ents  to  Ohio,  where  he  was
educated  in  the  Western  Reserve  college.  He  went
to  Kenosha,  Wis.,  in  1840,  taught  there,  and  edited
a  Whig  newspaper,  but  removed  to  Shopiere,  Rock
co.,  in  1850,  and  engaged  in  manufacturing.  He
was  a  member  of  the  first  State  constitutional
convention,  and  served  in  the  state  senate  from
1855  till  1857.  Soon  afterward  he  was  elected
secretary  of  state,  and  in  1861  became  governor.
He  was  drowned  while  on  his  way  to  Pittsburg
Landing,  with  supplies  for  the  relief  of  wounded
soldiers,  after  the  battle  of  Shiloh.

HARVEY,  Moses,  author,  b.  near  Armagh,
Ireland,  25  March,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at
Belfast  college  in  1840,  studied  theology  in  the
Presbyterian  college  in  that  city,  and  was  a  Pres-
byterian minister  at  Maryport,  Cumberland,  Eng-
land, in  1843.  He  became  minister  of  the  Free
Presbyterian  church  at  St.  John,  Newfoundland,
in  1852,  and  preached  there  till  1878,  when  he  re-
tired from  active  duties. Henceforth  he  engaged


in  literary  and  scientific  studies,  and  became  popu-
lar as  a  lecturer.  He  studied  the  natural  history,
geology,  and  resources  of  the  island,  and  published
the  result  of  his  labors  in  British  and  American
newspapers.  In  1886  the  council  of  the  Royal  geo-
graphical society  of  England  elected  him  a  fellow
in  recognition  of  his  services  to  geographical  science
in  his  works  on  Newfoundland  and  Labrador.  He
is  the  author  of  "  Thoughts  on  the  Poetrv  and  Lit-
erature of  the  Bible"  (St.  John,  N.  F.,  1853);
"  The  Testimony  of  Nineveh  to  the  Veracity  of  the
Bible  "  (1854) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Harmony  of  Sci-
ence and  Revelation  "  (Halifax,  1856) ;  "  Lectures
on  Egypt  and  its  Monuments,  as  Illustrative  of
Scripture"  (St.  John,  N.  F.,  1857);  "Lectures,
Literary  and  Biographical"  (Edinburgh,  1864);
"Across  Newfoundland  with  the  Governor"  (St.
John,  N.  F.,  1878);  "Newfoundland,  the  Oldest
British  Colony"  (London  and  Boston,  1883);
"Text-Book  of  Newfoundland  History"  (Boston,
1885);  and  "Where  are  We  and  Whither  Tend-
ing?" (London  and  Boston,  1886).  He  is  also  the
author  of  the  articles  on  "  Labrador,"  "  Newfound-
land," and  "  The  Seal  Fisheries  of  the  World  "  in
the  9th  edition  of  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica."

HARVEY,  Peter,  merchant,  b.  in  Barnet,  Vt.,
10  July,  1810 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  June,  1877.
His  father,  Alexander  Harvey,  a  native  of  Glasgow,
Scotland,  and  a  graduate  of  Oxford,  came  to  this
country  to  purchase  land  and  make  a  settlement
for  a  Scottish  emigration  company.  At  the  age  of
fifteen  the  son  was  apprenticed  to  David  Russell
and  Co.,  of  Plymouth,  N.  H.,  and  subsequently  he
went  to  Boston,  where  he  engaged  in  business  un-
der the  firm  of  Emerson,  Lamb,  and  Harvey.
Later  he  became  a  member  of  Harvey,  Page  and
Co.,  succeeding  James  Tufts  and  Co.  He  was
treasurer  of  the  Rutland  railroad,  and  president  of
the  Kilby  bank.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Nourse,  Ma-
son and  Co.,  on  the  dissolution  of  which  he  re-
tired from  active  business.  He  was  originally  a
Whig,  on  the  dissolution  of  this  party  joined  the
Democratic,  but  afterward  represented  a  Repub-
lican district  in  Gov.  Bullock's  council.  He  served
in  both  branches  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature,
and  in  1868  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  con-
gress. He  is  principally  known  for  having  become
intimately  acquainted  with  Daniel  Webster,  and
was  perhaps  his  most  trusted  friend.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  Marshfield  club,  designed  to  honor
Webster's  memory,  and  author  of  "  Reminiscences
and  Anecdotes  of  Daniel  Webster  "  (Boston,  1878).

HARVIE,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Gargunnock,
Scotland ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  6  Feb.,  1807.  He
emigrated  to  Virginia  in  early  manhood,  and  set-
tled in  Albemarle  county.  lie  was  a  lawyer  of
ability,  and  speedily  attained  a  large  practice,  thus
laying  the  basis  of  subsequent  wealth.  In  1774  he
was  appointed  by  the  general  assembly  of  Virginia,
with  Dr.  Thomas  Walker,  the  Kentucky  explorer,
a  commissioner  to  treat  with  the  western  Indians,
after  their  defeat  at  Point  Pleasant  on  10  Oct.  of
that  year  by  Andrew  Lavis.  He  represented  West
Augusta  county  in  the  Virginia  conventions  of
1775  and  1776,  was  elected  a  member  of  congress,
22  May,  1777,  for  one  year,  and  re-elected,  29  May,
1777,  to  serve  for  one  year  from  11  Aug.  He  was
later  a  faithful  and  efficient  purchasing  agent  for
the  state,  with  the  provisional  rank  of  colonel,  and
"was  sent  by  the  Virginia  assembly  on  an  impor-
tant mission  to  the  American  army."  He  was  reg-
ister of  the  land-office  of  Virginia,  which  he  organ-
ized in  1780-'91,  and  was  commissioned  secretary
of  the  commonwealth,  19  May,  1788,  but  how  long


HARWOOD


HASCALL


109


he  served  in  this  capacity  does  not  appear.  He
was  an  enterprising  citizen  of  Richmond,  and
erected  several  buildings,  that  have  been  long  fa-
miliar to  its  citizens,  among  them  the  noted  Gam-
ble house,  which  was  subsequently  owned  by  the
Revolutionary  veteran,  Maj.  Robert  Gamble,  from
which  Gamble's  Hill  takes  its  name.  Col.  Harvie,
in  superintending  the  building  of  this  mansion,
met  with  his  death  by  a  fall  from  a  ladder.

HARWOOD,  John  Edmund,  actor,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1771 ;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  21  Sept.,
1809.  He  received  a  liberal  education,  and  studied
law  in  England.  In  1793  he  came  to  this  country,
having  joined  a  company  of  comedians  that  had
been  engaged  for  the  theatre  in  Philadelphia.
Later,  Harwood  married  Miss  Bache,  a  grand-
daughter of  Benjamin  Franklin.  He  then  retired
from  the  stage,  to  begin  business  as  bookseller
and  conductor  of  a  circulating  library,  but  after
several  years  he  was  unsuccessful,  and  lost  his  capi-
tal. In  1803  he  went  to  New  York  city,  under  an
engagement  with  the  manager  of  the  Park  theatre.
Dunlap  says  he  was  a  man  of  wit  and  refinement,
and  highly  endowed  as  an  actor,  but  indolent  and
careless  of  study.  At  the  close  of  his  career  he
became  too  corpulent  to  continue  some  of  his  best
early  representations.  Harwood  published  a  vol-
ume of  "  Poems  "  (New  York,  1809).  They  display
taste  and  scholarship,  but  have  no  especial  merit.
— His  son,  Andrew  Allen,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Settle,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  in  1802  ;  d.  in  Marion,  Mass.,
28  Aug.,  1884,  was  appointed  midshipman,  1  Jan..
1818,  and  from  1819  till  1821  served  in  the  sloop-
of-war  "  Hornet  "  in  the  suppression  of  the  Afri-
can slave-trade.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant
in  1827,  and  in  the  following  year  was  appointed
to  the  receiving-ship  "  Philadelphia."  He  was  de-
tached as  special  messenger  to  bring  home  the
ratified  treaty  with  Naples,  and  from  1835  till
1837  served  in  the  Mediterranean  squadron.  He
was  assistant  inspector  of  ordnance  in  1843-'52.
member  of  a  commission  to  visit  dock-yards  and
foundries  in  England  and  France  in  1844.  and  in
1848  was  promoted  to  commander.  In  1851  he
became  member  of  a  board  appointed  to  prepare
ordnance  instructions  for  the  navy,  and  to  make
investigations  and  experiments.  He  commanded
the  frigate  "  Cumberland,"  of  the  Mediterranean
squadron,  from  1853  till  1855,  when  he  was  ap-

e)inted  captain.  He  was  inspector  of  ordnance
om  1858  till  1861,  and  in  the  latter  year  was
commissioned  chief  of  the  bureau  of  ordnance  and
hydrography.  In  the  following  year  he  became
commodore,  and  was  appointed  commandant  of
the  navy-yard  at  Washington,  and  of  the  Potomac
flotilla.  He  was  retired  in  1864,  but  served  as  sec-
retary of  the  light-house  board,  and  a  member  of
the  examining  board  from  1864  till  1869,  when  he
was  made  rear-admiral  on  the  retired  list.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  prepared  a  work  on  "  Summary
Courts-Martial,"  and  published  the  "  Law  and
Practice  of  U.  S.  Navy  Courts-Martial "  (1867).

HASBROUCK,  Abraham  Brnyn,  lawyer,  b.
in  Kingston,  N.  Y.,  in  November,  1791 ;  d.  there,
23  Feb.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1810,
studied  law  at  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  and  Litchfield.
Conn.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1813.  He
practised  his  profession  in  Kingston,  and  in
1825-'7  served  one  term  in  congress.  Columbia
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1828,  and  in
1840-'50  he  was  president  of  Rutgers  college,  con-
tributing much  to  its  prosperity  by  his  lectures  on
constitutional  law.  He  also  planted  and  cared  for
many  of  the  fine  trees  that  now  adorn  the  college
grounds. Mr.  Hasbrouck  was  vice-president  of


the  American  Bible  society  in  1851,  and  president
of  the  Ulster  county  historical  society  in  1856.
He  was  dignified  and  scholarly,  of  genial  manners
and  generous  hospitality.

HASCALL,  Daniel,  clergvman,  b.  in  Benning-
ton, Vt.,  24  Feb.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Hamilton.  N.  Y„  28
June,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in
1806,  and  afterward  studied  theology  while  en-
gaged in  teaching  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.  He  became
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Elizabethtown,
N.  Y.,  in  1808,  and  in  1813  was  called  to  Hamilton,
N.  Y.  He  received  pupils  in  theology  in  1815,
and  after  he  had  established  the  Baptist  education
society  of  New  York  in  1817,  his  school  was
merged  in  1820  in  the  Hamilton  literary  and  theo-
logical institution  (now  Madison  university),  which
was  opened  under  his  charge.  In  1828  he  dis-
solved his  pastorate  in  order  to  devote  his  time  to
this  institution,  which  he  left  in  1835  to  give  his
attention  to  the  interests  of  an  academy  in  Flor-
ence, Oneida  eo.,  N.  Y.  He  removed  to  West  Rut-
land, Vt.,  in  1837,  and  in  1848  became  pastor  of  a
church  in  Lebanon,  N.  Y„  but  in  1849  returned  to
Hamilton.  He  published  "  Elements  of  Theolo-
gy," designed  for  family  reading  and  Bible-classes ;
a  smaller  work  for  Sunday-schools:  "Cautions
against  False  Philosophy"  (1817) ;  and  a  pamphlet
entitled  "  Definition  of  the  Greek  Baptizo  "  (1818).

HASCALL,  Milo  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in  Le  Roy,
Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  Aug.,  1829.  He  spent  the
early  years  of  his  life  on  his  father's  farm,  and  in
1846  went  to  Goshen,  Ind.  He  was  appointed  from
Indiana  to  the  U.S.  military  academy,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1852,  and  assigned  to  the  artil-
lery. He  served  in  garrison  at  Fort  Adams,  R.  I.,
from  1852  till  1853,  when  he  resigned.  He  was  a
contractor  for  the  Indiana  and  Michigan  southern
railroad  in  1854,  and  practised  law  in  Goshen,
Ind.,  from  1855  till  1861.  serving  as  prosecuting
attorney  of  Elkhart  and  Lagrange  counties  from
1856  tiil  1858.  and  school-examiner  and  clerk  of
courts  from  1859  till  1861,  when  he  enlisted  as  a
private  in  an  Indiana  regiment.  He  was  subse-
quently appointed  captain  and  aide-de-camp  on
Gen.  Thomas  A.  Morris's  staff,  and  organized  and
drilled  six  regiments  in  Camp  Morton.  He  became
colonel  of  the  17th  Indiana  regiment  on  21  June,
which  was  engaged  in  the  West  Virginia  campaign,
and  at  Philippi  made  the  first  capture  of  a  Con-
federate flag.  In  December,  1861,  he  was  ordered
to  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  placed  in  command  of  a
brigade  consisting  of  the  17th  Indiana,  6th  Ohio,
43d  Ohio,  and  15th  Indiana  regiments,  assigned  to
the  division  commanded  by  Gen.  William  Nelson.
He  was  transferred  to  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Thomas  J.
Wood's  division,  serving  during  the  capture  of
Nashville  and  in  the  advance  on  Shiloh.  He  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  25  April,
1862.  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  Tennessee
campaign  from  October,  1862,  till  March,  1863.
At  the  battle  of  Stone  River  he  commanded  a  divis-
ion, and  was  wounded.  He  was  then  sent  to  In-
dianapolis to  return  deserters  from  Ohio,  Illinois,
and  Indiana,  was  transferred  to  the  Army  of  the
Ohio  and  placed  in  command  of  the  district  of  In-
diana. He  also  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Chicka-
mauga  and  Mission  Ridge,  and  was  active  in  the
defence  of  Knoxville.  Pie  was  in  command  of  the
2d  division  of  the  23d  corps.  Army  of  the  Ohio,  in
the  invasion  of  Georgia  in  1864,  being  engaged  in
numerous  actions  on  the  advance  to  Atlanta  and
taking  an  active  part  in  the  siege  of  that  city.
He  resigned  his  commission  on  27  Oct.,  1864,  and
became  a  proprietor  of  Salem's  bank,  in  Goshen,
Ind.,  in  which  he  is  now  (1887)  engaged.


110


HASELTINE


HASKIN


HASELTINE,  James  Henry,  sculptor,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  2  Nov.,  1833.  He  studied  in  Paris
and  Rome,  but  came  to  this  country  in  1861  to
enlist  in  the  U.  S.  army.  After  the  close  of  the
civil  war,  in  which  he  served  as  major  of  the  6th
Pennsylvania  cavalry,  he  went  to  Europe  to  study
art.  He  has  lived  in  Rome  and  Paris,  and  now
(1887)  resides  in  Nice.  His  works  include  "  Happy
Youth  "  (1858) ;  "  America  Honoring  her  Fallen
Brave  "  (owned  by  the  Union  league  of  Philadel-
phia, 1865) ;  "  Love,"  and  "  Ingratitude  "  (1866) ;
"New  Wine"  (1867);  "Superstition,"  and  "Relig-
ion "  (1868) ;  "  America  Victorious  "  (1869) ;  "  Nis-
sia,  wife  of  King  Candaules  of  Lydia"  (1876);
"The  Ball-Player"  (1871);  "Ida"  (1875);  "Kiss-
ing Cherubs  "  (1878) ;  "  Captivity  "  (1879) ;  "  Cleo-
patra "  (1882) ;  "  The  Morning  Star  "  (1883) ;  "  For-
tune" (1884);  "Hero"  (1885);  and  portraits  of
Henry  W.  Longfellow,  T.  Buchanan  Read,  and
Gens.  Sheridan,  Hartsuff,  Merritt,  Forsyth,  and
Duryee. — His  brother,  William  Stanley,  artist,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  11  Jan.,  1835,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1854,  after  which  he  studied  art
in  his  native  city  under  Weber.  He  then  went
to  Europe  and  studied  in  Diisseldorf  and  in  Rome,
where  he  now  (1887)  resides.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  the  National  academy  in  1861.  His
early  works  include  "  Indian  Rock,  Nahant,"
"Castle  Rock,  Nahant,"  and  a  "Calm  Sea,  Men-
tone."  Other  pictures  by  his  hand  are  "  Bay  of
Naples,"  "  Ischia,"  "  Spezzia,"  "  Ostia,"  "  Pon-
tine Marshes,"  and  "Venice."  He  sent  to  the  Cen-
tennial exhibition  of  1876  "  Ruins  of  a  Roman
Theatre,  Sicily,"  and  "  Natural  Arch  at  Capri."

HASKELL,  Abraham,  physician,  b.  in  Lan-
caster, Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1746 ;  d.  in  Ashby,  Middle-
sex co.,  Mass.,  13  Dec,  1834.  He  followed  the
trade  of  a  shoemaker  till  he  was  of  age,  but  was
fitted  for  Harvard,  studied  medicine  under  Israel
Atherton,  of  Lancaster,  and  began  his  practice  in
Lunenburg.  He  removed  thence  to  Leominster  in
1810,  and  in  1833  joined  his  son,  who  was  a  physi-
cian in  Ashby.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts medical  society  soon  after  its  establish-
ment, was  a  successful  practitioner,  and  labored
faithfully  during  the  spotted- fever  panic  in  Wor-
cester county.  He  wrote  chiefly  for  his  amuse-
ment, but  read  dissertations  on  "  Croup,"  "  Spot-
ted Fever,"  and  other  subjects  before  the  Massa-
chusetts medical  society,  which  were  published  in
its  "  Transactions."  He  also  printed  a  paper  on
"Ichthyosis,"  in  the  "New  England  Journal  of
Medicine  and  Surgery."  He  delivered  a  fourth  of
July  oration  at  Fitchburg,  which  was  published.

HASKELL,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Preston,
Conn.,  in  1784;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  9  Aug.,
1848.  His  early  life  was  spent  in  laboring  on  his
father's  farm.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,
taught  in  a  public  school  in  Norwich,  and  had  for
one  of  his  scholars  Lydia  Huntley,  afterward  Mrs.
Sigourney.  He  was  assistant  teacher  in  Bacon
academy,  Colchester,  in  1806-'7,  then  studied  the-
ology, and  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Litchfield
association  of  ministers.  He  was  successively  pas-
tor at  Middletown,  Litchfield,  St.  Albans,  and
Burlington,  Vt.,  holding  the  latter  charge  from
1810  till  1821,  when  he  was  appointed  president  of
the  University  of  Vermont.  This  post  he  held  till
he  resigned  in  1824.  For  several  years  he  suffered
from  mental  disorder  and  was  separated  from  his
family,  but  subsequently  joined  them  in  Brooklyn,
where  he  devoted  himself  to  literary  work.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  Olivet  college,
Mich.  He  published  an  ordination  sermon  (1814) ;
a  "  Gazetteer  of  the  United  States,"  with  J.  Calvin


Smith  (New  York,  1843);  "Chronological  View  of
the  World  "  (1845) ;  and  edited  McCulloch's  "  Geo-
graphical Dictionary  "  (New  York,  1843-'4).

HASKELL,  Daniel  Noyes,  journalist,  b.  in
Newburyport,,Mass.,  1  Jan.,  1818;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1874.  He  was  the  son  of  a  car-
riage-trimmer, and  after  receiving  a  good  educa-
tion engaged  in  business.  He  wrote  constantly
for  the  press,  and  in  1853  became  editor  of  the
"  Boston  Transcript,"  which  post  he  held  until  his
death.  He  took  an  active  part  in  politics  as  a
Whig,  but  was  indifferent  to  official  honors.  Later
he  was  a  supporter  of  the  liberal  branch  of  the
Whig  party,  and  afterward  became  a  Republican.

HASKELL,  Llewellyn  Solomon,  merchant,
b.  near  Gloucester,  Me.,  4  Jan.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Santa
Barbara,  Cal.,  31  May,  1872.  He  was  of  Welsh
ancestry,  was  educated  in  the  Gardiner  lyceum.
Me.,  and  began  business  as  a  druggist  in  Philadel-
phia about  1834.  He  afterward  formed  a  partner-
ship with  Thomas  B.  Merrick,  and  removed  to
New  York  city  in  1841.  He  had  resided  on  the
summit  of  Orange  mountain,  N.  J.,  for  several
years,  when  he  became  impressed  with  the  many
advantages  offered  by  its  southeastern  slope  as  a
place  of  residence  for  business  men.  Having  spent
two  years  in  the  purchase  of  land  there,  he  began
in  1857  to  lay  out  Llewellyn  park,  and  about  1859
retired  from  business  to  give  his  whole  time  to  its
improvement.  The  park  is  now  filled  with  fine
residences.  Mr.  Haskell  was  a  practical  land-
scape-gardener, and  many  of  its  most  beautiful
features  are  due  to  him.  A  bronze  bust  of  its
founder  has  been  placed  near  the  entrance  in
Orange,  N.  J. — His  son,  Llewellyn  Frost,  soldier,
b.  8  Oct.,  1842,  went  to  Heidelberg,  Germany,  to
study,  but  returned  in  1861  to  join  the  National
army.  He  enlisted  in  the  14th  New  York  regi-
ment, rose  to  the  rank  of  captain,  served  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Alexander  S.  Asboth  at  Pea  Ridge
and  on  that  of  Gen.  Henry  Prince  at  Cedar  Moun-
tain, where  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  was  the
only  officer  on  Gen.  Prince's  staff  that  was  not
killed  or  mortally  wounded.  He  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  7th  colored  troops  in  October,
1863,  served  in  South  Carolina  and  Virginia,  and
became  colonel  in  November,  1864.  At  the  close
of  the  war  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers.  He  then  became  associated  with  his
father  in  the  development  of  Llewellyn  park,  but
in  1877  removed  to  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  where  he
has  since  engaged  in  business.

HASKIN,  Joseph  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
in  1817 ;  d.  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  3  Aug.,  1874.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1839,  and  entered  the  1st  artillery.  He  was  on
duty  in  Maine  during  the  "disputed  frontier"
controversy,  from  1840  till  1845,  afterward  in
Florida  and  Louisiana,  and  during  the  Mexican
war  took  part  in  all  the  battles  under  Gen.  Scott,
losing  an  arm  at  the  storming  of  Chapultepec.
He  was  subsequently  in  garrison  and  fortress-
duty  on  the  frontiers  and  elsewhere,  becoming
captain  in  the  1st  artillery  in  1851,  was  compelled
to  surrender  Baton  Rouge  arsenal  to  a  vastly  su-
perior force  of  Confederates  in  the  winter  of  1861,
served  during  the  civil  war  in  Washington,  at  Key
West,  in  command  of  the  northern  defences  of
Washington  in  1862-'4,  and  as  chief  of  artillery  in
the  Department  of  Washington  till  1866.  He  was-
promoted  to  be  major  in  i862,  lieutenant-colonel
of  staff  the  same  year,  lieutenant-colonel,  1st  artil-
lery, in  1866,  and  brevet  colonel  and  brevet  briga-
dier-general, 13  March,  1865.  He  was  retired  from
active  service  in  1872.


HASLETT


HASSLER


111


HASLETT,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland ;  killed
in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  3  Jan.,  1777.  He  studied  first
theology  and  subsequently  medicine,  and  practised
successfully  in  Kent  and  Sussex  counties,  Del.  He
was  repeatedly  in  the  state  assembly,  served  dur-
ing the  Revolutionary  war,  and  was  in  the  actions
of  Long  Island  and  White  Plains,  where  he  sur-
prised a  picket  of  Roger's  rangers,  taking  thirty-
six  prisoners,  a  pair  of  colors,  and  sixty  muskets.
He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Princeton,  and  was
colonel  of  the  Delaware  regiment  at  the  time  of
his  death. — His  son,  Joseph,  d.  in  July,  1823,  was
governor  of  Delaware  in  1811,  1814,  and  1823.

HASLETT,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  December,  1799;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
28  Sept.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1819,  and  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1822.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a
surgeon  in  the  same  year  and  continued  in  service,
reaching  the  rank  of  fleet-surgeon,  until  1841,  when
he  resigned.  On  the  establishment  of  the  Brook-
lyn city  hospital,  Dr.  Haslett  became  its  vice-presi-
dent, and  practically  its  head.  On  the  death  in
1853  of  its  first  president,  Dr.  Haslett  succeeded
him,  and  continued  to  discharge  the  duties  of  his
office  until  shortly  before  his  death.  Dr.  Haslett
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  board  of
management  of  the  Packer  collegiate  institute.

HASSARD,  John  Rose  Greene,  journalist,
b.  in  New  York  city,  4  Sept.,  1836;  d.  there,  18
April,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  John's  col-
lege. New  York,  in  1855,  and  in  1857-'63  was  as-
sistant editor  of  the  '"New  American  Cyclopaedia."
He  became  editor  of  the  ''Catholic  World"  in
1865,  and  in  1866  was  attached  to  the  New  York
"  Tribune  "  as  editorial  writer.  From  1867  till
1883  he  also  wrote  the  musical  criticisms  for  that
journal,  and  on  the  death  of  George  Ripley  be-
came its  literary  critic.  In  1878  several  hundred
telegraphic  despatches  in  cipher,  relating  to  the
disputed  presidential  election  of  1876,  came  into
the  possession  of  the  "  Tribune,'"  and  after  much
curious  study  were  translated  by  Mr.  Ilassard  and
Col.  William  M.  Grosvenor,  of  that  paper.  The
publication  of  these  telegrams,  showing  negotia-
tions with  the  returning-boards  of  two  states  to
purchase  the  electoral  votes  of  those  states  for
the  Democratic  candidate,  caused  much  excite-
ment, and  the  plot  was  investigated  by  a  commit-
tee of  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives.  Mr.
Hassard  published  "  Life  of  Archbishop  Hughes  "
(New  York.  1866) :"  The  Ring  of  the  Xibelung"
(1877);  "Life  of  Pius  IX."  (1878);  "History  of  the
United  States  "  for  schools  (1878) ;  and  "  A  Pick-
wickian Pilgrimage"  (Boston,  1881).

HASSARD,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Jamaica,
West  Indies,  21  Jan.,  1806;  d.  in  Great  Barring-
ton,  Mass..  13  Jan..  1847.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1812.  studied  in  the  academy  at  Westerly,
R.  I.,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1826,  and  engaged
in  literary  pursuits  in  New  Haven.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  deacon's  orders  by  Bishop  Brownell,  of
Connecticut,  in  1835,  ordained  priest  by  Bishop
Griswold,  and  became  rector  of  St.  Thomas  s
church,  Taunton,  Mass.  After  a' service  of  three
years  he  resigned  this  charge,  and  in  1839  became
rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Great  Barrington,
where  he  continued  until  his  death.  He  was  large-
ly instrumental  in  promoting  the  growth  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  New  England.  A
volume  of  his  sermons  was  published  after  his
death,  with  a  memoir  by  Henry  W.  Lee  (Boston).

HASSAUREK,  Friedrich,  journalist,  b.  in
Vienna,  Austria,  9  Oct.,  1832 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,
3  Oct.,  1885. He  served  in  the  student  legion  in


the  German  revolution  of  1848,  and  was  twice
wounded.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1848,
settled  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  engaged  in  jour-
nalism, politics,  and  the  practice  of  law.  He  was
U.  S.  minister  to  Ecuador  in  1861-5,  and  during
the  latter  year  became  editor  of  the  Cincinnati
"  Volksblatt."  He  published  "  Four  Years  among
the  Spanish-Americans  "  (New  York,  1868).

HASSELQUIST,  Toovay  Nelsson,  clergyman,
b.  in  Hasslared,  Sweden,  2  March,  1816.  His  par-
ents were  peasants.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the
College  of  Kristianstad  in  1835,  studied  theology
at  the  University  of  Lund,  and  was  ordained  to  the
Lutheran  ministry  in  1839.  After  occupying  the
office  of  assistant  pastor  in  various  parishes  he  left
his  native  country  in  1852,  and  settled  in  Gales-
burg,  111.,  where  he  has  ever  since  been  an  active
laborer  in  aid  of  the  educational  and  religious  in-
terests of  his  countrymen.  He  was  called  in  1863
to  the  presidency  of  the  Swedish  seminary  at  Pax-
ton,  which  was  removed  in  1875  to  Rock  Island,
111.,  under  the  title  of  Augustana  college  and  theo-
logical seminary.  Under  the  presidency  of  Dr.
Hasselquist  these  have  become  second  to  none  of
the  Lutheran  institutions  in  the  country.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Scandinavian  Augus-
tana synod  and  its  presiding  officer  in  1860-'70,
and  has  held  many  offices  of  honor  and  trust  in
his  own  synod  and  in  the  general  council.  In  the
interest  of  Swedish  immigrants  Dr.  Hasselquist
travels  extensively  every  year  through  (he  western
states,  and  in  1870  he  returned  to  his  native  coun-
try for  the  same  purpose.  In  1855  he  founded  at
Chicago  a  religio-political  periodical  called  "  Hem-
landet  det  Gamla  och  det  Nya,"  of  which  he  still
(1887)  has  charge,  and  since  1856  he  has  edited  a
religious  periodical,  published  in  Rock  Island,  111.,
at  first  under  the  title  "  Ratta  Hemlandet,"  but
several  years  ago  changed  to  "  Augustana  och
Missionaren."  Muhlenberg  college,  Allentown,
Pa.,  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870.  He
has  published  various  addresses  and  sermons.

HASSLER,  Ferdinand  Rudolph,  survevor,  b.
in  Aarau,  Switzerland,  6  Oct.,  1770:  d.  in  Phila-
delphia. Ph.,
20  Nov.,  1843.
He  received
a  scientific
education  in
Europe,  and
was  for  some
time  connect-
ed with  the
trigonometri-
cal survey
of  Switzer-
land. Sub-
sequently he
emigrated  to
the  United
States,  and
through  the
influence  of
Albert  Gal-
latin secured
an  appoint-
ment at  the
U.  S.  military
academvas  acting  professor  of  mathematics,  which
he  held'in  1807-10.  and  in  1810-11  he  served  in  a
similar  capacity  in  Union  college.  He  was  then
selected  to  direct  the  U.  S.  coast  survey,  and  sent
on  a  mission  to  France  and  England  to  procure  in-
struments and  standards  of  measurement.  He  was
detained  in  England  as  an  alien  enemy  till  1815,  and


^faffy^


112


HASSLER


HASTINGS


on  his  return  was  formally  appointed  superintend-
ent of  the  coast  survey,  but  did  not  begin  his  field-
work  until  1817.  During  the  following  year  the
work  was  discontinued,  and  was  not  resumed  until
1832.  After  this  he  was  the  active  head  of  the
survey  until  his  death.  During  his  administration
a  base-line  had  been  measured  in  the  vicinity  of
New  York.  The  triangulation  had  been  extended
as  far  east  as  Rhode  Island  and  south  to  the  head
of  Chesapeake  bay.  The  topography  had  kept
pace  with  the  triangulation,  and  the  hydrography
of  New  York  bay,  of  Long  Island,  of  Delaware
bay  and  river,  and  the  off-shore  soundings  from
Montauk  point  to  the  capes  of  the  Delaware,  were
substantially  completed.  The  triangulation  cov-
ered an  area  of  9,000  square  miles,  furnishing  de-
terminations of  nearly  1,200  stations  for  the  de-
lineation of  1,600  miles  of  shore  -  line.  Prof.
Hassler  was  also  for  many  years  chief  of  the  bureau
of  weights  and  measures.  He  was  a  fellow  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  and  contributed
papers  to  its  "Transactions"  pertaining  to  his
work  on  the  survey.  Besides  his  annual  reports  of
the  coast  survey,  and  as  superintendent  of  the  fab-
rication of  standard  weights  and  measures  (Wash-
ington, 1837-'42),  he  published  "  Analytical  Trigo-
nometry "  (New  York,  1826) ;  "  Elements  of  Geome-
try "  (Richmond,  1828) ;  "  System  of  the  Universe,"
with  plates  and  tables  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1828);
"  Logarithmic  and  Trigonometric  Tables  "  (1838) ;
and  "  Elements  of  Arithmetic  "  (1843).

HASSLER,  Simon,  musician,  b.  in  Bavaria,  25
July,  1832.  He  came  to  this  country  with  his
parents,  and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1842.
His  father,  Henry  Hassler,  a  musician  of  the  Mo-
zart school,  gave  him  his  first  instruction  in  music,
and  his  education  was  continued  under  Keller,
Wolsieffer,  and  Waldteuffel.  In  1852  he  made  his
first  public  appearance  as  a  violinist.  At  about
the  same  time  his  father  and  brother  Mark  es-
tablished an  orchestra,  of  which  Simon  became  a
member,  and  for  over  twenty-five  years  has  been
the  leader.  He  has  long  been  active  as  the  con-
ductor of  musical  concerts,  and  is  widely  known  as
the  leader  of  bands  and  orchestras  during  the
summer  months  at  various  seaside  resorts.  He  is
the  author  of  numerous  musical  productions,  in-
cluding dramas,  marches,  waltzes,  and  quadrilles.
He  has  composed  music  for  many  of  the  plays  of
Shakespeare,  and  a  "  Festival  March,"  which  was
played  at  the  opening  of  the  Permanent  exhibition
at  Philadelphia  in  1876.

HASTINGS,  Hugh  J.,  journalist,  b.  in  County
Fermanagh,  Ireland,  20  Aug.,  1820;  d.  in  Mon-
mouth Beach,  N.  J.,  12  Sept.,  1883.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1831,  and  settled  with  his  family
in  Albany,  N.  Y.  After  having  been  for  some
time  engaged  as  a  clerk,  he  began  his  career  as
reporter  for  the  Albany  "  Atlas  "  in  1840.  Three
years  afterward  he  established  the  Albany  "  Weekly
Switch,"  and  in  1844  the  "  Knickerbocker,"  which
proved  a  success.  Mr.  Hastings  took  an  active
part  in  state  and  national  politics,  devoting  him-
self to  the  interests  of  the  Whig  party  and  its  suc-
cessor, the  Republican  party.  He  was  appointed
by  President  Taylor  collector  of  the  port  of  Albany,
but  resigned  the  office  under  Fillmore.  He  as-
sumed the  editorship  of  the  New  York  "  Commer-
cial Advertiser "  in  1868,  and  in  1875  became  its
proprietor.  He  was  a  warm  supporter  of  Gen.
Grant,  criticised  Mr.  Hayes's  administration,  and
on  President  Arthur's  accession  rendered  him  all
the  aid  in  his  power.  His  death  was  mainly  the
result  of  his  being  thrown  from  his  carriage
while  driving  along  Broadway,  Long  Branch.


HASTINGS,  Rnssell,  soldier,  b.  in  Greenfield,
Mass.,  30  May,  1835.  While  he  was  a  boy  his  par-
ents removed  to  Ohio,  and  settled  in  Willoughby,
Lake  co.,  where  he  was  educated  in  the  common
schools.  Early  in  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  as  a
private,  and  was  soon  promoted  to  be  a  lieutenant
in  the  23d  Ohio  regiment.  During  Sheridan's  cam-
paigns he  acted  as  adjutant-general,  was  severely
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Opequan,  and  was  subse-
quently promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  28th
Ohio  regiment,  after  a  charge  in  which  he  had  dis-
played great  courage.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865.  Gen.
Hastings  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Ohio  legis-
lature in  1865,  and  while  there  was  appointed  U.  S.
marshal  for  the  northern  district  of  Ohio.  Owing
to  failing  health,  he  resigned  in  1874.

HASTINGS,  Serranus  Clinton,  jurist,  b.  in
the  state  of  New  York,  14  Nov.,  1814.  He  was
educated  at  the  Gouverneur  academy,  St.  Lawrence
county,  and  was  principal  of  the  Norwich  academy
for  one  year.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  Iowa.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Iowa  legislature  for  several  years,
president  of  the  council  during  one  session,  and
one  of  the  first  Iowa  representatives  to  congress,
serving  from  29  Dec,  1846,  to  3  March,  1847.  In
1848  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  state,  and  served  one  year.  He  then
removed  to  California,  and  was  elected  chief  justice
of  that  state  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  legisla-
ture. After  serving  two  years  he  was  elected  by
the  people  attorney-general  of  the  state,  and  in
1878  founded  and  endowed  Hastings  college  of  the
law  in  the  University  of  California.  He  also  paid
into  the  state  treasury  of  California  $100,000  in
gold,  on  condition  that  the  sum  should  be  used  for
the  legal  education  of  students  in  every  vocation
of  life.  Judge  Hastings  also  gave  about  $6,000  in
property,  and  otherwise  contributed  to  the  founda-
tion of  St.  Catherine  academy  in  Benicia,  Cal.  He
gave  and  procured  funds  to  classify,  print,  and
publish  two  volumes  of  the  botany  of  the  Pacific
coast.  For  several  years  preceding  1887  he  was
professor  of  comparative  jurisprudence  in  the  Has-
tings college  of  law.

HASTINGS,  Thomas,  musician,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  15  Oct.,  1784;  d.  in
New  York  city,  15  May,  1872.  In  1796  he  removed
with  his  parents  to  a  farm  in  Clinton,  N.  Y.  He
attended  the  district-school,  and  began  to  study
music  with  a  sixpenny  gamut-book  of  four  small
pages.  When  about  eighteen  he  became  leader  of
the  village  choir.  His  brother  presented  him  at
this  time  with  an  elaborate  treatise  on  music,
which  he  mastered  without  aid,  and  in  1806  he  was
invited  to  take  charge  of  a  singing-school.  He
soon  achieved  reputation  in  training  church-choirs,
and  his  services  were  much  in  demand.  He  went
in  1817  to  Troy,  subsequently  to  Albany,  and
afterward  took  editorial  charge  of  a  religious  news-
paper in  Utica  entitled  the  "  Western  Recorder,"
which  gave  large  space  to  church-music.  He  held
this  post  for  nine  years,  during  which  time  he  lec-
tured repeatedly  in  Albany,  New  York,  Philadel-
phia, and  Princeton,  N.  J.  In  1832  he  went  to  New
York,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.  He  endeav-
ored to  improve  the  character  of  the  church-music
in  the  churches  of  New  York.  For  many  years
he  was  choir-director  in  Dr.  Mason's  church  in
Bleecker  street,  and  devoted  his  time  to  preparing
collections  of  sacred  music,  the  composition  of
tunes  and  hymns,  and  the  editing  of  musical  peri-
odicals. He  was  a  constant  contributor  to  the  re-
ligious press,  and  in  1835-'7  issued  the  "  Musical


HASWELL


HATCH


113


izine."  The  University  of  the  city  of  New
York  gave  him  the  degree  of  doctor  of  music  in
1858.  His  publications  number  nearly  fifty  sepa-
rate volumes,  and  include  "  The  Musical  Reader "
(Utica,  1818);  "Dissertation  on  Musical  Taste"
rAlbanv,  1822 ;  2d  ed.,  rewritten,  New  York,  1853) ;
•'Spiritual  Songs  "(New  York,  1831) ;  "The  Moth-
er's Nursery  Songs  "  (1834) ;  "  Anthems,  Motets,
and  Set  Pieces  "  (1836) ;  "  The  Manhattan  Collec-
tion "  (183?) ;  "  Elements  of  Vocal  Music  "  (1839) ;
"Sacred  Songs  "(1842);  "Indian  Melodies  Har-
monized "  (1845) ;  "  Devotional  Hvmns  and  Poems  "
(1850) ;  "  The  Presbyterian  Psalmodist  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1852) :  "  The  History  of  Forty  Choirs  "  (New
York.  1853);  "Selah"  (1856):  " Hastings's  Church
Music  "  (1860) ;  and  "Introits"  (1865).— His  son,
Thomas  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
28  Aug.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in  1848,
and  at  the  Union  theological  seminary.  New  York
city,  in  1851.  He  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian
churches  in  Mendham,  N.  J.,  in  1852-6,  and  in
New  York  city  in  1856-'82.  He  then  became  pro-
fessor of  sacred  rhetoric  in  Union  theological  sem-
inary, 6f  which  he  was  chosen  president  in  1888.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1865.  He  edited
"Church  Melodies"  with  his  father  in  1857.

HASWELL,  Charles  Haynes,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  New  York  city,  22  May,  1809.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  high-school  of Jamaica,  L.  I., and

in  a  classical  school
in  New  York  city.
From  his  boyhood
he  showed  great  in-
terest in  mechan-
ics, and  he  entered
in  1825  the  steam-
engine  factory  of
James  P.  Allaire,
where  he  remained
for  several  years.
In  1836  he  was  ap-
pointed chief  engi-
neer in  the  U.  S.
navy, and  was  then
the  only  one  of
that  grade.  He  was
a  member  of  the
board  that  designed
the  steam  frigates
"  Missouri "  and  "  Mississippi."  An  engineer  corps
having  been  organized  in  1839,  he  was  promoted  to
the  rank  of  engineer-in-chief  in  1844,  and  held  that
office  until  1850,  when,  in  consequence  of  failing
health,  he  left  the  service.  Subsequently  he  trav-
elled in  Europe,  and  on  his  return  settled  in  New
York,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.
He  designed  and  constructed  the  first  practicable
steam  launch  in  1837,  and  was  the  first  to  put  zinc
into  a  marine  steam  boiler  or  the  hold  of  an  iron
steam  vessel  in  order  that  the  galvanic  action  of  the
salt  water  and  copper  might  be  exhausted  on  the
zinc,  in  preference  to  the  iron.  As  engineer  of  the
state  quarantine  commission  he  designed  and  di-
rected the  completion  of  Hoffman  island  and  its
buildings  in  the  lower  bay  of  New  York,  and  while
in  the  employ  of  the  New  York  department  of
public  charities  and  corrections  designed  and  built
the  crib  bulkhead  at  Hart's  island.  He  was  a
trustee  of  the  New  York  and  Brooklyn  bridge  in
1877-'8,  and,  in  addition  to  membership  in  all  of
the  principal  engineering  societies  in  the  United
States,  he  is  a  member  of  the  institutes  of  civil
engineers  and  of  naval  architects  in  Great  Britain.
Mr.  Haswell  has  published  "  Mechanic's  and  En-
voi., in. — 8


~7Zj?A.a/*  yK  y/(z«>u*^<L.


gineer's  Pocket-Book"  (New  York,  1844;  51st  ed.
1887) ;  "  Mechanic's  Tables  "  (1856) ;  "  Mensuration
and  Practical  Geometry  "  (1858) ;  "  Book-keeping  "
(1871) ;  and  has  in  manuscript  (1887)  a  "  History  of
the  Steam  Boiler  and  its  Appendages"  and  "  Remi-
niscences of  New  York  from  1816  to  1835."

HATCH,  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Bangor,  Me.,
22  Dec,  1832;  d.  in  Fort  Robinson,  Neb.,  11
April,  1890.  In  April,  1861,  he  joined  the  troops
enlisted  to  defend  the  national  capital,  and  subse-
quently had  charge  of  the  camp  of  instruction  at
Davenport,  Iowa.  He  was  commissioned  captain
in  the  2d  Iowa  cavalry,  12  Aug.,  1861,  major,  5
Sept.,  and  lieutenant-colonel,  11  Dec,  the  same
year.  He  commanded  his  regiment  at  New  Mad-
rid, Island  No.  10,  the  battle  of  Corinth,  the  raid
on  Booneville,  and  the  battle  of  Iuka.  He  was
promoted  colonel,  13  June,  1862,  and  commanded
a  brigade  of  cavalry  in  Gen.  Grant's  Mississippi
campaign.  He  was  afterward  placed  at  the  head
of  the  cavalry  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennes-
see, and  was  present  at  the  various  engagements  in
which  it  took  part.  He  was  disabled  by  wounds
in  December,  1863,  and  on  27  April,  1864,  was
made  brigadier-general.  Under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,
and  still  in  command  of  a  cavalry  division,  he  was
engaged  in  the  battles  of  Franklin  (for  bravery  in
which  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in* the
regular  service)  and  Nashville,  and  in  the  pursuit
of  Hood's  Confederate  army.  For  gallantry  at
Nashville  he  was,  in  1864,  brevetted  major-general
of  volunteers,  and  three  years  later  promoted  to
the  same  rank  by  brevet  in  the  U.  S.  army.  On  15
Jan.,  1866,  he  was  honorably  mustered  out  of  the
volunteer  service,  and  on  6  July  following  he  was
promoted  colonel  of  the  9th  U.  S.  cavalry,  which
commission  he  held  twenty-three  years.  After
the  war  he  served  in  Colorado,  Indian  and  Wyo-
ming territories,  and  Nebraska.

HATCH,  Frederick  Winslow,  physician,  b.
in  Charlottesville,  Ya.,  2  March.  1822  ;  d.  in  Sac-
ramento, Cal.,  10  Oct.,  1885.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  college  in  1841,  and  in  medicine  at
the  University  of  New  York  in  1843.  He  re-
moved to  Kenosha,  Wis.,  in  1846,  and  in  1851  to
Sacramento,  Cal.,  where  he  was  professor  of  ma-
teria medica,  and  afterward  of  the  principles  and
practice  of  medicine,  in  the  University  of  Califor-
nia. Dr.  Hatch  was  a  trustee,  and  from  1868  un-
til his  death  president,  of  the  Medical  association
of  California,  permanent  secretary  of  the  State
board  of  health,  and  in  1862-'6  president  of  the
board  of  health  of  Sacramento.  He  wrote  numer-
ous papers  on  the  climate  of  California,  and  the
medical  springs  of  that  state.

HATCH,  Israel  Thompson,  congressman,  b.
in  Owasco,  Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y..  in  1808 ;  d.  in  Buf-
falo, N.  Y.,  24*  Sept.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1829,  settled  in  Buffalo,  N  Y.,  and  prac-
tised law.  In  1830  he  was  assistant  secretary  of
state,  was  in  the  state  senate  in  1852  and  in  1856,
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  1857  till  1859,  when  he  was  appointed  post-
master at  Buffalo.  During  his  congressional  ser-
vice he  was  appointed  by  President  Buchanan  to
report  on  the  reciprocity  treaty  between  the  United
States  and  Canada  that  was  ratified  in  1854  for  a
period  of  ten  years.  Mr.  Hatch  was  a  member  of
the  Constitutional  convention  of  1867-'8,  and  for
many  years  previous  to  his  death  was  engaged  in
banking  and  other  enterprises  in  Buffalo.

HATCH,  John  Porter,  soldier,  b.  in  Oswego,
N.  Y.,  9  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,  and  assigned  to
the  3d  infantry. Subsequently  he  was  transferred


114


HATFIELD


HATHEWAY


to  the  mounted  rifles,  and  promoted  2d  lieutenant,
18  April,  1847.  He  saw  service  during  the  military
occupation  of  Texas  in  1845-'6,  and  took  part  in
all  the  principal  battles  of  the  Mexican  war,  being
brevetted  1st  lieutenant,  20  Aug.,  1847,  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  battles  of  Contre-
ras  and  Churubusco,  and  captain  on  13  Sept.,  for
gallantry  at  Chapultepec.  After  the  conclusion  of
the  Mexican  war,  he  was  chiefly  engaged  in  fron-
tier duty  and  on  various  expeditions  against  the
Indians  until  1861,  when  he  was  acting  as  chief
of  commissariat  in  the  Department  of  New  Mexi-
co, after  receiving  a  captain  s  commission  on  13  Oct.,
1860.  On  28  Sept.,  1861,  he  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  and  in  December  following
was  placed  in  command  of  a  brigade  of  cavalry  at
Annapolis,  Md.,  under  Gen.  King.  He  distin-
guished himself  by  several  daring  reconnoissances
about  Gordonsville,  the  Rapidan,  and  the  Rappa-
hannock, and  afterward  commanded  the  cavalry
of  the  5th  army  corps,  taking  part  in  the  battles
of  Winchester,  Groveton,  and  Manassas,  Va.,
where  he  was  wounded  and  made  brevet  major  for
'•  gallant  and  meritorious  services."  He  was  again
severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  South  Mountain,
Md.,  14  Sept.,  1862,  and  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel.  Disabled  by  his  injuries  and  unable  to
report  for  duty  until  18  Feb.,  1863,  he  was  then
employed  on  courts-martial,  assigned  to  command
the  draft  rendezvous  at  Philadelphia,  and  given
charge  of  the  cavalry  depot  at  St.  Louis  until  27
Oct.,  1863,  when  he  was  made  major  of  the  4th
cavalry.  During  the  remainder  of  the  war  he  was
assigned  to  various  commands  in  the  Department
of  the  South,  being  in  charge  of  John's  Island  and
Honey  Hill,  S.  C,  during  the  attacks  on  those
places.  He  was  also  under  Gen.  Sherman's  orders,
co-operating  with  him  while  the  latter  was  moving
up  the  coast,  and  participating  in  several  skir-
mishes. From  26  Feb.  to  26  Aug.,  1865,  he  was  in
command  of  the  Charleston  district.  Department
of  South  Carolina.  On  13  March  of  the  latter  year
he  was  brevetted  colonel  and  brigadier-general  for
his  services  during  the  civil  war,  and  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers  for  the  same  cause.  From  the
close  of  the  war  until  1881  he  was  on  duty  prin-
cipally in  Texas,  the  Indian  territory,  Montana,
and  Washington  territory,  and  was  promoted  colo-
nel, 2d  cavalry,  26  June,  1881.  Col.  Hatch  re-
mained in  command  of  his  regiment  until  9  Jan.,
1886,  when  he  was  retired  by  operation  of  law.

HATFIELD,  Edwin  Francis,  clergyman,  b.
in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  9  Jan.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Sum-
mit, N.  J.,  22  Sept.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  college  in  1829,  studied  theology  at
Andover  seminary,  and  was  ordained  on  14  May,
1832.  He  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  New  York  city,  until  failing
health  compelled  his  resignation  in  1863.  He
then  became  special  agent  of  the  Union  theologi-
cal seminary,  and  raised  a  large  sum  for  its  en-
dowment. From  1846  till  1870  he  was  stated
clerk  of  the  new-school  Presbyterian  church ;  at
the  union  of  the  new  and  old  school  churches,  in
1870,  he  was  re-elected  to  this  office,  and  continued
in  it  till  he  became  moderator  of  the  general  assem-
bly in  1883.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Marietta  college  in  1850.  He  left  his  library  of
more  than  6,000  volumes  to  Union  theological
seminary.  He  published  " Universalism  as  it  Is"
(New  York,  1841) ;  "  Memoir  of  Elihu  W.  Bald-
win" (1843);  "St.  Helena  and  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  "  (1852) ;  "  History  of  Elizabeth,  N.  J."  (1868) :
"The  Church  Hymn-Book,  with  Tunes"  (1872);
"  The  New  York  Observer  Year-Book "  (3  vols.,


1871-'3); "Chapel Hymn-Book"  (1873); and  a

S)sthumous  work,  edited  by  his  son,  J.  B.  Tavlor
atfield.  "  Poets  of  the  Church  "  (1884).

HATHAWAY,  Benjamin,  poet,  b.  in  Cayuga
county,  N.  Y.,  30  Sept.,  1822.  He  was  the  eldest
of  eight  children,  and  was  taken  from  school  and
put  to  work  at  the  age  of  eleven  on  account  of
family  reverses.  Although  shut  out  from  libraries
and  deprived  for  many  years  of  all  literary  associa-
tion, he  made  the  most  of  his  meagre  opportunities
for  culture.  His  taste  for  poetry  found  congenial
themes  in  the  woods,  fields,  and  flowers.  Many  of
the  poems  afterward  collected  in  his  "  Art  Life  "
were  first  written  with  chalk  upon  barrel-heads  dur-
ing his  employment  as  a  cooper.  They  were  com-
posed amid  the  noise  and  clatter  of  the  shops,  and
in  the  evening,  often  after  nine  o'clock,  as  he  usual-
ly worked  until  that  hour,  they  were  transcribed
upon  paper.  An  early  developed  fondness  for  trees
and  plants  and  their  cultivation  led  Mr.  Hathaway
to  add  to  his  other  enterprises  the  business  of  nur-
seryman, which  he  followed  in  connection  with  the
farm  for  over  thirty  years.  It  was  late  in  life  before
he  could  devote  much  time  to  his  favorite  studies
so  as  to  plan  or  prosecute  any  large  or  consecutive
work.  For  ten  years,  however,  intellectual  pursuits
occupied  much  of  his  attention.  He  spent  several
winters  at  the  University  library,  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,
in  researches  for  his  "  League  of  the  Iroquois "
(Chicago,  1880),  and  several  more  in  Chicago,  en-
gaged upon  that  work  and  upon  a  collection  of
miscellaneous  poems  entitled  "  Art  Life  "  (1876).

HATHEWAY,  Samnel  Gilbert,  pioneer,  b.
in  Freetown,  Mass.,  in  1780 :  d.  in  Solon,  Cort-
land co.,  N.  Y.,  2  May,  1867.  He  was  descended
from  the  navigator.  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert.  By
the  death  of  his  father  he  became  dependent  on
his  own  exertions  at  the  age  of  nine  years,  worked
on  several  farms,  went  to  sea,  and,  having  saved  a
small  sum  of  money,  set  out  before  he  was  twenty
years  of  age  for  western  New  York,  then  a  wilder-
ness, and  purchased  three  hundred  acres  of  un-
cleared land  in  Cortland  county.  His  wisdom,
frugality,  and  industry  enabled  him  in  time-  to  ac-
cumulate a  comfortable  property.  He  was  elected
justice  of  the  peace  in  1810,  which  office  he  held
forty-three  years,  represented  Cortland  in  the
legislature  in  1814  and  1818,  was  state  senator  in
1822,  and  in  1832  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  in  1833-'5.  In  1852  he  was
a  presidential  elector.  He  was  greatly  interested
in  military  matters,  and  rose  through  various
grades  till  he  was  commissioned  major-general  of
militia  in  1823.  His  personal  popularity  enabled
him  to  hold  in  his  control  almost  every  executive
appointment  in  his  district.  He  was  the  friend
of  Andrew  Jackson  and  Martin  Van  Buren.  At
the  age  of  eighty  Mr.  Hatheway  attended  the  na-
tional Democratic  convention  at  Charleston,  S.  C.
See  a  memoir  of  his  life  by  Henry  S.  Randall
(Cortland,  N.  Y.,  1867).— His  son,  Samuel  Gil-
bert, soldier,  b.  in  Freetown,  Mass.,  18  Jan.,
1810;  died  in  Solon,  N.  Y.,  16  April,  1864,  was
graduated  at  Union  college  in  1831,  studied  law,
and  in  1833  removed  to  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  and  began
practice.  He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1842-'3,
declined  a  renomination  in  1844,  and  resumed
practice.  He  was  a  defeated  candidate  for  con-
gress in  1856  and  in  1862,  and  the  next  year  en-
tered the  army  as  colonel  of  the  14th  New  York
regiment.  He  afterward  commanded  Abercrom-
bie's  division,  as  acting  brigadier-general,  but  in
1863,  the  exposures  of  camp-life  having  produced
disease  of  the  heart,  he  was  compelled  to  resign,
and  died  a  few  months  afterward.


HATHORNE


HAUN


115


HATHORNE,  William,  colonial  official,  b.  in
Wiltshire,  England,  in  1608 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in
1681.  In  1630  he  emigrated  to  this  country  and
settled  in  Dorchester,  from  which  place  he  removed
to  Salem  in  1636,  and  in  1645  was,  with  Gov.
Thomas  Dudley  and  Gen.  Daniel  Denison,  an  agent
to  treat  with  D'Aulnay.  the  French  agent  at  St.
Croix.  He  was  deputy  from  Salem  to  the  general
court  for  several  years,  was  its  first  speaker  in
1644,  and  held  that  office  six  years.  He  served  in
King  Philip's  war,  and  the  following  war  with  the
Indians,  was  one  of  the  board  of  assistants  in
1662-'79,  and  commanded  a  regiment  of  militia.
He  was  zealous  in  the  cause  of  liberty,  and  was  one
of  the  five  principal  citizens  whom  Charles  II.  in
1666  ordered  to  be  sent  to  England  to  answer  to
the  charge  of  refusing  to  submit  to  the  authority
of  the  royal  commissioners. — His  son,  John,  jurist,
b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  August,  1641 ;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, 10  May,  1717,  was  a  representative  in  the
state  assembly  in  1683,  assistant  or  councillor  in
1684-1712,  excepting  during  Sir  Edmund  Andros's
administration,  and  was  active  in  the  witchcraft
prosecutions.  He  served  in  the  Indian  and  east-
ern wars  as  colonel,  and  was  commander  of  the
forces  in  the  expedition  of  1696.

HATTON,  Frank,  journalist,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Ohio,  28  April,  1846.  His  father,  Richard,  re-
moved to  Cadiz,  Ohio,  where  he  published  the
"  Republican."  At  the  age  of  eleven  the  son  en-
tered the  office  of  this  paper,  where  he  became
foreman,  and  then  local  editor.  When  the  civil
war  began  he  enlisted  in  the  98th  Ohio  infantry,
and  in  1864  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant.  His
service  was  with  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.
After  the  war  he  went  to  Mount  Pleasant,  Iowa,
edited  the  "  Journal "  there  in  1869-'74,  and
then  removed  to  Burlington,  Iowa,  where  he  pur-
chased a  controlling  interest  in  the  "  Hawkeye."
He  was  postmaster  in  Burlington  for  a  few  years
prior  to  1881.  In  that  year  President  Arthur  ap-
pointed him  assistant  postmaster -general,  and
he  served  from  October,  1881,  till  October,  1884.
when  the  retirement  of  Judge  Gresham  from
the  office  of  postmaster  -  general,  led  to  Mr.  Hat-
ton's  promotion  to  fill  the  vacancy.  He  served
until  the  close  of  President  Arthur's  administra-
tion, and  was  the  youngest  cabinet  officer  that
ever  served  the  government,  Alexander  Hamilton
alone  excepted.  From  October,  1882,  till  the
summer  of  1884  Mr.  Hatton  was  connected  with
the  "  National  Republican  "  in  Washington.  In
July  of  the  latter  year  he  removed  to  Chicago,  and
assisted  in  reorganizing  the  "  Mail,"  of  which  he  is
now  (1887)  the  editor-in-chief.

HATTON,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Sumner  coun-
ty, Tenn.,  in  1827;  killed  at  the  battle  of  Fair
Oaks,  Va.,  31  Mar,  1862.  He  was  educated  at
Harvard,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1849.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Tennessee
house  of  representatives  in  1856,  and  in  1858  was
elected  to  congress  from  that  state,  serving  one
term.  He  then  entered  the  Confederate  army,  was
appointed  brigadier-general,  23  May,  1862,  and  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  5th  brigade,  1st
division,  1st  corps.  Army  of  Virginia.

HATTON,  Thomas,  b.  in  England ;  d.  in  Mary-
land in  1655.  He  was  descended  from  Sir  Christo-
Eher  Hatton,  Queen  Elizabeth's  lord  chancellor.
te  came  from  London  to  Maryland  in  1648,  and
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  province,  and  privy
councillor,  shortly  after  his  arrival.  He  is  said  to
have  brought  with  him  the  draught  of  the  toleration
act  from  Lord  Baltimore,  but  he  was  absent,  on
the  day  of  its  passage,  from  the  assembly  of  1649.


During  the  brief  absence  of  Gov.  Stone  from  the
province,  in  the  same  year,  Thomas  Green  was  ap-
pointed governor,  with  Hatton  as  substitute.  Hat-
ton  refused  to  sit  in  the  Puritan  assembly  of  1654,
and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  the  Severn  in  1655,
in  defending  the  government  of  Lord  Baltimore.

HATUEY  (ah'-tway),  Haytian  cacique,  d.  in
1512.  After  the  conquest  of  Hayti  by  the  Span-
iards, he  passed  with  many  of  his  subjects  to  the
eastern  part  of  Cuba,  where  he  established  himself
and  ruled  over  the  natives.  Fearing  for  Cuba  the
same  fate  that  had  befallen  his  native  country,  he
made  preparations  to  resist  the  Spaniards,  should
they  appear  in  his  new  dominion.  Accordingly,
when  in  1512  Diego  Velasquez  de  Cuellar  under-
took the  conquest  of  Cuba,  Hatuey  opposed  the
invaders,  but  was  routed  and  took  refuge  in  the
woods.  During  two  months  he  carried  on  a  gue-
rilla warfare,  until  he  was  captured  and  condemned
to  be  burned.  While  they  were  leading  the  ca-
cique to  the  stake,  a  priest  tried  to  describe  to  him
the  happiness  and  blessings  he  would  enjoy  in
heaven.  "  Do  white  men  go  there  too  ?  "  asked  the
Indian  chief.  "  Yes,  provided  they  are  good,"  was
the  answer.  " Then,"  replied  Hatuey,  "I  do  not
wish  to  go  where  I  shall  meet  with  such  people."

HAUCK,  Minnie,  singer,  b.  in  New  York  city,
16  Nov.,  1852.  Her  father  was  a  German,  her
mother  an  American,  and  she  removed  with  them
to  New  Orleans  in  1855.  She  first  appeared  in
public  at  a  concert  in  that  city  in  1865,  and  at
fifteen  years  of  age  she  returned  to  New  York
and  became  leading  soprano  in  Christ  church
choir.  She  appeared  in  New  York  early  in  1868
as  Amina  in  "  La  Sonnambula."  After  a  suc-
cessful tour  in  this  countrv  she  sang  at  Covent
Garden.  London,  26  Oct.,  1868.  In  1869  she  was
engaged  at  the  Grand  Opera.  Vienna,  and  she
sang  also  in  Moscow,  Berlin.  Paris,  and  Brussels
for  several  years.  The  chief  episode  in  her  artistic
career  was  her  creation  of  Carmen  in  Bizet's  opera
at  Brussels,  2  Jan.,  1878.  In  1881  she  married
Ernst  von  Hesse- Wartegg.  the  traveller.

HAUGHERY,  Margaret,  philanthropist,  b;  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  early  in  this  century ;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  in  1882.  Her  maiden  name  was
Gaffney.  She  came  to  New  Orleans  with  her  hus-
band about  1836,  and  after  his  death  became  a  do-
mestic at  the  orphan  asylum.  When  the  Sisters
opened  a  second  institution  she  took  charge  of
their  large  dairy.  But  she  soon  associated  herself
with  all  their  labors,  and  it  was  principally  due  to
her  efforts  that  the  asylum  reached  a  sound  finan-
cial condition.  As  soon  as  the  institution  was  out
of  debt  she  established  a  dairy,  and  entered  into
business  on  her  own  account.  In  1866  she  opened
a  bakery  in  the  heart  of  New  Orleans.  She  made
money  rapidly,  but  still  drove  about  with  her  bread-
cart,  as  she  had  done  with  her  milk-wagon,  and
was  known  as  "Margaret,  the  orphans'  friend."
All  that  she  made  was  spent  on  the  orphans.  After
her  death  her  statue  was  erected  in  New  Orleans.
It  was  unveiled  on  9  July,  1884.

HAUN,  Henrv  P.,  jurist,  b.  in  Scott  countv,
Ky.,  18  Jan.,  181*5;  d.  in  Maysville,  Cal.,  6  May.
1860.  He  was  well  educated,  and,  having  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839.  He  removed
to  Iowa  in  1845,  and  was  a  member  of  the  con-
vention that  framed  the  constitution  of  that  state
in  1846.  In  1849  he  removed  to  Yuba  county,
Cal.,  and  in  1851  was  elected  county  judge.  He
was  afterward  Democratic  candidate  for  governor
of  the  state,  and  was  then  appointed  a  U.  S.  sena-
tor in  place  of  David  C.  Broderick,  serving  from  5
Dec,  1859,  till  5  March,  1860.


116


HAUPT


HAVEMEYER


HAUPT,  Herman,  engineer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 26  March,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1835,  and  entered  the
2d  infantry,  but  resigned  on  30  Sept.  following.
and  was  assistant  engineer  on  the  public  works  of
Pennsylvania  until  1839.  He  was  appointed  in
1844  professor  of  civil  engineering  and  mathemat-
ics in  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  and  filled
that  chair  until  1847,  when  he  became  principal
engineer  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Columbia  rail-
road, of  which  he  was  made  superintendent  in
1849.  From  1856  till  June,  1861,  he  was  chief  en-
gineer of  the  Hoosac  tunnel  in  Massachusetts.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  aide  to  Gen.  Irwin
McDowell,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  chief  of
the  bureau  of  U.  S.  military  railways,  in  charge  of
construction  and  operation.  In  September,  1862,
he  declined  the  appointment  of  brigadier-general
of  volunteers.  In  1875  he  acted  as  general  mana-
ger of  the  Piedmont  air-line  railway  from  Rich-
mond, Va.,  to  Atlanta,  Ga.  Since  1875  he  has
been  chief  engineer  of  the  Tide- water  pipe  line
company,  and  he  has  demonstrated  the  feasibility
of  transporting  oil  in  pipes  for  long  distances.
He  was  also  for  several  years  general  manager  of
the  Northern  Pacific  railroad.  Col.  Haupt  in-
vented a  drilling-engine,  which  took  the  highest
prize  of  the  Royal  polytechnic  society  of  Great
Britain.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Hints  on  Bridge-
Building  "  (1840) ;  "  General  Theory  of  Bridge-Con-
struction "  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  Plan  for  Improve-
ment of  the  Ohio  River"  (1855);  and  "Military
Bridges"  (New  York,  1864).  —  His  son,  Lewis
Muhlenberg,  engineer,  b.  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  21
March,  1844,  was  educated  at  the  Lawrence  scien-
tific school  of  Harvard,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1867.  He
was  lieutenant  of  engineers  in  the  lake  surveys  in
1868,  and  in  1869  engineer  officer  of  the  5th  mili-
tary district,  Texas.  He  resigned  in  August  of
that  year,  and  was  appointed  engineer  of  Fair-
mount  park,  Philadelphia.  In  April,  1872,  he  be-
came assistant  examiner  in  the  U.  S.  patent-office,
and  in  September  of  that  year  he  was  chosen  as-
sistant professor  of  civil  and  mechanical  engineer-
ing in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  soon
thereafter  professor  of  civil  engineering,  which
chair  he  still  (1887)  fills.  Prof.  Haupt,  in  April,
1886,  patented  an  automatic  system  for  improv-
ing rivers  and  harbors,  and  of  maintaining  chan-
nels by  an  adjustable  deflecting  shield,  suspended
by  buoys,  floats,  or  barges.  He  is  editor  of  the
"  American  Engineering  Register,"  and  has  pub-
lished "Engineering  Specifications  and  Con-
tracts" (Philadelphia,  1878);  "Working  Draw-
ings, and  How  to  Make  and  Use  Them "  (Phila-
delphia, 1881) ;  and  "  The  Topographer— his  Meth-
ods and  Instruments  "  (Philadelphia,  1884).

HAUPT,  Paul,  educator,  b.  in  Gorlitz,  Germany,
25  Nov.,  1858.  He  was  educated  at  the  Gorlitz
gymnasium,  at  the  University  of  Berlin,  and  that
of  Leipsic,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1878.  He
was  private  tutor  at  the  University  of  Gottingen  in
1880,  professor  of  Assyriology  there  in  1883,  and
became  professor  of  the  Semitic  languages  in
Johns  Hopkins  university,  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  the
latter  year.  He  introduced  the  principle  of  the
neo-grammarians  into  Semitic  philology,  and  dis-
covered the  Sumerian  dialect  in  1880.  He  is  an
associate  editor  of  "  Hebraer,"  and  author  of  "  Die
sumerischen  Familiengesetze  "  (Leipsic,  1879); "  Der
keilinschriftliche  Sintfluthbericht "  (1881);  "  Akka-
disehe  und  sumerische  Keilschrifttexte"  (1881-'2);
"  Die  akkadische  Sprache "  (Berlin,  1883) ;  and
*•  Das  babylonische  Nimrodepos  "  (Leipsic,  1884).


HAVELAND,  Laura  Smith,  philanthropist,
b.  in  Ketley,  Leeds  co.,  Canada,  20  Dec,  1808.  At
the  age  of  thirteen  she  was  received  as  a  birth-
right member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  later
was  married  to  Charles  Haveland,  Jr.  A  few  years
afterward  she  united  with  the  Wesleyan  Meth-
odist church.  She  has  founded  the  River  Raisin
institute  for  manual  labor  at  Adrian,  Mich.,  and
in  1869  established  the  Michigan  orphan  asylum.
During  the  civil  war  she  was  unwearied  in  her
efforts  to  aid  the  suffering  in  camps  and  hospitals.

HAVEMEYER,  William  Frederick  (haiv-
my-er),  manufacturer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  12  Feb.,
1804;  d.  there,  30  Nov.,  1874.  His  parents  were
German,  and  immigrated  to  this  country  in  the
latter  part  of  the  last  century.  The  son  received
an  excellent  education  in  the  best  schools  of  the
city,  and  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1823.  He
entered  the  sugar-refinery  of  his  father,  acquired  a
thorough  knowledge  of  the  business,  and  in  1828
succeeded  to  it,  having  his  cousin  as  a  partner.  In
1842  he  nominally  retired  from  business  with  a
handsome  fortune,  but  retained  an  interest  as  silent
partner  for  some  years.  From  an  early  age  he  took
a  warm  interest  in  politics  and  public  affairs.  He
was  a  Democrat  of  the  most  uncompromising  kind.
His  admiration  and  support  of  President  Jackson
were  followed  by  friendly  relations  with  President
Van  Buren,  and  correspondence  passed  between
the  two  men  in  which  Mr.  Havemeyer  vehemently
urged  the  latter  to  be  firm  in  spite  of  all  popular
outcry,  and  to  imitate  the  example  of  the  hero  of
New  Orleans.  While  still  a  young  man  he  became
a  director  of  the  Merchants'  exchange  bank,  and
predicted  the  collapse  of  the  U.  S.  bank  years  be-
fore that  event  occurred,  and  at  a  time  when  the
utterance  of  such  a  prophecy  was  considered
proof  positive  that  his  mind  was  diseased.  In
1851  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  Bank  of  North
America,  and  held  the  office  for  ten  years,  tiding
that  institution  over  the  crisis  of  1857.  In  1844
he  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Polk  and  Dal-
las ticket.  In  1845  he  was  elected  mayor  of  New
York  by  a  large  majority,  and  re-elected  in  1848.
His  administration  was  notable  for  the  scrupulous
care  that  he  bestowed  on  all  the  business  details  of
his  office,  the  rigid  way  in  which  he  scrutinized
warrants  to  which  his  signature  was  required,  and
his  earnest  efforts  for  honesty  and  economy  in
public  expenditure.  In  1846  Mayor  Havemeyer,
together  with  Robert  B.  Minturn  and  Gulian  C.
Verplanck,  strove  to  abolish  the  abuses  practised
on  immigrants,  and  as  a  result  of  their  efforts  the
board  of  emigration  commissioners  was  established,
of  which  Mr.  Havemeyer  was  the  first  president.
The  present  police  system  of  the  city  was  also
founded  during  his  mayoralty,  night-watchmen
before  that  time  having  been  the  only  guardians  of
the  peace.  In  1859  he  was  again  a  candidate  for
mayor,  but  was  defeated  by  Fernando  Wrood.
During  the  war  he  was  thoroughly  loyal  to  the
government,  and  urged  the  abolition  of  slavery  as
a  war  measure.  Though  immersed  in  business,  to
which  he  had  returned,  he  found  time  during  the
few  years  after  the  war  to  protest  most  earnestly
against  the  corruption  and  frauds  that  were  rife  in
the  city.  When  the  reform  movement  began  in
earnest  in  1871,  Mr.  Havemeyer  was  elected  vice-
president  of  the  committee  of  seventy,  and  proved
one  of  the  most  active  members  of  that  body.  He
assisted  in  organizing  reform  associations  in  all  the
assembly  districts  of  the  city,  and  his  long  political
experience  made  him  especially  valuable  in  the
canvass  that  resulted  in  the  overthrow  of  the
Tweed ring. He  was  chosen  chairman  of the


HAVEN


HAVEN


117


memorable  mass  reform  meeting  held  at  Cooper
institute,  4  Sept.,  1871,  and  his  speech  on  that  oc-
casion was  one  of  the  most  fearless  and  outspoken
of  any  in  its  denunciation  of  the  official  thieves.
The  meeting  was  composed  of  business  and  profes-
sional men  who  usually  took  no  part  in  politics.
In  the  autumn  of  1872  he  was  nominated  for
mayor  as  representing  the  reform  movement,  and
elected  by  a  small  majority.  He  assumed  office,  1
Jan.,  1873,  and  at  his  death  had  a  month  more  to
serve.  His  third  term  was  not  successful.  The
greater  part  of  his  time  was  spent  in  unseemly
wrangles  with  the  aldermen  and  other  city  officers ;
several  of  his  appointments  were  injudicious,  and
an  application  was  made  to  the  governor  for  his
removal  from  office,  a  step  which  the  executive  de-
clined to  take.  Still,  there  was  no  doubt  of  his
integrity. — His  son,  Henry,  b.  in  New  York  city,
25  July,  1838;  d.  near  Babylon,  L.  L,  2  June,
1886,  was  the  fourth  of  six  sons.  He  became  a
member  of  the  family  sugar-refining  firm,  which
controlled  more  than  half  the  entire  sugar  interest
of  the  country.  He  was  also  engaged  in  the  to-
bacco commerce.  Although  only  forty-eight  years
of  age  at  the  time  of  his  death,  Mr.  Havemeyer
had  long  been  a  prominent  Democrat  and  inti-
mately associated  with  Samuel  J.  Tilden,  and  was
appointed  with  him  as  a  New  York  commissioner
to  the  Centennial  exhibition.  He  was  at  one  time
president  of  the  Long  Island  railway,  and  built  the
iron  pier  at  Rockaway.  He  was  exceedingly  popu-
lar, and  often  gave  eccentric  banquets  at  Oak
island,  off  the  Long  Island  coast,  which  he  had

{>urchased  for  that  special  purpose. Most  of  the
atter  years  of  his  life  were  spent  abroad.

HAVEN,  Alice  Bradley,  author,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y,  13  Sept.,  1828;  d.  in  Mamaroneck,  N.  Y.,  23
Aug.,  1863.  Her  maiden  name  was  Emily  Brad-
ley, and  while
attending  school
she  sent,  under
the  pen-name  of
"  Alice  G.  Lee,"
many  sketches  to
the  Philadelphia
"  Saturday  Ga-
zette." In  1846
she  married  its
editor,  Joseph  C.
Neal,  and  at  his
request  assumed
and  retained  the
name  of  Alice,
and  wrote  under
the  pen-name  of
"Cousin  Alice."  On  her  husband's  death  in  1847
she  took  editorial  charge  of  the  "  Gazette,"  and
conducted  it  for  several  years,  contributing  at  the
same  time  poems,  sketches,  and  tales  to  other  maga-
zines. In  1853  she  married  Samuel  L.  Haven.  Her
books  include  "The  Gossips  of  Rivertown,  with
Sketches  in  Prose  and  Verse "  (1850) ;  "  Helen
Morton  " ;  "  Pictures  from  the  Bible  " ;  "  No  Such
Word  as  Fail  " ;  "  Patient  Waiting  no  Loss " ;
"  Contentment  Better  than  Wealth  " ;  "  All's  not
Gold  that  Glitters " ;  "  Out  of  Debt,  Out  of  Dan-

fer  " ;  '•  The  Coopers  "  ;  and  "  The  Good  Report :
lessons  for  Lent "  (New  York,  1867).  Parts  of  her
private  diary  were  published  under  the  title  of
"  Cousin  Alice :  a  Memoir  of  Alice  B.  Haven "
(New  York,  1865).

HAYEN,  Erastus  Otis,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Oregon,
in  August,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan
university  in  1842,  and  afterward  had  charge  of


^z^L-  <?3.  -"4^-=


a  private  academy  at  Sudbury,  Mass.,  at  the  same
time  pursuing  a  course  of  theological  and  general
study.  He  became  principal  of  Amenia  semi-
nar}-, N.  Y.,  in  1846,  and  in  1848  entered  the  Meth-
odist ministry  in  the  New  York  conference.  Five
years  later  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  Latin
in  Michigan  university,  which  he  exchanged  the
next  year  for  the  chair  of  English  language,  lit-
erature, and  history.  He  resigned  in  1856,  and
returned  to  Boston,  where  he  was  editor  of  "  Zion's
Herald  "  for  seven  years,  during  which  period  he
served  two  terms  in  the  state  senate,  and  a  part  of
the  time  was  an  overseer  of  Harvard  university.  In
1863  he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  Michigan
university,  which  place  he  occupied  for  six  years.
He  then  became  president  of  Northwestern  uni-
versity, Evanston,  111.,  and  in  1872  was  chosen
secretary  of  the  board  of  education  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  which  place  he  resigned  in  1874
to  become  chancellor  of  Syracuse  university,  N.  Y.
In  May,  1880,  he  was  elected  and  ordained  a  bishop.
Bishop  Haven  was  a  man  of  great  versatility  of
talent.  As  a  preacher  he  was  able  and  earnest —
didactic  and  hortatory  rather  than  oratorical ;  he
was  judicious  and  successful  as  an  administrator,
but  wearied  among  the  details  of  preceptoral  du-
ties. His  religious  convictions  were  positive  and
controlling  in  all  his  life,  and  while  ardently  de-
voted to  his  own  denomination,  he  was  also  broadly
and  generously  catholic  toward  all  other  Christian
bodies.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by  Union
college  in  1854,  and  a  few  years  later  that  of  LL.D.
by  Ohio  Wesleyan  university.  He  served  five
times  in  the  general  conference,  and  in  1879  visited
Great  Britain  as  delegate  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church  to  the  parent  Wesleyan  body.  He
wrote  largely  for  the  periodical  press,  and  also  pub-
lished "  American  Progress  " ;  "  The  Young  Man
Advised,"  made  up  from  discourses  delivered  in
the  chapel  of  Michigan  university  (New  York,
1855) :  '•  Pillars  of  Truth,"  a  work  on  the  evidences
of  Christianitv  (1866) ;  and  a  treatise  on  "  Rhetoric."
HAYEN,  Gilbert,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Maiden,
Mass*.,  19  Sept.,  1821 ;  d.  there,  30  Jan.,  1880.  He
united  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  his
nineteenth  year,  became  a  student  in  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, and  was  graduated  in  1846.  Soon  after-
ward he  was  employed  as  a  teacher  in  Amenia
seminary,  N.  Y.,  and  while  there  was  licensed  to
preach.  Two  years  later  he  was  chosen  principal  of
the  institution  as  successor  to  his  kinsman,  Rev.
E.  0.  Haven.  In  1851  he  became  a  member  of  the
New  England  conference,  and  entered  upon  the
regular  work  of  the  ministry,  and  for  the  next  nine
years  served  as  pastor  of  churches  in  Massachusetts.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  for  part
of  the  year  1861  chaplain  of  one  of  the  Massachu-
setts regiments,  but  the  state  of  his  health  soon
compelled  him  to  resign.  In  1862  he  travelled  in
western  Europe,  Palestine,  Egypt,  and  Greece.
After  his  return,  having  partially  recovered  his
health,  he  resumed  his  ministerial  work  in  Boston,
and  in  1867  was  chosen  to  the  editorship  of  "  Zion's
Herald,"  a  weekly  paper.  In  May,  1872,  at  the
general  conference  held  in  Brooklyn,  he  was  elected
and  ordained  bishop.  He  had  his  official  residence
at  Atlanta,  Ga.,  but  travelled  through  all  parts  of
the  country  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  He
visited  Mexico  in  1873  and  1876,  and  Liberia
in  1877,  superintending  and  setting  in  order
the  missions  in  those  countries.  He  was  also
actively  interested  in  the  educational  work  of  his
church,  especially  among  the  freedmen  of  the
south,  and  Clark  university,  at  Atlanta,  was  largely
indebted  for  its  prosperity  to  his  wise  counsels  and


118


HAVEN


H  AVI  LAND


liberal  gifts.  Bishop  Haven  was  an  able  writer,  a
zealous  reformer,  an  earnest  preacher,  and  an  inde-
fatigable laborer.  He  was  a  delegate  in  the  gen-
eral conference  of  1868,  and  in  that  of  1872.  He
steadfastly  declined  all  honorary  collegiate  de-
grees. Besides  his  abundant  writings  in  news-
papers, magazines,  and  reviews,  he  published  "  The
Pilgrim's  Wallet,  or  Sketches  of  Travel  in  Eng-
land, France,  and  Germany " ;  "  National  Ser-
mons "  ;  "  Life  of  Father  Taylor,  the  Sailor
Preacher  "  (New  York,  1871) ;  and  "  Our  Next-Door
Neighbor,  or  a  Winter  in  Mexico  "  (1875).

HAVEN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dennis,
Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  23  May,
1874.  His  parents  removed  to  Amherst,  Mass.,
and  he  was  graduated  at  the  college  in  1835.  For
two  years  he  taught  in  the  New  York  deaf  and
dumb  institution,  studying  at  the  same  time  in
Union  theological  seminary.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Andover  seminary  in  1839,  and  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  Congregational  church  in  Ashland,
Mass.,  where  he  remained  until  1846.  He  then  ac-
cepted a  call  to  the  Harvard  church,  Brookline,
Mass.,  and  held  this  charge  until  1850,  editing  at
the  same  time  "  The  Congregationalist."  He  was
professor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy  in  Am-
herst from  1850  till  1858,  and  of  systematic  the-
ology in  the  Chicago  theological  seminary  from
1858  till  1870,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of
failing  health.  He  then  visited  Germany,  Pales-
tine, and  Egypt,  after  which  he  devoted  himself
to  preaching  and  lecturing  upon  ancient  and  mod-
ern philosophy  and  the  English  classics.  In  1873
he  became  acting  professor  of  mental  and  moral
philosophy  in  the  Chicago  university,  which  office
he  held  until  his  death.  He  was  a  close  student,
remarkable  for  the  extent  and  thoroughness  of  his
scholarship.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Marietta  in  1859  and  Amherst  in  1862,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  from  Kenyon  in  the  latter  year.  He
published  "Mental  Philosophy"  (Boston,  1857);
"  Moral  Philosophy  "  (1859) ;  "  Studies  in  Philoso-
phy and  Theology  "  (Andover,  1869) ;  and  a  work
on  "Systematic  Divinity,"  which  was  completed
a  few  weeks  before  his  death  (Boston,  1875).

HAVEN,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Framing-
ham,  Mass.,  15  Aug.,  1727;  d.  3  March,  1806.  He
was  a  descendant  of  Richard  Haven,  who  settled
in  Lynn,  Mass.,  in  1636.  Samuel  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1749,  and  after  studying  theology
with  Rev.  Ebenezer  Parkman,  of  Westborough,
was  ordained  in  1752  pastor  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional church  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  which  charge
he  held  until  1806.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Edinburgh  in  1770,  and  from  Dart-
mouth in  1773.  Among  his  printed  sermons  are
on  the  "  Death  of  George  II. "  (1761)  ;  on  the
"Restoration  of  Peace"  (1763);  "The  Dudleian
Lecture  "  (Cambridge,  1798) ;  and  a  "  Discourse  "
on  the  ordination  of  his  colleague,  Rev.  Timothy
Alden  (1800). — His  grandson,  Nathaniel  Apple-
ton,  lawyer  and  author,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
14  Jan.,  1790;  d.  there,  3  June,  1826,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1807,  studied  law,  and  settled
in  Portsmouth.  From  1821  till  1825  he  edited  the
"  Portsmouth  Journal."  He  delivered  an  oration
at  Plymouth,  4  July,  1814,  a  Phi  Beta  Kappa  ora-
tion at  Dartmouth  in  1816,  and  one  at  Plymouth  at
the  second  centennial  celebration  of  the  landing  of
the  first  settlers.  He  also  wrote  several  poems  and
contributed  to  the  "  North  American  Review."  A
volume  of  his  writings  was  published,  with  a  me-
moir, by  George  Ticknor  (1827). — Another  grand-
son, Samuel  Forster,  archaeologist,  b.  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  28  May,  1806; d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  5


Sept.,  1881,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1826.
He  studied  law  at  the  Harvard  law-school,  and
practised  his  profession  in  Dedham  and  in  Lowell.
For  many  years  he  served  as  librarian  of  the
American  antiquarian  society,  Worcester,  Mass.,  in
whose  "  proceedings  "  he  published  many  reports
and  papers  from  1850  till  1881.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  several  addresses,  including  a  "  Centennial
Address,"  delivered  at  Dedham,  21  Sept.,  1836;
"  Records  of  the  Company  of  the  Massachusetts
Bay  to  the  Embarkation  of  Winthrop  and  his  As-
sociates for  New  England  "  (1850) ;  "  Remarks  on
the  Popham  Celebration  "  (1865) ;  and  "  History  of
Grants  under  the  Great  Council  for  New  England  "
(1869).  He  published  "  Archaeology  of  the  United
States,"  printed  by  the  Smithsonian  institution
(Washington,  1855),  and  a  new  edition  of  Thomas's
"  History  of  Printing  in  America  "  (Albany,  1874).

HAVEN,  Solomon  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Che-
nango county,  N.  Y.,  27  Nov.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  24  Dec,  1861.  His  early  life  was  spent  in
working  on  his  father's  farm.  He  obtained  a  good
common -school  education,  studied  the  classics
under  a  private  tutor,  and  began  a  course  in  medi-
cine. This  was  soon  abandoned  for  the  law,  and  at
the  age  of  eighteen  years  he  entered  the  office  of
Gov.  John  Young,  of  Geneseo,  teaching  during  the
winter  months  to  gain  the  necessary  funds.  In
1835  Mr.  Haven  removed  to  Buffalo,  and  completed
his  studies  in  the  office  of  Fillmore  and  Hall.  In
May  of  the  same  year  he  was  admitted  to  practice,
and  in  January,  1836,  became  a  partner  with  his
preceptors  in  the  firm  of  Fillmore,  Hall  and  Haven.
This  relation  existed  several  years,  and  until  each
member  of  the  firm  had  attained  national  reputa-
tion. Mr.  Haven  filled  the  offices  of  commissioner
of  deeds,  district  attorney  of  Erie  county,  and
mayor  of  Buffalo.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
Whig,  and  served  three  terms,  in  1851-'7,  exerting
extended  influence  at  an  important  and  critical
period  of  the  history  of  the  country.

HAVENS,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mason
county,  Ky.,  25  Dec,  1763 ;  d.  in  Indiana  in  No-
vember, 1864.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1781,
and  in  1820  joined  the  itinerant  ministry  in  the
Ohio  conference.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
Methodism  in  the  northwest,  especially  in  Indiana,
where  the  last  forty  years  of  his  life  were  spent.

HAVESTAD,  Bernhard,  German  missionary,
b.  in  Cologne  in  1715  ;  d.  in  Miinster  in  1778.  He
became  a  member  of  the  Jesuit  order,  and  in  1748
was  ordered  as  a  missionary  to  Chili.  He  remained
twenty  years  in  the  missions  of  Concepcion,  and  ex-
plored the  country  in  parts  that  were  until  then  en-
tirely unknown,  pushing  as  far  as  lat.  49°  S.,  and
visiting  the  unsubdued  tribes  of  Araucanians,
Guaycurus,  Huilliches,  and  Pehuenches.  As  he
spoke  fluently  the  Chilidugu,  a  dialect  used  by  the
traders  with  the  Indian  tribes,  he  had  an  opportu-
nity to  gather  valuable  information  about  the  cus-
toms, statistics,  and  natural  history  of  the  abo-
rigines. When  the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits  was
decreed  on  29  June,  1768,  Havestad  was  arrested
and  returned  to  Germany,  where  he  published
"Chilidugu,  sive  res  Chilenses"  (2  vols.,  Miinster,
1777). This  work  is  now  very  rare.

HAVILAND,  John,  architect,  b.  near  Taunton,
England,  15  Dec,  1792;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28
March,  1852.  After  studying  his  profession  with
James  Elmes,  he  went  to  Russia  in  1815  to  enter
the  Imperial  corps  of  engineers,  but  came  to  the
United  States  in  the  following  year.  He  settled  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  became  associated  with
Hugh  Bridgport  in  the  management  of  an  architec-
tural drawing-school. Among  the  buildings  that


HAVILAND


HAWKINS


119


he  planned  are  the  hall  of  justice,  New  York ;  the
U.  S.  naval  hospital,  Norfolk,  Va. ;  the  deaf  and
dumb  asylum,  Philadelphia;  the  state  insane
asylum,  Harrisburg ;  the  U.  S.  mint  at  Philadel-
phia, and  the  eastern  penitentiary  in  that  city.
The  latter  increased  his  reputation  greatly  as  a
designer  of  prison-buildings,  and  he  afterward
planned  the  state  penitentiaries  of  New  Jersey,
Missouri,  and  Rhode  Island.  He  introduced  the
plan  of  building  the  cells  in  lines  radiating  from
a  common  centre.  He  published,  with  Hugh  Bridg-
port,  "  Builders'  Assistant,  for  the  Use  of  Carpen-
ters and  Others  "  (3  vols.,  Baltimore,  1818).

HAVILAND,  Thomas  Heath,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Charlottetown,  13  Nov.,  1822.  He  was
educated  at  Brussels,  Belgium,  studied  law,  and
was  called  to  the  bar  of  Prince  Edward  Island  in
1846.  He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council
of  the  island  from  April,  1859,  till  November,  1862,
for  a  short  period  in  1865,  in  1866-'7,  and  from
September,  1870,  till  April,  1872,  having  been  co-
lonial secretary  during  those  periods,  except  in
1865,  when  he  was  solicitor-general.  After  1865
he  either  held  office  or  led  the  opposition  in  the
provincial  parliament,  until  he  was  called  to  the
senate,  18  Oct.,  1873.  He  has  represented  George-
town in  the  provincial  assembly  since  1846,  was
a  delegate  to  the  Quebec  union  conference  in  1864,
and  to  Ottawa  in  May,  1873,  to  arrange  the  final
terms  upon  which  the  island  was  admitted  into
the  Dominion.  On  14  July,  1879,  he  was  appointed
lieutenant  -  governor  of  Prince  Edward  Island,
which  office  he  retained  until  1  Aug.,  1884.

HAVILAND,  William,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Ireland  in  1718;  d.  16  Sept.,  1784.  He  was  aide  to
Gen.  Blakeney  in  the  rebellion  of  1745,  and  in
1757  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  27th  regiment
under  Loudon  in  this  country.  He  served  under
Abercrombie  at  Ticonderoga  in  1758,  under  Am-
herst in  1759-'60,  and  as  brigadier-general  com-
manded the  expedition  that  reduced  Isle  Aux  Noix,
St.  Johns,  and  Chambly,  entering  Montreal  with
Amherst  in  September,  1760.  Owing  to  his  me-
chanical genius,  he  was  enabled  to  invent  means
for  passing  the  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  and
contributed  greatly  to  the  success  of  the  English
army.  He  was  senior  brigadier-general  and  sec-
ond in  command  at  the  reduction  of  Martinique  in
February,  1762,  and  commanded  the  4th  brigade  at
the  siege  of  Havana.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-
general  in  1772,  and  general,  19  Feb.,  1783.

HAWES,  Joel,  elergvman,  b.  in  Medwav,  Mass.,
22  Dec,  1789 ;  d.  in  Gilead,  Conn.,  5  June,  1867.
He  was  of  humble  parentage,  and  had  few  oppor-
tunities for  early  education.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1813,  studied  theology  at  Andover,  and
on  4  March,  1818,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st
Congregational  church  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  of  which
he  was  sole  pastor  until  1860.  senior  pastor  until
1864,  and  pastor  emeritus  until  his  death.  In  1844
he  visited  Europe  and  the  east,  spending  several
months  in  Asia  Minor  and  Turkey,  where  his
daughter  was  a  missionary.  He  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  religious  press  and  periodicals,
and  published  "Lectures  to  Young  Men,"  which
had  a  large  circulation  in  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain  (Hartford,  1828);  "Tribute  to  the
Memory  of  the  Pilgrims"  (1830);  "Memoir  of
Normand  Smith  "  (1839) :  "  Character  Everything
to  the  Young"  (1843);  "The  Religion  of  the  East"
(1845) ;  "  Looking-Glass  for  the  Ladies,  or  the  For-
mation and  Excellence  of  Female  Character"
(1845);  "Washington  and  Jay"  (1850);  and  "An
Offering  to  Home  Missionaries,"  discourses  on  home
missions,  which  he  published  at  his  own  expense


for  distribution  to  the  missionaries  of  the  Ameri-
can home  missionary  society  (1865.)

HAWES,  Richard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Caroline
county,  Va.,  6  Feb.,  1797;  d.  in  Bourbon  county,
Ky.,  25  May,  1877.  He  emigrated  to  Kentucky  in
1810.  After  being  educated  at  Transylvania  uni-
versity he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  his  practice  in  Winchester,  Kv.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1828,  1829,  and  1836,
and  in  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Whig,  serving  until  1841.  He  subsequently  be-
came an  ardent  Democrat,  advocated  the  southern
cause  during  the  civil  war,  and  left  Kentucky  with
Breckinridge  and  others  in  1861.  On  the  death  of
George  W.  Johnson,  at  Shiloh,  he  was  elected  to
succeed  him  in  the  nominal  office  of  "  provision-
al "  or  Confederate  governor  of  Kentucky.  When
Bragg  entered  the  state,  Hawes  went  with  him  to
Frankfort,  and  was  installed  governor.  4  Oct.,  1862,
but  was  compelled  to  retire  immediately,  in  conse-
quence of  the  advance  of  a  division  of  Buell's  army.
After  the -close  of  the  war  he  returned  to  Paris,
Ky.,  and  in  1866  was  appointed  county  judge,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.

HAWES,  William  Post,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  4  Feb.,  1803;  d.  in  1842.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1821,  studied  law  with
John  Anthon,  and  practised  with  success  in  his
native  city.  He  was  the  author  of  many  essays,
and  also  wrote  upon  political  topics.  A  collection
of  his  writings  was  published  shortly  after  his
death,  entitled  "Sporting  Scenes  and  Sundry
Sketches,  being  the  Miscellaneous  Writings  of  J.
Cvpress,  Jr.."  edited,  with  a  memoir,  bv  Henry
William  Herbert  (1842).

HAWKINS,  Benjamin  Waterhouse,  educa-
tor, b.  in  London.  England,  8  Feb.,  1807.  He
was  educated  at  St.  Aloysius  college,  and  also
studied  art  under  the  sculptor  William  Behnes.
After  1827  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of
natural  history,  and  in  1852  included  the  subject
of  geology.  During  1842-'7  he  was  engaged  in
making  studies  from  living  animals  in  Knowsley
park  for  the  Earl  of  Derby.  Mr.  Hawkins  was
assistant  superintendent  of  the  World's  fair  in
London  in  1851.  In  1852  he  was  appointed  by  the
Crystal  palace  company  to  restore  the  external
forms  of  the  extinct  animals  to  their  natural
gigantic  size,  and  then  devoted  three  and  a  half
years  to  the  construction  of  the  thirty-three  life-
size  models  which  were  placed  in  the  Crystal
palace  park,  many  of  which  were  of  colossal  pro-
portions. In  the  interior  of  his  model  of  the
Iguanodon  he  carried  out,  on  30  Dec,  1853,  his  idea
of  giving  a  dinner  to  about  twenty  literary  and  sci-
entific gentlemen,  including  Sir  Richard  Owen  and
Prof.  Edward  Forbes.  He  came  to  New  York  in
1868,  and  lectured  on  popular  science  in  the  hall  of
the  Cooper  union.  Later  he  was  engaged  to  make
models  of  extinct  animals  for  the  Central  park
museum,  and  for  a  time  was  occupied  in  making
studies  for  Princeton  college.  He  was  elected  a
fellow  of  the  Linnean  society  in  1847,  of  the  Geo-
logical society  in  1854,  and  a  member  of  the  Society
of  arts  in  1846.  He  has  published  "  Popular  Com-
parative Anatomy"  (London,  1840):  "Elements
of  Form "  (1842) ;  "  Comparative  View  of  the
Human  and  Animal  Frame "  (1860) ;  "  Atlas  of
Elementary  Anatomy,  with  Prof.  Thomas  H.  Hux-
ley" (1865);  "Artistic  Anatomy  of  Cattle  and
Sheep  "  (3d  ed.,  1873) :  and  "  Artistic  Anatomy  of
the  Horse  "  (5th  ed.,  1874).

HAWKINS,  Dexter  Arnold,  lawyer,  b.  in
Camden,  Me.,  23  June,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
24  July,  1886. He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in


120


HAWKINS


HAWKINS


1848,  and  for  the  next  four  years  was  lecturer  on
public  instruction  before  the  teachers'  institutes
of  Maine.  In  1849  he  was  principal  of  Topsham
academy.  After  studying  law  at  Harvard,  and  at
the  Nicole  des  droits  at  Paris,  France,  he  travelled
for  two  years,  examining  European  methods  of  in-
struction, under  a  commission  from  the  governor
of  Maine.  He  began  the  practice  of  law  in  1854
in  New  York  city,  where  he  lived  during  the  re-
mainder of  his  life,  and  was  a  frequent  speaker  and
writer  in  favor  of  free  education,  protection,  hard
money,  bi-metallism,  and  political  and  municipal
reform.  The  national  bureau  of  education  was  es-
tablished largely  through  his  efforts.  His  reports
on  "Sectarian  Appropriations  of  Public  Moneys
and  Property,"  and  on  the  "  Duty  of  the  State  to
protect  the  Free  Common  Schools  by  Organic
Law"  (1869  and  1871),  caused  the  repeal  of  obnox-
ious statutes  in  New  York  and  the  adoption  of  a
constitutional  amendment  forbidding  such  legisla-
tion. In  1875  he  delivered  an  address  before  the
Lowell  institute  on  "  The  Educational  Problem  in
the  Cotton  States."  His  report  on  the  "  Extrava-
gance of  the  Tammany  Ring"  (1871)  led  to  the  ex-
posure of  its  fraudulent  accounts  and  to  its  down-
fall. His  pamphlet  on  the  "  Donations  of  Public
Property  to  Private  Corporations,  and  the  Illegal
Exemption  of  the  Same  from  Taxation  "  (New
York,  1873),  brought  about  an  amendment  to  the
constitution  of  New  York  prohibiting  such  dona-
tions. Among  his  other  publications  are  "  Tradi-
tions of  Overlook  Mountain  "  (1873) ;  "  The  Roman
Catholic  Church  in  New  York  City  and  the  Public
Land  and  Public  Money"  (1880);  "Free -Trade
and  Protection  "  (1883) ;  "  The  Redemption  of  the
Trade  Dollar  "(1886);  and  "  The  Silver  Problem,"
an  address  that  was  delivered  at  the  request  of  the
committee  on  coinage,  etc.,  of  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives (1886). — His  cousin,  Rush  Christopher,
soldier,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Vt.,  14  Sept.,  1831,  left  home  at
an  early  age  and  enlisted  in  the  2d  U.  S.  dragoons,
but  after  a  brief  term  of  service  in  Mexico  was
dischai'ged  for  disability  contracted  in  the  field.
He  settled  in  New  York  in  1851,  studied  law,  and
in  1856  began  the  practice  of  his  profession.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  the  9th
regiment  of  New  York  volunteers  and  the  Haw-
kins zouaves,  of  which  he  was  elected  colonel.  He
commanded  a  successful  expedition  against  Wins-
ton, N.  C,  on  16  Feb.,  and  on  19  April  his  brigade
took  part  in  the  action  at  South  Mills,  where  he
was  wounded.  He  served  with  his  regiment  in
Virginia  and  elsewhere,  and  with  it  was  mustered
out  of  the  service  on  30  May,  1863.  Since  the  war
he  has  been  active  in  movements  for  political  re-
form. His  collection  of  books  from  the  first  15th
century  presses  was  the  most  comprehensive  in  the
country,  and  was  sold  at  auction  in  New  York  in
1887.  Col.  Hawkins  has  contributed  to  periodical
literature  and  has  published  "  The  First  Books  and
Printers  of  the  15th  Century  "  (New  York,  1884).

HAWKINS,  Ernest,  author,  b.  in  England
about  1802.  He  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1824,
took  priest's  orders  in  1830,  and  in  1845  became
prebend  of  St.  Paul's,  London,  and  secretary  to
the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel.  Since
1865  he  has  been  a  canon  of  Westminster  Abbey.
He  has  published  "  Notices  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land's Missions  to  the  North  American  Colonies
Previous  to  the  Independence  of  the  United
States"  (London,  1845).  This  is  a  volume  of  great
historical  interest,  composed  of  the  manuscript
letters,  reports,  etc.,  of  the  missionaries  in  New
York,  New  England,  and  Canada,  to  the  Society  for
the  propagation  of  the  gospel. Among  his  other


K. rc<*W£ie<


works  are  "  Annals  of  the  Colonial  Church  "  (1847),
and  "  Annals  of  the  Diocese  of  Quebec"  (1849).

HAWKINS,  Sir  John,  navigator,  b.  in  Plym-
outh, England,  in  1532;  d.  at  sea,  21  Nov.,  1595.
His  father,  William,  began  the  African  slave-trade
in  which  England  was  engaged  for  nearly  three
hundred  years.  John  was  knighted  by  Queen
Elizabeth  for  his  success  in  the  same  enterprise.
In  January,  1565,  he  crossed  with  a  cargo  of  cap-
tives from  Guinea  to  the  West  Indies,  arrived
at  the-  island  of
Dominica,  and
traded  along  the
Spanish  coasts
and  Florida  un-
til about  the  first
of  June,  when  he
returned  to  Eng-
land. Hawkins  is
the  first  English-
man who  gives
any  detailed  ac-
count of  Florida.
The  struggling
French  colony  of
Landonniere  was
then  in  the  sec-
ond year  of  its
existence.  He
showed  them
great  kindness,
and  left  them  a  vessel  in  which  to  return  to  France.
In  his  narrative  regarding  Florida  he  mentions
the  abundance  of  tobacco,  sorrel,  maize,  and  grapes,
and  ascribes  the  failure  of  the  French  colony  to
their  lack  of  thrift,  as  "  in  such  a  climate  and  soil,
with  marvellous  store  of  deer,  and  divers  other
beasts,  all  men  may  live."  On  his  return  he  was
presented  with  a  coat  of  arms,  on  which  was  graven
the  figure  of  a  savage,  bound  and  captive,  and  to
intimate  that  the  African  slave-trade  was  the
true  crusade  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  the  pil-
grims' scallop-shell  in  gold,  between  two  palmers'
staves.  In  1567  he  embarked  on  a  third  voyage
with  his  kinsman,  Francis  Drake.  They  captured
several  hundred  negroes  in  Guinea,  crossed  again
to  Dominica,  and,  when  the  Spaniards  refused  to
trade  with  them,  stormed  the  town  of  Rio  de  la
Hacha,  and,  notwithstanding  the  prohibition  of
the  government,  exchanged  negroes  with  the  plant-
ers for  jewels  and  produce.  They  then  crossed  the
Gulf  of  Mexico  toward  Florida,  were  forced  to  put
into  San  Juan  de  Ulua  for  supplies,  and  the  next
day  engaged  in  a  naval  action  with  the  Spanish,
in  which  Hawkins  lost  his  whole  fleet  except  two
small  ships.  Returning  to  England,  he  became
treasurer  of  the  navy,  and  in  1588  was  vice-admi-
ral of  the  squadron  that  was  sent  against  the  Span-
ish armada.  In  1595  Drake  prevailed  upon  Eliza-
beth to  send  him  with  Hawkins  on  another  expe-
dition to  Spanish  America.  They  sailed  from
Plymouth  with  the  intention  of  seizing  Nombre  de
Dios,  but  the  commanders  quarrelled  and  separated.
Porto  Rico  successfully  resisted  the  English,  and
Hawkins  died  at  sea,  overcome  by  his  reverses.
He  was  an  able  seaman,  but  rude,  cunning,  and
avaricious.  He  founded  a  hospital  at  Chatham
for  seamen.  Hawkins  published  "  A  True  Declara-
tion of  the  Troublesome  Voyage  of  Mr.  John  Haw-
kins to  the  Partes  of  Guynea  and  the  West  Indies,
1567-'8  "  (London,  1569).

HAWKINS,  John  Henry  Willis,  reformer,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  23  Oct.,  1799;  d.  in  Parkers-
burg,  Pa.,  26  Aug.,  1858.  He  was  a  confirmed
drunkard,  when  the  efforts  of  his  little  daughter


HAWKINS


HAWKS


121


induced  him  to  reform  in  1840.  From  this  time
until  his  death  he  lectured  with  success  in  the
temperance  cause  in  every  state  in  the  Union  ex-
cept California,  also  contributing  constantly  to  the
temperance  press. — His  son,  William  George,
clergyman,  b.  in  Baltimore,  22  Oct.,  1823,  was
graduated  at  Wesleyan  university  in  1848,  studied
at  the  Protestant  Episcopal  seminary  in  Alexan-
dria, Va.,  in  1848-'51.  and  has  since  held  rector-
ships in  Maryland.  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,
New  York,  and  Nebraska.  He  edited  the  "Na-
tional Freedman  "  in  1863-'6,  has  been  engaged  in
domestic  missions,  and  in  1874  became  chaplain  of
the  inebriate  asylum  at  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  and  in
1885  rector  of  the  English  and  classical  school  at
Beatrice,  Gage  co.,  Neb.  He  has  published  "  Life
of  J.  H.  W.  Hawkins."  his  father  (Boston,  1859) ;
"Lumsford  Lane"  (1863);  "History  of  the  New
York  National  Freedman 's  Association"  (New
York,  1868);  and  has  in  press  (1887)  "Young
America  in  the  Northwest."

HAWKINS,  John  P.,  soldier,  b.  in  Indiana
about  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1852,  assigned  to  the  infantry,
and  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  12  Oct.,  1857.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  brigade  quarter-
master in  the  defences  of  Washington,  D.  0.  He
was  appointed  commissary  of  subsistence  with  the
staff  rank  of  captain,  3  Aug.,  1861,  and  filled  sev-
eral posts  as  chief  and  assistant  commissary  of  sub-
sistence in  southwest  Missouri  and  west  Tennessee,
until  13  April,  1863,  when  he  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  and  from  17  Aug.  of  that
year  till  7  Feb.,  1864,  was  in  command  of  a  brigade
of  colored  troops  in  northeastern  Louisiana.  He
was  then  promoted  to  the  command  of  a  division,
and  stationed  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  from  March.
1864,  till  February,  1865.  He  afterward  took  part
in  the  Mobile  campaign,  and  for  gallant  and  meri-
torious services  at  the  capture  of  that  city  was
brevetted  major.  For  his  services  in  the  war  he
was  successively  given  the  brevets  of  lieutenant-col-
onel, colonel,  brigadier-general,  and  major-general
in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  also  major-general  of  volun-
teers. On  23  June,  1874,  he  was  made  major  and
commissary  of  subsistence,  and  in  1887  was  in  charge
of  the  subsistence  department  at  Omaha,  Neb.

HAWKINS,  Philemon,  statesman,  b.  in  Glou-
cester county,  Va.,  28  Sept.,  1717;  d.  in  Warren
county,  N.  C,  in  1801.  He  served  in  a  cavalry
troop  at  the  battle  of  Alamance,  16  May,  1771,  as
aide  to  Gov.  Tryon,  in  the  same  year  was  a
member  of  the  general  assembly,  and  represented
Bute  and  Granville  counties  for  thirteen  years.
He  raised  the  first  volunteer  company  in  Bute
county  for  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  was  elect-
ed its  colonel  in  1776.  Col.  Hawkins  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  convention  that  ratified  the  National
constitution,  was  the  last  surviving  signer  of  the
constitution  of  North  Carolina,  and  was  frequent-
ly a  member  of  the  executive  council. — His  son,
Benjamin,  statesman,  b.  in  Warren  county,  N.  C,
15  Aug.,  1754 :  d.  in  Hawkinsville,  Ga.,  6  June,
1816,  was  a  student  in  the  senior  class  at  Prince-
ton when  the  Revolution  began,  and  his  proficiency
in  modern  languages,  especially  French,  caused
Gen.  Washington  to  appoint  him  interpreter  be-
tween the  American  and  French  officers  of  his
staff.  Hawkins  served  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth,
and  probably  in  other  engagements,  and  in  1780
was  commissioned  to  procure  ammunition  and
arms  at  home  and  abroad.  He  went  to  the  West
Indies  and  obtained  and  shipped  supplies  in  ves-
sels that  belonged  to  a  merchant  of  New  Berne,
John Wright Stanley. He was  elected by the


legislature  to  congress  in  1782,  in  1785  was  ap-
pointed to  treat  with  the  Cherokee  and  Creek  In-
dians, and  concluded  the  treaties  of  Josephinton
and  Hopewell.  He  was  re-elected  to  congress  in
1786,  and  in  1789  became  one  of  the  two  first  U.  S.
senators  from  North  Carolina.  At  the  expiration
of  his  term  in  1797  he  was  appointed  agent  for
"  superintending  all  Indians  south  of  the  Ohio."
Although  he  possessed  a  large  fortune,  he  removed
to  the  Creek  wilderness,  established  a  settlement,
built  cabins  and  mills,  and  manufactured  imple-
ments. He  tendered  his  resignation  to  each  suc-
cessive president  from  Washington  to  Madison,
but  it  was  always  refused.  The  city  of  Hawkins-
ville, Ga.,  the  headquarters  of  his  station,  was
named  in  his  honor.  His  manuscripts  are  in  the
possession  of  the  Georgia  historical  society,  and
two  of  them,  on  "  Topography "  and  "  Indian
Character,"  have  been  privately  printed. — Benja-
min's nephew.  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Warren
county,  N.  C,  in  1770;  d.  in  Sparta,  Ga.,  17  May,
1819,  was  elected  member  of  the  assembly,  and  its
speaker  in  1805.  In  1810  he  became  governor,  and
took  an  active  part  in  the  war  of  1812. — Phile-
mon's grandson,  Mieajah  Thomas,  congressman,
b.  in  Warren  county.  N.  C,  in  1790 ;  d.  there,  22
Dec,  1858,  was  educated  at  the  University  of
North  Carolina,  served  in  the  legislature  in  1819,
and  was  a  member  of  the  senate  in  1823-8.  From
1831  till  1841  he  was  a  member  of  congress,  having
been  elected  as  a  Democrat,  and  for  many  years
was  major-general  of  North  Carolina  militia.

HAWKS,  Francis  Lister,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  Berne.  N.  C,  10  June,  1798;  d.  in  New  York
city,  26  Sept.,  1866.  His  early  training  was  re-
ceived chiefly  from  his  mother,  and,  as  he  was
naturally  of  an  im-
petuous spirit,  this
discipline  was  all-
important.  He
was  graduated  at
the  University  of
North  Carolina  in
1815,  with  the
highest  honors  of
his  class.  He  then
entered  upon  the
study  of  law,  un-
der Judge  Gaston,
in  New  Berne,  was
admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised
his  profession  with
great  success  in
his native town

and  in  Hillsboro,  Orange  co.  He  was  appointed
reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  and
also  elected  to  the  legislature.  At  this  early  pe-
riod he  manifested  rare  oratorical  powers  and  fre-
quently drew  crowds  to  hear  him.  But.  although
meeting  with  entire  success  in  the  practice  of  law,
his  heart  was  not  really  in  the  work.  He  re-
solved to  become  a  candidate  for  orders  in  the
Episcopal  church,  studied  theology  under  the
Rev.  William  Mercer  Green  (afterward  bishop),
completed  his  course  in  New  Berne,  and  was  or-
dered deacon  in  1827,  by  Bishop  Ravenscroft,  and
ordained  priest  by  the  same  bishop.  About  1823
Mr.  Hawks  married  Miss  Kirby,  of  New  Haven,
Conn.,  who  died  four  years  afterward,  leaving  two
children.  This  domestic  relation  and  its  results
brought  about  an  intimacy  with  the  Rev.  Dr.
Harry  Croswell,  rector  of  Trinity  church.  New
Haven,  and,  at  the  latter's  solicitation,  Mr.  Hawks
became  Dr.  Croswell's  assistant,  25  April,  1829. He


Aa-J^/.  J^^^y^


122


HAWKS


HAWLEY


soon  grew  popular  as  a  preacher,  and  exercised
a  wide  influence  for  good.  His  stay  in  New  Ha-
ven, however,  was  short,  and  in  the  summer  of
the  same  year  he  accepted  an  assistant  minister-
ship in  St.  James's,  Philadelphia,  of  which  Bishop
White  was  rector.  The  next  year  he  was  elected
professor  of  divinity  in  Washington  (now  Trinity)
college,  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  in  March,  1831,  be-
came rector  of  St.  Stephen's  church,  New  York
city.  In  December  of  the  same  year  he  was  elect-
ed rector  of  St.  Thomas's,  New  York.  In  this
office  he  remained  until  1843,  and  was  soon  the
most  eloquent  pulpit  orator  in  the  Episcopal  church.
The  house  of  bishops,  at  the  general  convention
of  1835,  nominated  Dr.  Hawks  missionary  bish-
op in  Louisiana,  and  in  the  territories  of  Arkan-
sas and  Florida.  The  nomination  was  concurred
in  by  the  house  of  deputies,  but  Dr.  Hawks  de-
clined the  appointment.  At  the  same  convention
he  was  appointed  historiographer  of  the  church
and  conservator  of  documents.  He  spent  several
months  in  England  in  1836,  and,  from  the  libraries
and  public  records  there,  obtained  no  less  than
eighteen  large  folio  volumes  of  manuscripts  relat-
ing to  the  Church  of  England  in  America.  He
entered  at  once  upon  his  work  as  historiographer
and  prepared  in  due  season  two  volumes.  These
having  been  severely  criticised,  Dr.  Hawks  was  so
vexed  that  he  resolved  to  abandon  the  work.  Al-
though abundant  materials  were  at  hand  for
church  history  in  New  York  and  other  states,  the
historiographer  published  nothing  further.  In
1837,  in  conjunction  with  Rev.  Dr.  Caleb  S.  Henry,
he  founded  the  "  New  York  Review,"  a  quarterly,
and  contributed  freely  to  its  pages.  The  "  Review  "
did  good  service  during  its  six  years  of  existence.
In  1839  he  established  St.  Thomas's  hall,  a  school
for  boys,  at  Flushing,  L.  I.  For  a  time  it  was  suc-
cessful ;  but  financial  embarrassments  came  upon
it,  and  Dr.  Hawks,  through  its  failure,  became  in-
volved in  debt.  This  was  in  1843,  and  led  to  his
resigning  the  rectorship  of  St.  Thomas's,  and  re-
moving to  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  where  one  of  his
daughters  resided.  He  was  elected  bishop  by  the
convention  of  that  diocese,  but  at  the  general  con-
vention of  1844  opposition  was  made  to  his  con-
firmation on  the  ground  of  pecuniary  troubles
connected  with  his  unfortunate  enterprise.  Dr.
Hawks  made  his  most  eloquent  address  in  vin-
dication of  his  conduct,  fully  clearing  himself  in
relation  to  charges  of  dishonorable  transactions.
The  house  voted  to  this  effect,  and  referred  the
whole  question  back  to  the  diocese  of  Mississippi.
Although  the  diocese  unanimously  expressed  its
entire  confidence  in  Dr.  Hawks,  he  nevertheless
deemed  it  best  to  decline  the  bishopric.  In  1844
he  went  to  New  Orleans  as  rector  of  Christ  church
in  that  city,  which  office  he  occupied  five  years.
While  there  the  University  of  Louisiana  was
founded,  and  he  was  elected  its  first  president.  He
was  again  urged  to  return  to  New  York,  which  he  did
in  1849,  becoming  rector  of  Calvary  church  in  that
city.  Wealthy  friends  relieved  him  of  all  outstand-
ing obligations  in  connection  with  St.  Thomas's
hall  (to  the  amount  of  $30,000),  and  his  position
became  one  of  increased  usefulness.  In  1852  he
was  elected  bishop  of  Rhode  Island,  but  declined.
In  1859  he  was  invited  to  occupy  the  chair  of  his-
tory in  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  but  de-
clined that  also.  He  received  the  degrees  of  D.  D.
and  LL.  D.  from  the  same  institution  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war.  Dr.  Hawks,  whose  sym-
pathies naturally  were  with  the  south,  resigned  his
rectorship  of  Calvary  and  removed,  in  1862,  to
Baltimore,  where  he  became  rector  of  Christ  church.


In  1865,  however,  he  returned  to  New  York,  where
a  new  congregation  was  gathered  and  a  building
begun  in  25th  street  for  the  chapel  of  the  Holy
Saviour.  The  corner-stone  was  laid  4  Sept.,  1866,
and  this  was  Dr.  Hawks's  last  public  act.  His
health  being  completely  broken,  he  sank  rapidly
into  the  grave.  He  was  a  great  as  well  as  good
man,  a  faithful  minister,  an  orator  of  high  rank,
and  a  deserving  author.  His  chief  publications
were  "  Reports  of  Cases  adjudged  in  the  Supreme
Court  of  North  Carolina  "  (4  vols.,  Raleigh,  1823-8) ;
"  Contributions  to  the  Ecclesiastical  History  of  the
United  States  of  America  " — vol.  i.,  "  On  the  Early
Church  in  Virginia"  (New  York,  1836);  vol.  ii.,
"  On  the  Church  in  Maryland  "  (1839) ;  "  Commen-
tary on  the  Constitution  and  Canons  of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States "
(1841) ;  "  Auricular  Confession  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  Church"  (1850);  and  "History of  North
Carolina  "  (vol.  i.,  1857).  Dr.  Hawks  also  translated
Rivero  and  Tschudi's  "  Antiquities  of  Peru  "  (1854),
and  edited  several  valuable  historical  Works,  among
them  the  "  State  Papers  of  Gen.  Alexander  Hamil-
ton "  (1842) ;  Perry's  "  Expedition  to  the  China
Seas  and  Japan  "  (1852-'4) ;  Appletons'  "  Cyclo-
paedia of  Biography  "  (1856) ;  and  the  "  Romance
of  Biography  "  (12  vols.).  In  conjunction  with  Rev.
William  S.  (now  Bishop)  Perry,  he  brought  out
volumes  i.  and  ii.  of  the  "  Documentary  History  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United
States  "  (1863-'4).  See  a  memorial  volume,  with  a
sketch  of  his  life,  by  Rev.  N.  L.  Richardson  (1868).
— His  brother,  Cicero  Stephens,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  New  Berne,  N.  C,  26  May,  1812 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  19  April,  1868,  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  North  Carolina  in  1830.  He  studied  law,
but  abandoned  it  for  theology,  which  he  studied
under  Bishop  Freeman,  and  was  ordered  deacon,
8  Dec,  1834,  and  ordained  priest,  24  July,  1836,  by
Bishop  B.  T.  Onderdonk.  While  in  deacon's  orders
he  was  in  charge  of  the  church  in  Ulster,  and,  on
being  made  priest,  became  rector  of  Trinity,  Sau-
gerties,  N.  Y.  In  1837  he  accepted  the  rectorship
of  Trinity  church,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained for  six  years.  In  1843  he  removed  to  Mis-
souri and  became  rector  of  Christ  church,  St.
Louis.  He  was  appointed  bishop  of  Missouri  by
the  house  of  bishops,  with  the  concurrence  of  the
house  of  deputies,  in  1844,  and  was  consecrated,  20
Oct.,  1844.  During  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1849
in  St.  Louis  he  was  untiring  in  his  ministrations
to  the  suffering.  In  recognition  of  his  services
at  this  time  he  was  given  a  purse  of  $3,000  by
Christ  church,  and  a  residence  in  Paul  street  by
the  citizens  of  St.  Louis.  He  contributed  to  vari-
ous journals,  edited  the  "  Boys'  and  Girls'  Libra-
ry," and  the  "  Library  for  my  Young  Country-
men," and  published  "  Friday  Christian ;  or  the
First  Born  of  Pitcairn  Island.

HAWLEY,  Bostwick,  clergyman,  b.  in  Camil-
lus,  N.  Y.,  8  April,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at  Wes-
leyan  university  in  1838,  taught  in  Cazenovia,  N.
Y.,  in  1838-'42,  joined  the  Oneida  conference  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1839,  and  has
held  numerous  pastorates  in  New  York  state.  In
1872-'81  he  was  superintendent  of  public  schools  in
Bennington,  Vt.  Wesleyan  university,  of  which
he  has  been  a  trustee  since  1871,  conferred  on  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1863.  He  has  published,
besides  various  sermons  and  school  reports,  "  Close
Communion "  (New  York,  1863) ;  "  Manual  of
Methodism  "  (1868) ;  "  Nature,  Design,  and  General
Rules  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1870) ;  "  Working  and  Speaking  for  Christ "
(New  York,  1873) ;  "  Ministerial  Education  "  (1875) ;


HAWLEY


HAWLEY


123


"  Dancing  as  an  Amusement "  (1877) ;  "  Beauties
of  the  Rev.  George  Herbert "  (1877) ;  "  A  Plea  for
the  Intemperate  "  (1879) ;  "  Culture  and  Christian-
ity "  (1880) ;  "  Prominent  Doctrines  and  Peculiar
Usages  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  Stated
and  Defended  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Gospel  and  Scepti-
cism "  (1880) ;  "  The  Shield  of  Faith  "  (Cincinnati,
1880) ;  and  "  The  Lenten  Season  (1882).

HAWLEY,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Catskill,  N.
Y.,  19  Aug.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  26  Nov.,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1840,  and
after  reading  law  one  year  studied  at  the  Union
theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1844.  He  was  then  licensed  to  preach,
and  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in  New
Rochelle,  Lyons,  and  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained from  1858  until  his  death.  In  1867  he  was
sent  on  a  special  mission  to  Denmark  by  the  U.  S.
government.  He  was  president  of  the  Cayuga
county  historical  association  from  its  foundation
till  his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Hamilton  in  1861,  and  published  "  History  of
the  First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Auburn  "  (Au-
burn, 1876) ;  "  Earlv  Chapters  of  Cavuga  History  "
(1879) ;  "  Sanitary  Reforms  "  (1880) ;" "  Early  Chap-
ters of  Seneca  History  "  (1881) ;  and  "  Memorial
Discourses  "  (1884).  His  "  Mohewok  History "  is
now  in  press  (1887).

HAWLEY,  Gideon,  missionary,  b.  in  Bridge-
port, Conn.,  11  Nov.,  1727;  d.  in  Marshpee,  Mass.,
3  Oct.,  1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1749,
and  in  1752,  under  the  supervision  of  Jonathan
Edwards,  at  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  taught  the  Mo-
hawk, Oneida,  and  Tuscarora  Indians.  In  1753
the  commissioners  of  Indian  affairs  sent  him  to  es-
tablish a  mission  in  the  Iroquois  country,  on  the
Susquehanna  river.  He  remained  there  teaching
and  preaching  until  1756,  when  the  French  war
obliged  him  to  return  to  civilization.  He  then
went  to  Boston  and  joined  the  army  as  chaplain  of
Col.  Richard  Gridley's  regiment,  and  attempted
after  this  campaign  to  return  to  the  Iroquois  mis-
sion, but  the  enterprise  proved  too  hazardous.  In
1757  the  commissioners  of  the  Society  for  propa-

fating  the  gospel  appointed  him  pastor  of  the  In-
ian  tribes  at  Marshpee,  Mass.  He  was  installed,
10  April,  1758,  and  passed  the  residue  of  his  life,
nearly  half  a  century,  in  missionary  work  there.

HAWLEY,  Gideon,  scholar,  b.  in  Huntington,
Conn.,  26  Sept.,  1785 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  16  July,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1809,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1813.
In  1814  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  regents
of  the  University  of  New  York,  and  performed  the
duties  of  that  office,  without  a  salary,  for  twenty-
seven  years.  From  the  organization  of  the  Smith-
sonian institution,  in  1846,  until  his  death,  he  was
one  of  its  four  regents-at-large.  Mr.  Hawley  was
a  scholar  of  fine  attainments,  and  familiar  with  the
literature  of  many  countries.  He  printed  for  pri-
vate distribution  "Essays  in  Truth  and  Knowl-
edge "  (Albany,  1850),  which  are  characterized  by
metaphysical  discrimination  and  acuteness.

HAWLEY,  Joseph,  statesman,  b.  in  Northamp-
ton, Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1723 ;  d.  in  Hampshire  county,
Mass.,  10  March,  1788.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1742,  and  studied  theology,  but  abandoned  it
for  law,  and  practised  many  years  in  Hampshire
county.  He  was  frequently  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature,  and  served  on  most  of
its  important  committees.  He  was  a  member  of
the  committee  of  correspondence  in  1790,  chair-
man of  the  Massachusetts  committee  to  the  Provin-
cial congress  of  October,  1774,  and  served  in  that
body  in  1775. When  his  health  failed  in  1776,  he


retired  from  public  life.  Throughout  his  official
career  he  was  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  eloquent
advocates  of  American  liberty.

HAWLEY,  Joseph  Roswell,  statesman,  b.  in
Stewartsville,  N.  C,  31  Oct.,  1826.  He  is  of  Eng-
lish-Scotch ancestry.  His  father,  Rev.  Francis
Hawley  (descended  from  Samuel,  who  settled  in
Stratford,  Conn.,  in
1639),  was  b.  in  Farm-
ington,  Conn.  He
went  south  early  and
engaged  in  business,
but  afterward  en-
tered the  Baptist  min-
istry. He  married
Mary  McLeod,  a  na-
tive of  North  Caro-
lina, of  Scotch  parent-
age, and  the  family
went  to  Connecticut
in  1837,  where  the
father  was  an  active
anti-slavery  man.  The
son  prepared  for  col-
lege at  the  Hartford
grammar-school  and
the  seminary  in  Caze-
novia,  N.  Y.,  whither  the  family  removed  about
1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in  1847,  with
a  high  reputation  as  a  speaker  and  debater.  He
taught  in  the  winters,  studied  law  at  Cazenovia
and  Hartford,  and  began  practice  in  1850.  He  im-
mediately became  chairman  of  the  Free-soil  state
committee,  wrote  for  the  Free-soil  press,  and  spoke
in  every  canvass.  He  stoutly  opposed  the  Know-
Nothings,  and  devoted  his  energies  to  the  union  of
all  opponents  of  slavery.  The  first  meeting  for
the  organization  of  the  Republican  party  in  Con-
necticut was  held  in  his  office,  at  his  call,  4  Feb.,
1856.  Among  those  present  were  Gideon  Welles
and  John  M.  Niles.  Mr.  Hawley  gave  three
months  to  speaking  in  the  Fremont  canvass  of
1856.  In  February,  1857,  he  abandoned  law
practice,  and  became  editor  of  the  Hartford
"  Evening  Press,"  the  new  distinctively  Republi-
can paper.  His  partner  was  William  Faxon,  after-
ward assistant  secretary  of  the  navy.  He  re-
sponded to  the  first  call  for  troops  in  1861  by
drawing  up  a  form  of  enlistment,  and,  assisted
by  Drake,  afterward  colonel  of  the  10th  regi-
ment, raising  rifle  company  A,  1st  Connecticut
volunteers,  which  was  organized  and  accepted  in
twenty-four  hours,  Hawley  having  personally  en-
gaged rifles  at  Sharp's  factory.  He  became  the
captain,  and  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  vol-
unteer in  the  state.  He  received  special  praise
for  good  conduct  at  Bull  Run  from  Gen.  Erastus
D.  Keves,  brigade  commander.  He  directly  united
with  Col.  Alfred  H.  Terry  in  raising  the  7th  Con-
necticut volunteers,  a  three  years'  regiment,  of
which  he  was  lieutenant-colonel.  It  went  south  in
the  Port  Royal  expedition,  and  on  the  capture  of  the
forts  was  the  first  sent  ashore  as  a  garrison.  It  was
engaged  four  months  in  the  siege  of  Fott  Pulaski,
and  upon  the  surrender  was  selected  as  the  garri-
son. Hawley  succeeded  Terry,  and  commanded  the
regiment  in  the  battles  of  James  Island  and  Poco-
taligo,  and  in  Brannan's  expedition  to  Florida.  He
went  with  his  regiment  to  Florida,  in  January,  1863,
and  commanded  the  post  of  Fernandina,  whence
in  April  he  undertook  an  unsuccessful  expedition
against  Charleston.  He  also  commanded  a  brigade
on  Morris  Island  in  the  siege  of  Charleston  and
the  capture  of  Fort  Wagner.  In  February,  1864,
he  had  a  brigade  under  Gen.  Truman  Seymour  in


124


HAWLEY


HAWTHORNE


the  battle  of  Olustee,  Pla.,  where  the  whole  National
force  lost  38  per  cent.  His  regiment  was  one  of
the  few  that  were  armed  with  the  Spencer  breech-
loading  rifle.  This  weapon,  which  he  procured
in  the  autumn  of  1863,  proved  very  effective  in
the  hands  of  his  men.  He  went  to  Virginia  in
April,  1864,  having  a  brigade  in  Terry's  division,
10th  corps,  Army  of  the  James,  and  was  in  the
battles  of  Drewry's  Bluff,  Deep  Run,  Derbytown
Road,  and  various  affairs  near  Bermuda  Hundred
and  Deep  Bottom.  He  commanded  a  division  in
the  fight  on  the  Newmarket  road,  and  engaged
in  the  siege  of  Petersburg.  In  September,  1864,
he  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  having  been  re-
peatedly recommended  by  his  immediate  supe-
riors. In  November,  1864,  he  commanded  a
picked  brigade  sent  to  New  York  city  to  keep  the
peace  during  the  week  of  the  presidential  election.
He  succeeded  to  Terry's  division  when  Terry
was  sent  to  Port  Fisher  in  January,  1865,  after-
ward rejoining  him  as  chief  of  staff,  10th  corps,
and  on  the  capture  of  Wilmington  was  detached
by  Gen.  Schofield  to  establish  a  base  of  supplies
there  for  Sherman's  army,  and  command  south-
eastern North  Carolina.  In  June  he  rejoined
Terry  as  chief  of  staff  for  the  Department  of
Virginia.  In  October  he  went  home,  was  bre-
vetted  major-general,  and  was  mustered  out,  15
Jan.,  1866.  In  April,  1866,  he  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Connecticut,  but  he  was  defeated  in  1867,
and  then,  having  united  the  "  Press "  and  the
"Courant,"  he  resumed  editorial  life,  and  more
vigorously  than  ever  entered  the  political  con-
tests following  the  war.  He  was  always  in  de-
mand as  a  speaker  throughout  the  country.  He
was  president  of  the  National  Republican  conven-
tion in  1868,  secretary  of  the  committee  on  reso-
lutions in  1872,  and  chairman  of  that  committee
in  1876.  He  earnestly  opposed  paper  money  theo-
ries. In  November,  1872,  he  was  elected  to  fill
a  vacancy  in  congress  caused  by  the  death  of
Julius  L.  Strong.  He  was  re-elected  to  the  43d
congress,  defeated  for  the  44th  and  45th,  and
re-elected  to  the  46th  (1879-'81).  He  was  elected
senator  in  January,  1881,  by  the  unanimous  vote
of  his  party,  and  re-elected  in  like  manner  in
January,  1887,  for  the  term  ending  4  March,  1893.
In  the  house  he  served  on  the  committees  on
claims,  banking  and  currency,  military  affairs,
and  appropriations;  in  the  senate,  on  the  com-
mittees on  coast  defences,  railroads,  printing,  and
military  affairs.  He  is  chairman  of  the  commit-
tee on  civil  service,  and  vigorously  promoted
the  enactment  of  civil-service-reform  legislation.
He  was  also  chairman  of  a  select  committee  on
ordnance  and  war-ships,  and  submitted  a  long
and  valuable  report,  the  result  of  careful  investi-
gation into  steel  production  and  heavy  gun-mak-
ing in  England  and  the  United  States.  In  the
National  convention  of  1884  the  Connecticut  dele-
gation unanimously  voted  for  him  for  president
in  every  ballot.  He  was  president  of  the  U.  S.  cen-
tennial commission  from  its  organization  in  1872
until  the  close  of  its  labors  in  1877,  gave  two
years  exclusively  to  the  work,  was  ex-officio  mem-
ber of  its  committees,  and  appointed  all  save  the
executive.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Hamilton  in  1875,  and  from  Yale  in  1886.  Of  the
former  institution  he  is  a  trustee.  Ecclesiastically
he  is  a  Congregationalist.  Gen.  Hawley  is  an
ardent  Republican,  one  of  the  most  acceptable
extemporary  orators  in  the  republic,  a  believer
in  universal  suffrage,  the  American  people  and
the  "  American  way,"  is  a  "  hard-money  "  man,
would  adjust  the tariff  so as to benefit native


industries,  urges  the  reconstruction  of  our  naval
and  coast  defences,  demands  a  free  ballot  and  a
fair  count  everywhere,  opposes  the  tendency  to
federal  centralization,  and  is  a  strict  construction-
ist of  the  constitution  in  favor  of  the  rights  and
dignity  of  the  individual  states.

HAWLEY,  William  Merrill,  lawyer,  b.  in
Delaware  county,  N.  Y.,  23  Aug.,  1802 :  d.  in  Hor-
nellsville,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  1869.  His  father,  one  of
the  earliest  settlers  in  western  New  York,  was  a
farmer,  and  unable  to  give  his  children  a  classical
education.  William  went  to  the  common  school,
and  at  the  age  of  twenty-one  removed  to  Almond,
Alleghany  co.,  where  he  cleared  a  piece  of  land  for
tillage.  In  the  spring  of  1824  he  was  elected  con-
stable, and  began  the  study  of  law  to  assist  him  in
this  office.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1826,
removed  to  Hornellsville  the  next  year,  and  prac-
tised his  profession  until  his  appointment  in  1846
as  first  judge  of  Steuben  county.  He  served  in
the  state  senate,  was  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic
national  convention  of  22  May,  1848,  which  met  in
Baltimore,  and  was  identified  with  the  "  Free-soil
radical  delegation,"  which  culminated  in  the  Na-
tional convention  of  9  Aug.,  1848,  held  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  in  which  Martin  Van  Buren  was  nominated
for  the  presidency.  Judge  Hawley  was  one  of  the
committee  appointed  to  introduce  the  resolutions
the  essential  elements  of  which  were  afterward
adopted  by  the  Republican  party.  After  his  re-
tirement from  the  state  senate  he  did  not  again
enter  public  life,  but,  devoting  himself  to  his  pro-
fession, acquired  a  large  fortune,  and  practised
until  a  short  time  before  his  death.

HAWTHORNE,  Nathaniel,  author,  b.  in  Sa-
lem, Mass.,  4  July,  1804 ;  d.  in  Plymouth,  N.  H.,
18  May,  1864.  The  family  name  was  spelled
Hathorne  until  the
author  inserted  the
w.  In  1630  his  an-
cestor, William,  at
the  age  of  twenty-
three,  came  from
Wiltshire,  Eng-
land, with  John
Winthrop  in  the
"  Arbella,"  and  set-
tled in  Dorches-
ter, Mass.  In  1636
he  went  to  Salem,
which  gave  him
large  grants  of  land
to  induce  him  to  re-
move, holding  such
a  citizen  to  be  "a
public  benefit."  He

was  a  strict  Separatist,  a  man  of  strong  char-
acter and  great  energy,  and  in  the  little  village,
which  was  the  grimmest  of  all  the  Puritan  com-
munities, William  Hathorne  was  as  stern  and  al-
most as  conspicuous  a  figure  as  John  Endicott.
His  descendant  says  that  "he  had  all  the  Puri-
tanic traits,  both  good  and  evil " ;  and  it  is  easy
to  fancy  the  fine,  strong  roots  of  the  author's
genius  stretching  backward  and  feeding  upon  that
rank  soil  of  early  Puritanism,  and  transmuting  its
dark  and  acrid  juices  into  the  weird  and  exquisite
blossoming  of  the  tales  and  romances.  William  died
in  1681.  His  son,  John,  like  his  father,  was  a  per-
secutor of  Quakers,  and  he  was  the  chief  judge  in
the  witch  trials  at  Salem,  in  which  his  treatment
of  the  victims  was  harsh  and  cruel.  John  died  in
1717.  His  son,  Joseph,  was  a  quiet  farmer,  and
after  him  came  what  Hawthorne  calls  "a  dreary
and  unprosperous  condition  of  the  race." The


HAWTHORNE


HAWTHORNE


125


men  followed  the  sea.  Joseph's  son,  Daniel,  com-
manded a  privateer,  and  Daniel's  son,  Nathaniel
(father  of  the  author),  was  captain  of  a  trading-
vessel.  He  married  Elizabeth  Clark  Manning,
and  died  in  Surinam  in  1808.  Nathaniel,  the  sec-
ond of  three  children,  was  their  only  son.  He
was  born  in  a  plain  wooden  house  near  the  wharves,
in  which  his  mother  wholly  secluded  herself  after
her  husband's  death.  From  the  earliest  days,  Sa-
lem had  been  one  of  the  most  sombre  of  the  old
New  England  towns :  "  its  long  and  lazy  street,"
Hawthorne  says,  "  lounging  wearisomely  along  the
whole  extent  of  the  peninsula,  with  Gallows  hill
and  New  Guinea  at  one  end  and  a  view  of  the
almshouse  at  the  other."  In  the  beginning  of
the  century  it  was  an  important  port  for  the  In-
dia trade.  But  in  Hawthorne's  youth  it  began
to  decline  with  the  other  New  England  sea-ports,
and  in  1850  he  said  of  the  pavement  around  the
custom-house,  that  it  "  has  grass  enough  growing
in  its  chinks  to  show  that  it  has  not,  of  late  days,
been  worn  by  any  multitudinous  resort  of  busi-
ness." Hawthorne  was  "  a  pleasant  child,"  his
sister  said,  "  quite  handsome,  with  golden  curls."
But  the  austere  family  tradition,  the  melancholy
temperament  of  his  taciturn  father,  the  secluded
widowhood  of  his  mother,  the  decaying  old  sea-
port of  witch-haunted  memories  in  which  he  lived,
impressed  profoundly  the  imagination  of  the  soli-
tary boy,  whose  "  native  propensities,"  as  he  said
of  himself,  "  were  toward  fairy-land."  At  the  age
of  seven  he  was  placed  by  his  uncle  Manning  at
the  school  of  Dr.  Joseph  E.  Worcester,  the  lexi-
cographer, and,  being  severely  injured  while  play-
ing foot-ball,  he  was  confined  to  the  house  for  two
years,  where  Dr.  Worcester  still  taught  him,  and
where  he  acquired  the  habit  of  reading.  His
books  were  the  English  classics.  He  pored  over
Spenser  and  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  Froissart's
"  Chronicles  "  and  Clarendon's  history,  and  he  was
fascinated  by  the  "Newgate  Calendar."  In  1818
his  mother  removed  with  her  family  to  Raymond,
on  Sebago  lake,  in  Maine,  to  a  house  owned  by
her  brother,  where  Hawthorne  remained  for  a
year.  It  was  a  wild  country,  with  scattered  clear-
ings, and  "  nine  tenths  of  it  primeval  woods."
Here  he  lived  in  perfect  freedom,  he  says,  "  like
a  bird  of  the  air.  But  here,  also,  roaming  the
woods  alone  or  skating  or  "  camping  out,"  his
habit  of  solitude  was  confirmed.  In  1819  he  was
back  again  in  Salem,  fitting  for  college,  and  quite
sure  that  the  happiest  days  of  his  life  were  gone.
Like  other  boys  about  entering  college,  he  specu-
lated upon  his  future  vocation,  and  says  in  a  letter
that  he  would  not  be  a  minister,  nor  a  doctor,  nor
a  lawyer,  and  that  there  was  nothing  left  but  to  be
an  author.  There  is  an  apocryphal  diary  of  those
days,  which  was  published  in  the  Portland  "  Tran-
script "  in  1871  and  1873  by  the  person  who  pro-
fessed to  own  it,  but  which  Hawthorne's  son,  Julian,
dismisses  very  curtly  as  of  no  importance.  In  Au-
gust, 1820,  Hawthorne  issued  in  Salem  the  first
number  of  a  little  weekly  paper  called  the  "  Spec-
tator," which  was  discontinued  in  the  middle  of
September.  In  1821  he  entered  Bowdoin  college,
Brunswick,  Me.,  "a  plain  country  college."  then
only  twenty-five  years  old.  Henry  W.  Longfel-
low, John  S.  C.  Abbott,  George  B.  Cheever,  and
Horatio  Bridge  were  his  classmates,  and  Franklin
Pierce,  afterward  president,  was  in  the  class  before
him.  Bridge  and  Pierce  were  his  intimate  friends,
and  in  the  dedication  of  the  "  Snow  Image  "  Haw-
thorne pleasantly  lays  upon  Bridge  the  responsibil-
ity of  his  literary  career.

The  year  that  he  entered  college  was  the  year


in  which  a  distinctive  American  literature  be-
gan to  appear.  Bryant  published  in  that  year  his
first  volume  of  poems,  Cooper  his  "  Spy,"  Dana
the  "  Idle  Man,"  and  Pereival  his  first  volume  of
poems,  which  Edward  Everett  hailed  as  the  har-
binger of  a  golden  day.  Halleck's  and  Drake's
"  Croakers  "  were  already  familiar,  and  the  next
year  Miss  Sedgwick's  "New  England  Tale"  was
published.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Hawthorne
was  aware  of  this  literary  avatar  and  promise;
there  is  no  trace  of  any  influence  from  it  upon  his
own  works.  In  college  he  was  distinguished  only
for  his  themes.  He  wrote  indifferent  verse,  and
read  Scott's  novels,  and  Godwin's,  which  he  "  liked
next  to  Scott,"  and,  without  the  fear  of  the  stern
old  Puritan  Hathornes  before  his  eyes,  and  to  the
alarm  of  the  college  authorities,  he  sometimes
played  cards  and  showed  the  natural  tastes  of
vigorous  youth.  He  was  graduated  in  1825,  re-
turned to  Salem,  and  became  an  absolute  recluse,
imprisoned,  as  he  said,  "  in  a  lonely  chamber,"
where,  however,  he  felt  afterward  that  his  mind
and  character  were  formed,  and  in  which  he  said
"  fame  was  won."  He  read  and  wrote  by  day  and
night,  seldom  going  out  except  at  twilight  for  long,
lonely  walks  along  the  sea-shore  and  through  the
dusky  streets  of  the  town.  For  twelve  years  this
was  his  life,  and,  although  constantly  writing  and
publishing,  he  was,  in  his  own  words,  "  the  obscur-
est man  of  letters  in  America."  In  1826  he  pub-
lished, anonymously  and  at  his  own  expense,  a
novel  entitled  "  Fanshawe."  It  made  no  impres-
sion, but  it  has  traces  of  his  characteristic  power
and  his  admirable  literary  style.  Only  a  few  hun-
dred copies  were  sold,  and  he  endeavored  success-
fully to  suppress  it.  But  it  is  included  in  the
latest  editions  of  his  works.  The  failure  probably
affected  him  deeply,  for  he  had  the  generous  thirst
for  fame  which  belongs  to  genius.  He  was  not,
however,  wholly  disheartened,  and  a  little  later  he
completed  a  series  of  "  Seven  Tales  of  My  Native
Land,"  some  relating  to  witchcraft  and  some  to
piracy  and  the  sea.  He  found  a  publisher  with
difficulty,  and  there  were  such  delays  in  publish-
ing that  Hawthorne  withdrew  the  manuscript  and
burned  it.  But,  however  sobered  by  sharp  expe-
rience, his  good  genius  would  not  suffer  him  to
abandon  her.  Of  this  time  he  said  to  a  friend  af-
terward :  "  I  passed  the  day  in  writing  stories,  and
the  night  in  burning  them."  The  solitude  and
seclusion  of  his  life  were  due  not  only  to  his  tem-
perament and  to  disappointment  by  his  literary
failures,  but  to  the  social  ostracism  of  Democrats
in  the  little  town,  which  was  a  stronghold  of
Federalism  and  the  very  seat  of  the  Essex  junto,
the  aulic  council  of  the  Federal  party.  Haw-
thorne's father  had  been  a  Democrat,  and  the
son,  with  no  taste  for  politics,  naturally  accepted
the  paternal  party  connection,  and  had  no  dispo-
sition to  dispute  any  penalty  attaching  to  it.  In
1830  he  travelled  with  an  uncle  in  the  valley  of
the  Connecticut.  The  next  year  he  was  in  New
Hampshire,  and  about  this  time  he  wandered  as
far  as  Ticonderoga  and  Niagara.  But  the  excur-
sions were  brief.  He  was  soon  again  in  his  soli-
tary room,  and,  no  longer  attempting  the  publica-
tion of  a  book,  he  was  content  to  send  short  stories
and  sketches  and  essays  to  the  Salem  "  Gazette  "
and  the  "  New  England  Magazine."  He  sent  some
manuscripts,  including  several  of  the  "  Twice-told
Tales,"  to  Samuel  G.  Goodrich,  the  editor  of  the
Boston  "  Token  and  Atlantic  Souvenir,"  who  wrote
to  him  in  January,  1830,  that  he  would  try  to  in-
duce a  publisher  to  undertake  the  work,  and  offered
him  $35  for  the  first  publication  of  the  "  Gentle


12G


HAWTHORNE


HAWTHORNE


Boy"  in  the  "Token."  Hawthorne  assented  to
the  publication  of  any  of  the  tales,  and  in  May,
1831,  Mr.  Goodrich  published  four  of  them.  Al-
though these  tales  and  sketches,  in  the  "  Token  "  and
elsewhere,  were  received  without  general  acclama-
tion, there  were  some  sagacious  readers  who  per-
ceived the  rare  and  subtle  genius  of  the  author,  and
among  these  were  three  accomplished  young  women
of  Salem,  Miss  Elizabeth  P.  Peabody  and  her  sis-
ters, who  heard,  to  their  surprise  and  pleasure,  that
the  writer  was  the  son  of  their  neighbor,  the  widow
Hathorne.  The  acquaintance  of  the  families  fol-
lowed, and  the  second  sister,  Sophia,  a  woman  of
singular  accomplishment,  of  the  most  poetic  na-
ture and  charming  character,  afterward  became
Mrs.  Hawthorne.

Meanwhile,  in  1836,  Mr.  Goodrich,  who  evi-
dently recognized  the  promise  of  the  young  au-
thor, engaged  him  at  a  salary  of  $500,  of  which
he  received  but  little,  to  edit  the  "  American  Maga-
zine of  Useful  and  Entertaining  Knowledge,"  a
work  that  belonged  to  the  Bewick  publishing
company,  of  which  Goodrich  was  manager.  Haw-
thorne also  compiled  for  the  company  a  "  Univer-
sal History,"  from  which  sprang  the  famous  works
of  Peter  Parley,  and  for  which  he  received  $100.
His  gains  were  very  small,  although  his  modest
and  abundant  labors  were  gradually  winning  ap-
preciation. In  1835  the  notices  in  the  London
"  Athenaeum  "  of  his  tales  published  in  the  "  To-
ken "  were  so  encouraging  that  he  began  to  think
of  issuing  them  in  a  volume.  His  faithful  friend
Bridge  warmly  urged  the  publication,  and  assumed
the  pecuniary  risk,  and  early  in  1837  the  first  se-
ries of  "  Twice-told  Tales  "  was  published  by  the
American  stationers'  company  in  Boston.  Haw-
thorne sent  a  copy  to  Longfellow,  whose  "  Outre
Mer "  had  charmed  him,  regretting  that  they  had
not  been  more  intimate  in  college,  and  Longfellow
reviewed  the  book  with  enthusiasm  in  the  "  North
American  Review."  Hawthorne  afterward  sug-
gested to  Longfellow  the  story  of  "  Evangeline,"
and  greeted  the  poem  as  the  best  of  the  poet's
works.  Longfellow  was  very  sensible  of  Haw-
thorne's generosity,  and  the  warm  friendship  of  the
two  authors  and  neighbors  was  never  disturbed.
Six  or  seven  hundred  copies  of  "  Twice-told
Tales"  were  sold,  and  the  book  was  favorably  no-
ticed, though  the  quality  of  the  author's  genius
was  not  perceived.  It  was  generally  treated  as  a
mere  pleasant  talent.  But  those  tales  reveal  a
power  of  imagination,  a  spiritual  insight  and
knowledge  of  the  obscurer  motives  of  human  na-
ture, and  they  are  told  with  a  felicity  and  repose
of  manner  that  have  not  been  surpassed  in  our
literature.  They  have  often,  indeed,  a  sombre
tone,  a  fateful  sense  of  gloom,  which  is  half  weird,
sometimes  almost  uncanny,  but  of  which  the  fas-
cination is  irresistible.  Their  publication  marked
a  distinct  epoch  in  American  literature.  In  1837
Hawthorne  visited  his  friend  Bridge  in  Maine,  and
in  1838  he  began  to  write  for  the  "Democratic
Review,"  which  was  edited  by  John  L.  O'Sullivan.
He  was  now  engaged  to  Miss  Peabody,  and  began
to  think  of  a  provision  for  marriage,  and  in  Janu-
ary, 1839,  George  Bancroft,  the  historian,  who  was
collector  of  customs  at  Boston,  appointed  him  a
weigher  and  ganger,  with  a  salary  of  $1,200.

Two  years  later,  when  the  Whigs  came  in,  he
was  dismissed  from  his  place.  His  literary  work
was  suspended  during  his  official  term,  and  he  is
generally  supposed  to  have  been  weary  of  its  rou-
tine. But  he  said  that  he  enjoyed  the  society  of
sailors,  who  knew  him  and  treated  him  only  as  a
government  officer,  and  not  as  an  author. It  re-


leased him  from  self-consciousness.  In  1841  the
first  part  of  "Grandfather's  Chair"  was  published
in  Boston  and  New  York.  It  is  a  series  of  admi-
rable sketches  for  children  of  New  England  history
which  always  pleased  his  imagination.  In  April
of  this  year,  also,  he  joined  the  company  of  Boston
scholars  and  educated  men  and  women  who  began
at  Brook  Farm,  an  estate  of  two  hundred  acres  in
West  Roxbury,  the  experiment  of  an  Arcadia,  in
which  every  member  should  do  his  share  of  the
necessary  manual  labor  and  so  secure  to  all  the  de-
sirable mental  leisure.  But  with  the  "  transcen-
dental movement"  from  which  the  enterprise
sprang  Hawthorne  had  little  sympathy,  and  he  was
really  out  of  the  current  of  characteristic  life  at
the  farm.  The  association  was  one  of  the  expres-
sions of  the  remarkable  intellectual  and  moral
renaissance  of  that  period  in  New  England  of
which  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  is  the  most  striking
representative,  and  which  has  deeply  influenced
the  national  life.  But  to  Hawthorne,  as  his
"American  Note-Book"  shows,  the  sylvan  poem
was  very  prosaic.  "  I  went  to  live  in  Arcady,"  he
said  to  a  friend,  "  and  found  myself  up  to  the  chin
in  a  barn-yard."  There  was  indeed  no  stouter
manual  worker  than  he.  He  toiled  sometimes
for  sixteen  hours  a  day,  and  he  invested  $1,000,
his  savings  from  the  custom-house,  in  the  enter-
prise at  Brook  Farm,  hoping  to  be  married  and  to
find  a  home  there.  His  modesty  and  sincerity,  and
an  indefinable  manliness  of  nature,  fascinated  his
associates.  But  the  very  genius  of  the  place  was
social,  and  he  always  carried  solitude  with  him.
Like  his  "  Miles  Coverdale,"  he  was  a  spectator,  not
a  participant.  Indeed,  in  all  places  and  under  all
circumstances  his  native  propensity  toward  fairy-
land was  so  strong  that  actual  life  seemed  to  be
spectral  to  him.  Naturally,  Brook  Farm  was  es-
sentially uncongenial,  yet  his  "  Blithedale  Ro-
mance "  is  the  only  permanent  memorial  in  any
form  of  art  of  that  romantic,  earnest,  and  humane
endeavor  for  a  higher  form  of  human  society.

Hawthorne  was  married  in  July,  1842,  and  went
immediately  to  the  old  manse  in  Concord,  Mass.,
on  Concord  river  and  close  by  the  site  of  the  old
bridge,  of  which  Emerson's  lines,  engraved  upon
the  monument,  tell  the  story :

"  Here  once  the  embattled  farmers  stood,
And  fired  the  shot  heard  round  the  world."
The  old  manse  is  one  of  the  most  historic  houses
in  the  country.  It  is  a  gambrel-roofed  structure
of  wood,  erected  in  1765.  From  the  window  of
the  little  study  at  the  back  of  the  house,  on  the
second  floor,  the  Rev.  William  Emerson  had  seen
the  Revolutionary  battle  of  which  his  narrative  is
the  earliest  and  most  authentic.  In  the  same  room
his  grandson,  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  wrote  "  Na-
ture," and  Hawthorne  many  of  the  tales  that  were
first  published  in  the  "  Democratic  Review,"  and
were  then  collected  in  the  "  Mosses  from  an  Old
Manse."  In  this  home  Hawthorne  devoted  him-
self wholly  to  literature  and  happiness.  "  For,
now  being  happy,"  he  says  in  the  delightful  intro-
duction to  the  '•  Mosses,"  "  I  felt  as  if  there  were
no  question  to  be  put."  The  contrast  with  his  late
life,  either  in  the  custom-house  or  at  Brook  Farm,
was  refreshing  to  him.  The  manse  was  separated
from  the  country  road  by  a  straight  avenue  of
black  ash-trees,  and  as  he  entered  it  with  his  bride,
"  the  wheel-track  leading  to  the  door,  as  well  as
the  whole  breadth  of  the  avenue,  was  almost  over-
grown with  grass,"  as  befitted  the  path  to  Haw-
thorne's door.  He  resumed  his  old  solitary  habits,
and  was  seen  by  his  neighbors  only  upon  his  daily
walks  to  the  village  post-office,  about  a  mile  away.


HAWTHORNE


HAWTHORNE


127


Again  he  was  a  bird  of  the  night,  and  after  dusk  he
unmoored  his  boat  at  the  foot  of  the  garden  and  pad-
dled alone  about  the  winding  stream,  in  a  glimmer-
ing realm  that  seemed  this  native  fairy-land.  Some-
times he  took  a  whole  holiday  with  the  poet  Ellery
Channing,  almost  the  only  neighbor  whom  he  saw,
and  sometimes  also  Emerson  or  Henry  Thoreau
came  to  the  manse.  But  their  visits  were  few,  for
Hawthorne's  reserve  was  invincible  to  both  of
them.  Margaret  Fuller,  whose  sister  Ellery  Chan-
ning had  married,  also  came ;  but  the  sympathy
of  the  visitor  and  the  host  was  not  complete.
There  is  no  doubt  of  the  happiness  of  these  days,
in  which  Hawthorne's  eldest  child  was  born  and
"  Rappaccini's  Daughter "  was  written.  His  in-
come was  drawn  mainly  from  payments  for  the
stories  in  the  '*  Democratic  Review  " — payment  in-
deed which  was  not  large  and  not  always  prompt.
But  housekeeping  at  the  manse  was  very  simple
and  frugal,  and  in  the  occasional  absences  of  his
wife,  Hawthorne  often  remained  entirely  alone  or
with  some  friend  as  a  guest,  and  then  housekeep-
ing became  a  picnic,  and  they  cooked  the  dinner
and  washed  the  dishes  together  with  an  ease  and
glee  that  were  natural  to  Brook-Farmers.  Among
the  mosses  gathered  in  1843  were  the  "Celes-
tial Railroad,"  "  The  Procession  of  Life,"  "  Fire
Worship,"  "  Buds  and  Bird  Voices,"  and  "  Roger
Malvin's  Burial,"  all  of  which  appeared  in  the
"  Democratic  Review." "  Rappaccini's  Daughter  "


was  published  in  the  "  Review "  in  1844,  and  in
1845  the  second  series  of  "  Twice-told  Tales  "
was  issued  in  Boston.  This  series  begins  with
the  four  "  Legends  of  the  Province  House,"  tales
especially  characteristic  of  Hawthorne's  genius,
and  they  instantly  added  another  romantic  glamour
to  the  famous  Revolutionary  town  of  Boston.  In
the  same  year  Hawthorne  edited  the  "  African
Journal "  of  his  friend  Bridge,  of  the  navy,  for

Sublication  as  a  book,  and  the  "  Papers  of  an  Old
•artmoor  Prisoner  "  for  the  "  Democratic  Review."
The  accompanying  illustration  represents  the  old
manse  occupied  by  the  Hawthornes.

He  was  now  forty  years  old,  and  was  recognized
as  one  of  the  most  original  of  American  authors.
He  had  made  his  way  noiselessly  by  sheer  force  of
genius.  There  had  been  no  sudden  and  brilliant
"  sensation,"  but  the  public  had  become  gradually
aware  of  the  presence  of  a  new  literary  force,  the
full  scope  and  character  of  which  were  not  as  yet
apprehended.  He  was  still  compelled,  as  he  wrote
in  1844,  "  to  work  hard  for  small  gains." But  the

Eublishers  were  on  the  scent.  In  October,  1845,
e  was  urged  by  Wiley  and  Putnam,  of  New  York,  to
give  them  a  volume  of  tales  for  their  "  Library  of
American  Books,"  and  also  a  history  of  witch-
craft, which  had  been  suggested  to  him  as  a  prom-
ising subject.  This  work,  however,  he  did  not  at-
tempt. But  in  1846  Wiley  and  Putnam  published,


in  two  volumes,  as  the  seventeenth  number  of
their  pretty  paper-covered  series,  "  Mosses  from  an
Old  Manse."  Besides  the  tales  already  mentioned
as  written  in  1843,  there  were  included  in  the
volumes  "  The  Birthmark,"  "  Young  Goodman
Brown,"  "  The  New  Adam  and  Eve,"  '•  The  Christ-
mas Banquet,"  "  Drowne's  Wooden  Image,"  "  The
Artist  of  the  Beautiful,"  and  other  tales  no  less
striking  and  imaginative.  They  are  of  the  same
general  character  as  the  "Twice-told  Tales,"  but
they  have  the  air  of  larger  experience,  although
Hawthorne's  work  is  of  singularly  uniform  excel-
lence. His  genius  was  early  matured,  and  his
sinewy,  simple,  lucid  style  was  never  youthful  in
the  sense  of  crudity,  rhetorical  excess,  or  restless-
ness. But  his  imagination  was  richer  and  his  in-
sight deeper.  In  a  letter  to  Longfellow  in  1837,
after  the  publication  of  the  "Twice-told  Tales,"
he  says  that  he  lies  under  the  disadvantage  of  lack
of  material  from  the  narrow  conditions  of  his  life
and  want  of  experience.  But  the  custom-house,
Brook  Farm,  Concord,  and  marriage  had  brought
him  out  of  the  old  Salem  routine,  and  he  was  in
the  ripeness  of  his  power  when  the  "Mosses"  were
published.  In  comparison  with  his  larger  works,
they  now  seem  like  the  rosy  blossoms  in  his  apple-
orchard  in  May,  compared  with  the  rounded  fruit
on  the  trees  in  October — "  another,  yet  the  same."

Hawthorne's  income,  however,  was  now  so  di-
minished— for  he  had  lost  his  venture  at  Brook
Farm,  and  the  "Democratic  Review"  had  failed,
largely  in  debt  to  him — that  he  left  the  old  manse,
after  occupying  it  for  nearly  four  years,  and,  re-
turning to  Salem,  was  appointed  surveyor  in  the
custom-house  in  1846.  Here  he  remained  for  three
years,  of  which  he  has  told  the  story  in  the  in-
troduction to  "The  Scarlet  Letter."  In  this  in-
troduction he  speaks  of  himself  and  others  with  a
freedom  that  might  seem  to  be  remarkable  in  a  man
so  shy.  But  happily,  in  writing,  his  genius  had  full
play  without  the  constraint  arising  from  a  sense
of  the  personal  presence  of  others.  This  introduc-
tion is  a  delightful  fragment  of  autobiography,
but  the  candor  with  which  he  spoke  of  Salem  and
of  his  official  associates  was  warmly  resented.  It
was  evidently  thought  to  be  a  little  parricidal  in  a
son  of  Salem  to  speak  so  plainly  of  the  town  and
the  townspeople.  But  Hawthorne  replied  that  he
owed  nothing  to  a  town  that  had  permitted  its  son
— and  he  might  have  said  one  of  its  most  illus-
trious children — "to  be  deliberately  lied  down,"
which  he  felt  to  have  been  his  fate  at  the  time  of
his  official  removal.  The  three  years  of  his  Salem
surveyorship  have  no  record  in  the  "  American
Note-Books."  But  during  this  time  he  wrote  the
first  draft  of  "  The  Scarlet  Letter,"  a  longer  tale
than  any  of  the  earlier  works,  which  proved  to  be
so  sombre  that  he  thought  it  wiser  to  publish
with  it  some  sketches  afterward  issued  with  the
"  Snow  Image."  But  his  friend.  James  T.  Fields,
the  publisher,  on  reading  the  manuscript,  was  so
profoundly  impressed  by  it  that  Hawthorne  took
heart,  completed  the  work,  and  in  the  spring  of
1850  the  romance  was  published.  The  first  edition
of  5,000  copies  was  sold  in  two  weeks.  But  great
as  was  the  publisher's  admiration  of  the  work,  he
distrusted  its  popular  success,  and  the  type  was
distributed.  It  was,  however,  immediately  reset
and  stereotyped.  The  book  was  at  once  reprint-
ed in  England,  and  its  reception  in  both  coun-
tries was  enthusiastic.  The  author  had  made  the
"  ten-strike  "  of  which,  in  speaking  of  the  enthusi-
asm of  his  wife  and  his  publisher,  he  had  humor-
ously written  to  his  friend  Bridge,  and  from  being
the  "obscurest  of  American authors  he  had sud-


128


HAWTHORNE


HAWTHORNE


denly  become  one  of  the  most  renowned.  In  the
preface  to  the  "  Marble  Faun "  he  said  after-
ward that  "no  author  without  a  trial  can  conceive
the  difficulty  of  writing  a  romance  about  a  coun-
try where  there  is  no  shadow,  no  antiquity,  no
mystery,  no  picturesque  and  gloomy  wrong,  nor
anything  but  a  commonplace  prosperity  in  broad
and  simple  daylight."  But  his  early  works  were
a  series  of  sketches  of  just  such  romances,  and  "The
Scarlet  Letter"  was  a  romance  drawn  from  the
shadow  and  mystery  and  bareness  of  the  earliest
civilized  life  of  that  country,  a  tale  which  made
its  gloom  marvellously  picturesque  and  pathetic,
and  proved  that  American  genius  could  find  no
more  prolific  subjects  for  imaginative  treatment  in
literature  than  those  that  the  annals  of  its  own
country  could  furnish.  "  The  Scarlet  Letter  "
interprets  with  profound  perception  and  sympa-
thetic delicacy  and  skill  the  old  New  England
spirit  and  character  and  life  which  have  powerfully
influenced  the  development  of  American  civiliza-
tion. As  a  study  of  the  solitary  human  soul  in-
volved in  sin  and  struggling  with  its  own  weakness
and  sophistry,  seeking  in  the  darkness  of  conceal-
ment the  succor  that  could  be  found  only  in  the
full  light  of  penitence,  the  romance  is  a  remarkable
addition  to  imaginative  literature,  and  distinctively
characteristic  of  Hawthorne's  genius.

In  the  summer  of  1850,  after  the  publication  of
"  The  Scarlet  Letter,"  Hawthorne  removed  to  Len-
ox, in  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  and  occupied,  as  he
said,  "the  ugliest  little  old  red  farm-house  you
ever  saw,"  on  the  bank  of  the  pretty  lake  known  as
"  The  Stockbridge  Bowl,"  with  a  southward  vista
of  high  hills.  He  was  now  one  of  the  most  famous
authors  of  his  time,  but  he  secluded  himself  here
as  elsewhere,  and  almost  his  only  companion  was
Herman  Melville,  the  author  of  "  Typee,"  who  lived
at  Pittsfield.  In  the  old  red  farm-house  Hawthorne
wrote  "  The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables,"  which
was  published  early  in  1851,  and  which  he  preferred
to  "  The  Scarlet  Letter,"  thinking  it  more  character-
istic of  his  mind  and  more  proper  and  natural  for
him  to  write.  It  is  certainly  equally  characteristic
with  "  The  Scarlet  Letter."  for  it  is  another  presen-
tation of  what  Melville  called  the  "  tragic  phase  of
humanity."  which  Hawthorne  instinctively  treated
with  extraordinary  subtlety  and  power.  The  can-
vas of  "  The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables  "  is  larger
than  that  of  "The  Scarlet  Letter."  There  are
more  figures,  and  they  are  more  finely  elaborated,
and  there  is  a  cheerful  play  of  humor  and  sun-
shine. Phoebe,  Hepzibah,  Judge  Pyncheon,  and
Clifford  are  masterly  delineations,  like  portraits  of
Titian  and  Rembrandt  and  Raphael  which  do  not
fade  with  time.  The  popular  success  of  "  The
House  of  the  Seven  Gables  "  was  even  greater  than
that  of  its  predecessor.  The  sunshine  of  prosperi-
ty seemed  to  quicken  the  fertility  of  the  author's
genius,  and  in  the  summer  of  1851  he  wrote  "  The
Wonder  Book,"  a  charming  retelling  for  children
of  some  of  the  classical  myths,  and  in  the  same
year  the  "Snow  Image  and  Other  Twice-told
Tales  "  was  made  ready,  but  it  was  not  published  un-
til 1852.  In  the  autumn  of  1851  the  roving  author,
like  a  Bedouin  poet,  struck  his  tent  again,  and  re-
moved to  West  Newton,  near  Boston,  where  he
wrote  "  The  Blithedale  Romance."  This  tale  was
suggested  by  the  life  at  Brook  Farm,  its  mo-
tives, and  some  of  its  characters.  But,  as  Haw-
thorne said,  it  must  not  be  read  '•  as  if  it  had  any-
thing to  do  with  Brook  Farm,  which,  essentially,  it
has  not,  but  merely  for  its  own  story  and  charac-
ter." It  is,  as  Mr.  Lathrop  says,  the  story  of  a
man  dominated  by  a  theory,  and,  by  blind  abandon-


ment to  it,  ruining  himself  and  those  who  trust
him.  But  upon  this  simple  motive  the  author
plays  with  his  familiar  and  marvellous  skill.  The
sweet  and  shadowy  Priscilla,  the  superb  Zenobia,
the  intensely  self-concentrated  and  powerful  Hol-
lingsworth,  old  Moodie,  and  the  placid,  solitary
observer,  Miles  Coverdale,  are  drawn  at  once  with
airy  delicacy  and  incisive  force.  The  final  scene
of  the  romance  was  suggested  by  a  melancholy
incident  in  Concord,  which  deeply  affected  Haw-
thorne's imagination,  the  suicide  by  drowning  of  a
farmer's  daughter,  an  interesting  girl  whose  mind
had  grown  morbid  in  the  melancholy  consciousness
of  the  hopeless  difference  between  the  circumstances
of  her  life  and  her  educated  tastes  and  refined  ac-
complishments. Her  body  was  found  at  night,  and
raised  by  the  light  of  torches,  Hawthorne  giving
his  strong  arm  to  the  painful  service.  The  success
of  "  The  Blithedale  Romance  "  was  not  less  than
that  of  the  other  tales.

In  the  summer  of  1852  Hawthorne  removed  to
Concord,  where  he  had  bought  a  house  which  he
called  "  The  Wayside,"  and  which  he  said  Henry
Thoreau  told  him  was  once  occupied  by  a  man
who  thought  he  should  never  die.  This  fancy  was
the  motive  of  "Septimius  Felton." In  August,

1852,  he  published  a  campaign  life  of  Franklin
Pierce,  his  old  college  friend,  a  candidate  for  the
presidency.  Hawthorne  was  very  loth  to  under-
take it ;  but  Pierce  pressed  him,  and  he  could  not
refuse.  Although  a  Democrat,  Hawthorne  took  no
active  part  in  politics,  and  the  political  situation
of  the  country  merely  irritated  him.  He  had  no
sympathy  with  the  anti-slavery  controversy,  and
he  could  not  affect  a  sympathy  that  he  did  not  feel.
The  controversy,  however,  was  so  earnest  and
radical,  absorbing  every  other  public  interest,  dis-
solving and  reorganizing  political  parties,  that
Hawthorne's  position  deeply  pained  many  of  his
friends.  But  he  looked  upon  the  contest  with  an
air  of  remote  indifference,  which  was  characteristic
and  sincere,  but  none  the  less  strange  and  inex-
plicable to  ardent  combatants.  His  friend  Pierce
was  elected.  During  the  subsequent  winter  Haw-
thorne wrote  the  "  Tanglewood  Tales,"  a  second
series  of  the  "  Wonder  Book,"  and  in  the  spring  of

1853,  after  much  reluctance  upon  his  part  to  take
office,  he  was  appointed  to  the  consulate  at  Liver-
pool, the  most  lucrative  place  in  the  gift  of  the
president.  In  the  summer  of  1853  he  sailed  for
Liverpool  with  his  family.  He  lived  in  England
for  four  years,  and  the  record  of  his  English  life
is  found  in  the  "  English  Note-Books  "  and  "  Our
Old  Home."  At  the  end  of  1857  he  went  to
France,  Switzerland,  and  Italy,  returning  to  Eng-
land in  1859.  His  "  French  and  Italian  Note-
Books  "  contain  the  story  of  his  travels.  In  Italy
he  sketched  the  tale  of  "  The  Marble  Faun,"  which
he  completed  in  England,  and  it  was  published
simultaneously  in  Boston  and  London  in  1860,  the
English  edition  bearing  the  title  "  Transformation."
It  was  seven  years  since  his  last  publication  of  a
romance,  and  he  had  now  laid  the  scene  in  Italy
and  not  in  New  England.  But  the  genius  of  the
story-teller  was  unchanged.  There  are  the  same
vast,  shadowy  suggestion,  the  fascination  of  the
problem  of  moral  guilt,  the  interaction  of  the
strongest  individualities ;  there  are  passion,  sorrow,
human  feeling,  a  solemnity  in  human  life,  all
wrought  into  a  love-tale  which  is  told  with  the
power  that  throws  upon  the  reader  a  glamour  of
enchantment.

Hawthorne  returned  to  the  United  States  just  as
the  fierce  anti-slavery  controversy  was  deepening
into  war. In  1857  he  had  written  to  Bridge  that


HAWTHORNE


HAWTHORNE


129


he  sympathized  with  the  northern  feeling,  but  his
sympathy  has  still  the  air  of  remoteness.  After
the  war  began  he  wrote :  "  I  approve  the  war  as
much  as  any  man  ;  but  I  don't  quite  see  what  we
are  fighting  for."  He  was  still  a  spectator,  not  an
actor.  A  little  later  he  despaired  of  the  restoration
of  the  Union,  and  in  the  spring  of  1862  he  went  to
Washington  and  wrote  a  paper  for  the  "  Atlantic
Monthly,"  called  "Chiefly  about  War-Matters."
The  tone  of  this  paper  was  half-bantering,  a  tone

Eerfectly  natural  to  the  man  whom  the  situation
arassed  and  angered  as  much  as  it  pained.  But
the  editor  felt  that  such  a  tone  would  jar  harshly
upon  the  public  mind,  and  made  excisions,  which
were  described  good-humoredly  in  foot-notes  writ-
ten as  if  by  the  editor,  but  by  the  author  himself.

Just  before  the  visit  to  Washington  he  wrote  to
Bridge  that  he  had  begun  another  romance.  This
was  probably  "  Dr.  Grimshawe's  Secret."  He  con-
cluded some  papers  begun  in  England,  and  con-
tributed to  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  which  in  1863
were  issued  with  others  in  a  volume  called  "  Our
Old  Home."  This  he  dedicated  to  his  friend
Pierce ;  but  public  feeling  was  so  strong  against
the  ex-president  that  his  publishers  begged  the
author  not  to  imperil  thus  the  success  of  the  book.
Hawthorne  replied  that  "if  the  public  of  the
north  see  fit  to  ostracize  me  for  this,  I  can  only  say
that  I  would  gladly  sacrifice  a  thousand  or  two
dollars  rather  than  retain  the  good-will  of  such  a
herd  of  dolts  and  mean-spirited  scoundrels."  This
was  said  without  any  passion.  While  the  matter
was  still  pending,  on  20  July,  1863,  he  wrote  to  a
friend :  "  The  dedication  can  hurt  nobody  but  my
book  and  myself.  I  know  that  it  will  do  that,  but
am  content  to  take  the  consequences  rather  than
go  back  from  what  I  deliberately  judge  it  right  to
do."  In  the  same  letter  he  says  that  the  war
should  have  been  avoided,  and  that  the  best  settle-
ment would  be  a  separation  "  giving  us  the  west
bank  of  the  Mississippi  and  a  boundary-line  afford-
ing as  much  southern  soil  as  we  can  hope  to  digest
into  freedom  in  another  century."  The  dedication
was  published,  and  neither  the  book  nor  the  author
was  ostracized.  The  title  "  Our  Old  Home  "  ex-
presses the  strong  filial  feeling  of  the  genuine  son
of  New  England  for  the  old  England  of  his  an-
cestors, a  feeling  very  natural  and  common  among
the  truest  Americans.  The  book  is  a  series  of
shrewd  and  delightful  descriptive  sketches,  with
some  frank  criticisms  upon  English  life,  which
were  not  altogether  relished  in  England.  The  first
part  of  "  The  Dolliver  Romance  "  was  published  in
the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  in  July,  1864,  but  the  au-
thor had  died  more  than  a  month  before,  and  some
unrevised  parts  were  found  among  his  papers.  The
motive  of  the  tale  is  earthly  immortality,  which
was  always  attractive  to  Hawthorne.  It  appears
in  "  Dr.  Heidegger's  Experiment,"  in  "  Twice-told
Tales,"  and  there  is  a  hint  of  it  in  the  "  Virtuoso's
Collection."  The  legend  of  an  indelible  bloody
footprint  he  heard  first  in  1855,  at  Smithell's  Hall,
Lancashire,  England.  This  led  to  the  sketch  of
the  "  Ancestral  Footstep  "  and  to  "  Dr.  Grimshawe's
Secret,"  and  the  more  elaborate  study  of  "  Septi-
mius  Felton."  "  The  Dolliver  Romance  "  was  the
ultimate  form  of  the  romance  founded  on  the  elixir
of  life.  "  Septimius  Felton  "  was  deciphered  from
the  loose  manuscripts  by  his  eldest  daughter  Una,
with  the  assistance  of  Robert  Browning,  and  pub-
lished in  London  and  Boston  in  1871,  and  "Dr.
Grimshawe's  Secret,"  an  incomplete  sketch,  was
published  by  his  son  Julian  in  1882.  In  the  spring
of  1864  Hawthorne's  health  failed  rapidly.  He  was
deeply  depressed,  and  felt  that  his  work  was  done.
VOL. III. — 9.


In  April  he  went  to  Philadelphia  with  his  pub-
lisher, William  D.  Ticknor,  whose  sudden  death
while  they  lingered  in  that  city  greatly  shocked
the  enfeebled  author.  By  one  of  the  coincidences
that  always  profoundly  impressed  Hawthorne,  and
which  in  his  own  case  is  very  pathetic,  the  sudden
death  of  his  friend  Ticknor  upon  a  journey  with
him  prefigured  his  own  death  upon  a  similar  jour-
ney with  another  friend.  In  May  he  went  with
his  friend,  ex-President  Pierce,  to  the  White  moun-
tains. On  the  18th  they  reached  Plymouth,  N.  H.,
and  in  the  night  and  in  his  sleep  Hawthorne  died.
On  the  24th  of  May,  1864,

" that  one  bright  day

In  the  long  week  of  rain,"
he  was  buried  in  Sleepy  Hollow  cemetery,  Concord.
The  graves  of  Emerson  and  Thoreau  are  very  near
Hawthorne's.  The  historic  and  beautiful  town  of
Concord  has  a  twofold  title  to  renown.  It  was  the
scene  of  the  first  armed  and  orderly  resistance  to
British  aggression  on  19  April,  1775,  and  it  was
the  home  and  it  is  the  burial-place  of  Emerson  and
Hawthorne.  The  genius  of  both,  although  very  un-
like, was  among  the  most  exquisite  blossoms  of  the
New  England  Pu-
ritan stock.  A  fan-
ciful analogy  may
be  traced,  perhaps,
between  the  sunny
and  serene  and
lofty  tone  of  Emer-
son and  the  muse
of  the  young  Puri-
tan Milton,  while
the  weird  imagina-
tion of  Hawthorne,
brooding  over  the
mysteries  of  hu-
man life  and  character  and  bodying  forth  his  mus-
ings in  literary  form,  vivid,  subtle,  and  original,
may  recall  the  later  strain  of  the  poet  dealing
with  fate,  free-will,  foreknowledge  absolute.  The
three  men  of  the  same  race,  but  in  widely  separate
countries  and  times,  and  of  genius  so  genuine  but
so  dissimilar,  signally  illustrate  the  richness  and
variety  of  the  Puritan  tradition  and  character.

Hawthorne,  as  Coleridge  said  of  Wordsworth,
was  "  a  noticeable  man."  His  face  was  singularly
handsome  and  romantic,  the  outline  full  and
rounded,  the  features  symmetrical  and  strong,  the
brow  broad  and  massive,  and  the  whole  refined
head  powerful  and  poetic.  His  smile  was  very
sweet,  and  his  laugh  ready  but  not  excessive.  His
manner  was  that  of  a  very  shy  man,  but  it  was  self-
possessed  and  never  familiar.  With  others  he  was
generally  silent,  and  in  conversation  he  talked
quietly  without  effusiveness. or  ardor.  He  lived
habitually  within  himself,  and  seemed,  as  his  son
Julian  said,  to  find  no  better  society.  His  dress
was  dark  and  plain.  He  walked  rapidly,  but  with
no  air  of  effort,  and  his  frame,  well-knit  and
sturdv,  gave  his  movement  an  easy  swing,  which
implied  great  endurance.  The  photograph  known
as  the  Bennoch  portrait  (because  it  was  procured  by
Francis  Bennoch,  a  friend  in  England)  is  one  of
the  most  satisfactory  likenesses  of  Hawthorne.
There  are  several  portraits  of  him,  and  the  earlier
likenesses  reveal  the  singular  gentleness  of  his
strong  nature.  There  is  one  painted  in  1840  by
Charles  Osgood,  in  the  possession  of  his  cousin,
Richard  C.  Manning,  of  Salem.  In  1850  Cephas  G.
Thompson  painted  a  portrait  which  is  owned  by
Julian  Hawthorne.  Rouse  drew  in  crayon,  after
his  return  from  Europe,  a  likeness  now  in  the  pos-
session of  Mrs.  James  T.  Fields,  and  Leutze  painted


130


HAXALL


HAY


his  portrait  in  Washington  in  1862.  In  Rome,  Miss
Landor  modelled  a  bust  of  Hawthorne,  which  is
now  in  the  Concord  public  library,  and  Kuntze
modelled  his  head  in  profile,  but  of  a  size  a  little
smaller  than  life,  and  there  are  many  excellent  pho-
tographs. The  portrait  on  page  124  is  from  a  photo-
graph made  in  1861,  in  the  possession  of  the  senior
editor  of  this  work.  His  son  Julian  has  published
"  Nathaniel  Hawthorne  and  his  Wife,"  a  biography
(2  vols.,  Boston,  1885),  which  is  the  fullest  memoir,
and  his  son-in-law,  George  Parsons  Lathrop,  an  ad-
mirable '"Study  of  Hawthorne"  (1876).  Henry
James  wrote  his  life  for  the  series  of  "  English  Men
of  Letters  "  (1880).  The  complete  and  best  collection
of  his  works  is  the  Riverside  edition,  edited,  with  a
memoir,  by  Mr.  Lathrop  (12  vols.,  Boston,  1883).
There  is  also  a  cheaper  Globe  edition.  A  complete
analytical  index  to  his  works,  prepared  by  Evange-
line M.  O'Connor,  forms  a  volume  by  itself,  and  is
issued  uniform  with  the  various  editions  (Boston,
1882).— His  wife,  Sophia  Peabody,  author,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  26
Feb.,  1871,  possessed  artistic  talents,  and  made  her
husband's  acquaintance  while  illustrating  "  The
Gentle  Boy"  in  the  "Twice-told  Tales*  They
were  married  in  1843.  After  Hawthorne's  death
she  edited  his  "  Note-Books,"  and  published  a  vol-
ume of  her  own  observations  entitled  "Notes  in
England  and  Italy  "  (New  York,  1868).— Their  son,
Julian,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  June,  1846,
went  to  Europe  with  his  parents  in  1853,  and  after
their  return  entered  Harvard  in  1863,  but  gave
more  attention  to  athletic  exercises  than  to  his
studies.  In  1868  he  began  the  study  of  civil  en-
gineering in  the  scientific  school  at  Cambridge,
and  was  one  of  the  university  crew  in  the  regatta.
In  October,  1868,  he  went  to  Dresden  to  study,  but
the  Franco-German  war  began  while  he  was  visit-
ing at  home  in  the  summer  of  1870,  and  he  obtained
employment  as  a  hydrographic  engineer  under
Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  in  the  department  of
docks,  New  York.  In  1871  he  began  to  write
stories  and  sketches  for  magazines,  and  in  1872  lost
his  office  as  engineer,  and,  deciding  to  devote  him-
self to  literature,  went  to  England,  and  then  to
Dresden,  where  he  remained  two  years.  While
there  he  published  his  novels  of  "  Bressant "  (New
York,  1873)  and  " Idolatry"  (1874).  In  September,
1874,  he  settled  in  London,  where  he  remained  till
October,  1881.  The  following  winter  he  passed
near  Cork,  Ireland,  and  in  March,  1882,  returned
to  New  York.  While  in  England  he  contributed
much  to  the  magazines,  and  for  two  years  was  a
writer  on  the  staff  of  the  London  "  Spectator."  In
1875  he  published  in  the  "  Contemporary  Review  "
sketches  entitled  "  Saxon  Studies,"  afterward  issued
in  book-form  (New  York  and  London).  The  novel
of  "  Garth "  was  issued  in  book-form  in  1875,
and  was  followed  by  novelettes  and  collections  of
stories  entitled  "  The  Laughing  Mill,"  "  Archibald
Malmaison,"  "  Ellice  Quentin,"  "  Prince  Saroni's
Wife,"  and  the  "  Yellow  Cap  "  fairy-stories.  None
of  these  appeared  at  the  time  in  the  United  States,
but  "  Prince  Saroni's  Wife  "  was  reprinted  in  New
York  in  1884.  "  Sebastian  Stroine,"  his  next  novel,
was  published  in  book-form  in  1880,  "  Fortune's
FooP  in  1883,  and  "  Dust "  and  "  Noble  Blood  "  in
1884.  After  his  return  to  the  United  States  he
edited  his  father's  posthumous  romance,  "  Dr.
Grimshaw's  Secret,"  and  wrote  the  biography  of
his  father  and  mother. — Nathaniel  Hawthorne's
eldest  daughter,  Una,  died  unmarried.  His  daugh-
ter Rose  married  George  Parsons  Lathrop.

HAXALL,  Robert  William,  physician,  b.  in
Petersburg,  Va., 1 Aug.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Richmond,


Va.,  26  March,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1823,  attended  a  course  of  medical  lectures  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  received  his
medical  degree  from  the  University  of  Maryland
in  1826.  After  studying  in  Europe,  he  settled  in
Richmond,  where  he  had  a  large  practice.  He
was  on  several  occasions  president  of  the  Medical
society  of  Virginia,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  American  medical  association.  He  obtained
two  Boylston  prizes  for  essays,  and  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  "  Stethoscope."

HAY,  Charles  Augustus,  theologian,  b.  in
York,  Pa.,  11  Feb.,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at
Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1839,  and  at
the  Lutheran  theological  seminary  in  that  town  in
1841.  He  continued  his  studies  in  1841-'3  at  Ber-
lin and  Halle,  Germany,  and  during  these  years
travelled  extensively  on  the  continent  of  Europe
and  in  Great  Britain.  After  his  return  in  1843  he
became  pastor  in  1844  of  the  Lutheran  congrega-
tion at  Middletown,  Md.  From  this  place  he  was
called  to  the  chair  of  Hebrew  and  German  i  n  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  which  he  held
from  1844  till  1848.  He  was  pastor  at  Hanover  in
1848-'9,  and  at  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  in  1849-'65.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  again  called  to  the  theologi-
cal seminary  as  professor  of  Hebrew,  German,  bib-
lical criticism,  and  pastoral  theology.  He  has
discharged  the  duties  of  this  office  for  more  than
twenty  years,  and  takes  a  high  rank  as  a  theolo-
gian and  educator  in  his  church.  He  belongs  to
the  conservative  wing  of  the  general  synod,  and  is
an  advocate  of  distinctive  Lutheranism.  Together
with  the  Rev.  H.  E.  Jacobs,  D.  D.,  he  translated
from  the  German,  Dr.  Schmid's  "  Doctrinal  The-
ology of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  "  (1876 ;
revised  ed.,  1887),  and  is  a  frequent  contributor  to
the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"  "  Evangelical  Review,"
"  Quarterly  Review,"  and  other  periodicals.

HAY,  George,  jurist,  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  21
Sept.,  1830.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia
legislature,  was  for  many  years  U.  S.  attorney,  and
in  that  capacity  was  the  prosecutor  of  Aaron  Burr.
He  was  subsequently  a  judge  of  the  U.  S.  court
for  the  eastern  district  of  Virginia,  and  married  a
daughter  of  President  Monroe.  He  gained  some
celebrity  from  his  political  writings,  which  were
signed  "  Hortensius,"  and  wrote  a  treatise  against
usury  laws,  a  life  of  John  Thompson,  and  a  trea-
tise on  "  Expatriation  "  (1814).

HAY,  John,  author,  b.  in  Salem,  Ind.,  8  Oct.,
1838.  His  ancestor,  John,  was  a  son  of  a  Scottish
soldier  who  left  his  own  country  in  the  beginning
of  the  last  century  and  took  service  in  the  army
of  the  Elector  Palatine.  The  son,  with  his  family,
emigrated  to  this  country,  and  two  grandsons
served  with  distinction  in  the  war  of  independence.
John  Hay  took,  while  in  college,  high  rank  as  a
writer,  and  after  graduation  at  Brown  in  1858,
studied  law  at  Springfield,  111.  He  was  admitted
to  practice  in  the  supreme  court  in  Illinois  in  1861,
but  immediately  afterward  went  to  Washington  as
assistant  secretary  to  President  Lincoln,  remain-
ing with  him,  both  as  a  secretary  and  a  trusted
friend,  almost  constantly  till  his  death.  He  acted
also  as  his  adjutant  and  aide-de-camp,  and  served
for  several  months  under  Gen.  Hunter  and  Gen.
Gillmore,  with  the  rank  of  major  and  assistant  ad-
jutant-general. He  was  also  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel  and  colonel.  He  was  first  secretary  of  le-
gation at  Paris,  and  several  times  in  charge  in
1865-'7,  and  charge  de  affaires  at  Vienna  in  1867-'8,
when  he  resigned  and  came  home,  but  was  soon
afterward  secretary  of  legation  at  Madrid,  where
j  he  remained  more  than  a  year. Leaving  that


HAY


HAYDEN


131


post  in  1870,  he  came  to  New  York  and  became  an
editorial  writer  on  the  "Tribune,"  where  he  re-
mained about  five  years.  He  was  afterward  edi-
tor-in-chief of  that  paper  for  seven  months,  during
the  absence  of  Whitelaw  Reid  in  Europe.  He  re-
moved to  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1875,  and  took  an
active  part  in  the  presidential  canvasses  of  1876,
1880,  and  1884.  Under  the  administration  of
President  Hayes  he  was  first  assistant  secretary  of
state  in  1879-'81.  In  the  latter  year  he  represent-
ed the  United  States  at  the  International  sanitary
congress  of  Washington,  of  which  body  he  was
elected  president.  He  has  published  "  Pike  Coun-
ty Ballads,"  one  of  the  best  known  of  which  is
"Jim  Bludso"  (Boston,  1871),  "Castilian  Hays"
studies  of  Spanish  life  and  character  (1871),  and
has  been  engaged  many  years  in  writing,  in  col-
laboration with  John  G.  Nicolay,  a  "  History  of
the  Administration  of  Abraham  Lincoln,"  which
is  now  (1887)  in  course  of  serial  publication  in
"  The  Century."  Col.  Hay  is  also  the  translator  of
Einilio  Castelar's  treatise  on  the  Republican  move-
ment in  Europe  (New  York,  1874-'5).

HAY,  Walter,  physician,  b.  in  Georgetown,
D.  C,  13  June,  1830.  He  was  educated  in  private
schools  and  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  his  native
place.  In  1847  he  entered  the  employ  of  the  U.  S.
coast  survey,  but  resigned  in  1852,  studied  medi-
cine, and  was  graduated  at  Columbian  college  in
1853.  After  spending  four  years  in  Charleston
and  Florida,  he  removed  in  1857  to  Chicago,  111.
He  organized  St.  Luke's  hospital  in  that  city  in
1864,  became  editor  of  the  Chicago  "  Medical  Jour-
nal "in  1867,  and  retained  this  connection  until
the  sale  of  the  paper  in  1875.  In  1867  he  assisted
in  organizing  the  health  department  of  the  city  of
Chicago.  In  1871  he  was  one  of  the  committee  of
five  to  receive  and  distribute  the  fire  relief  fund.
In  the  same  year  he  organized  the  department  of
mental  and  nervous  diseases  in  Rush  medical  col-
lege, Chicago,  and  in  1872  was  appointed  adjunct
professor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in
that  institution.  He  assisted  in  organizing  the
American  neurological  association  in  1875.  and  in
1877  removed  to  Dubuque,  Iowa.  He  is  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  Chicago  "Medical  Journal."

HAYDEN,  Ferdinand  Yandeveer,  geologist,
b.  in  Westfield,  Mass.,  7  Sept.,  1829:  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  22  Dec,  1887.  He  settled  in  Ohio,  was
graduated  at  Ober-
lin  in  1850  and  at
Albany  medical  col-
lege in  1853.  Dur-
ing the  same  year  he
explored  the  "  Bad
Lands "  of  Dakota
for  James  Hall,  state
geologist  of  New
York,  and  returned
with  a  large  and  val-
uable collection  of
fossil  vertebrates.  In
1854  he  again  went
west,  spent  two  years
in  exploring  the  ba-
sin of  the  upper  Mis-
souri, and  returned
with  a  large  number
of  fossils,  part  of
which  he  deposited
in  the  St.  Louis  academy  of  science,  and  the  re-
mainder in  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural
sciences.  These  collections  attracted  the  attention
of  the  authorities  of  the  Smithsonian  institution,
and  he  was  appointed  geologist  on  the  staff  of


J.J.U^i^^


Lieut.  Gouverneur  K.  Warren,  of  the  topographical
engineers,  who  was  then  making  a  reconnoissance
of  the  northwest,  after  which,  in  May,  1859,  he  was
appointed  naturalist  and  surgeon  to  "the  expedition
sent  out  for  the  exploration  of  the  Yellowstone  and
Missouri  rivers  under  Capt.  William  F.  Raynolds.
He  continued  in  this  capacity  until  May,  1862,  when
he  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  assistant  surgeon  of
volunteers,  and  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the  Satterlee
hospital  in  Philadelphia,  becoming  full  surgeon  on
19  Feb.,  1863,  when  he  was  sent  to  Beaufort,  S.  C,
as  chief  medical  officer.  In  February,  1864,  he
became  assistant  medical  inspector  of  the  Depart-
ment of  Washington,  and  in  September,  1864,  he
was  sent  to  Winchester.  Va.,  as  chief  medical  offi-
cer of  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah.  This  office  he
held  until  May,  1865.  when  he  resigned  and  was
given  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was
appointed  professor  of  mineralogy  and  geology  in
1865  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  held
that  chair  until  1872,  when  the  increased  duties  of
the  survey  caused  his  resignation.  During  the
summer  of  1866  he  again  visited  the  valley  of  the
upper  Missouri  for  the  Philadelphia  academy  of
sciences,  and  gathered  valuable  vertebrate  fossils.
In  1867  congress  provided  for  the  geological  sur-
vey of  Nebraska.  Dr.  Hayden  was  directed  to
perform  the  work,  and  continued  so  occupied  until
1  April,  1869,  when  it  was  organized  under  the
title  of  the  Geological  survev  of  the  territories  of
the  United  States.  From  1869  till  1872  Dr.  Hay-
den conducted  a  series  of  geological  explorations
in  Dakota,  Wyoming,  Utah,  and  Colorado,  the
scope  of  investigation  including,  besides  geology,
the  natural  history,  climatology,  resources,  and
ethnology  of  the  region.  It  was  largely  in  conse-
quence of  his  explorations  and  reports  that  congress
was  led  to  set  apart  the  Yellowstone  national  park
as  a  perpetual  reservation.  In  1873  geography  was
added,  and  the  name  of  the  organization  then
became  the  Geological  and  geographical  survey
of  the  territories.  Dr.  Hayden  continued  the  di-
rection of  this  survey  until  1879.  when  the  then
existing  national  surveys  were  consolidated  into
the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  Dr.  Hayden  was
made  geologist-in-charge  of  the  Montana  division.
He  held  this  office  until  31  Dec,  1886,  when  fail-
ing health  led-  to  his  resignation.  Dr.  Hayden
was  a  member  of  scientific  societies  both  in  the
United  States  and  in  Europe,  and  in  1873  was
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  In
1887  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  lie  wrote
numerous  scientific  papers,  and  his  government
publications  were  very  large.  The  latter  include
annual  reports  of  his  work  performed  from  1867
till  1879 ;  also  a  series  of  "  Miscellaneous  Pub-
lications "  on  special  subjects  written  by  authori-
ties in  the  specialties  of  which  they  treat,  and  a
series  of  quarto  volumes  entitled  "  Report  of  the
U.  S.  Geological  Survev  of  the  Territories."

HAYDEN,  Horace *H.,  dentist,  b.  in  Windsor.
Conn.,  13  Oct.,  1769;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  26  Jan.,
1844.  His  parents  were  impoverished  by  the  war
of  the  Revolution,  in  which  his  father  was  an  officer.
The  son  taught  school  at  sixteen  years  of  age.
studied  architecture,  and  practised  that  profVs-inn
until  his  majority.  He  then  was  brought  in  con-
tact with  Dr.  Greenwood,  the  dentist,  of  Washing-
ton, in  New  York.  He  studied  dentistry,  and  set-
tled in  1804  in  Baltimore,  where  he  practised  with
eminent  success  till  his  death.  Dr.  Hayden  stud-
ied medicine,  and  geology  also,  and  was  called  in
consultation  by  the  chief  "physicians  of  Baltimore.
His  correspondence  in  Europe  on  geology,  botany.


132


HAYES


HAYES


and  dental  science  was  extensive.  Dr.  Hayden  was
a  surgeon  of  Maryland  troops  in  the  battle  of
North  Point  in  1814.  He  received  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  D.  from  Jefferson  college  in  1837,
and  from  Maryland  medical  university  in  1840.
He  was  the  founder  and  incorporator,  and  first
president,  of  Baltimore  college  of  dental  surgery,
and  its  first  professor  of  dental  pathology  and
physiology  from  1839  till  his  death.  He  was  also
founder  and  president  until  his  death  of  the
American  society  of  dental  surgery,  and  a  founder
and  vice-president  of  the  Maryland  academy  of  sci-
ence and  literature.  He  was  a  member  of  many
other  learned  societies,  and  published  "  Geological
Essays,  or  an  Inquiry  into  Geological  Phenomena
to  be  found  in  Various  Parts  of  America "  (Balti-
more, 1820),  which  Benjamin  Silliman  said  "  should
be  a  text-book  in  all  our  schools,"  and  papers,  in-
cluding li  New  Method  of  preserving  Anatomical
Preparations,"  in  the  "American  Medical  Record  "
of  1822 ;  "  Notice  of  a  Singular  Ore  of  Cobalt  and
Manganese,"  in  "  Silliman's  Journal "  (1822) ;  "  The
Bare  Hills  near  Baltimore,"  in  "  Silliman's  Jour-
nal "  for  1832 ;  and  "  Silk  Cocoons,"  in  the  "  Jour-
nal of  the  American  Silk  Company  "  (1839).

HAYES,  Augustus  Allen,  chemist,  b.  in  Wind-
sor, Vt.,  28  Feb.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  21
June,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Capt.  Par-
tridge's military  academy  at  Norwich,  Vt.,  in  1823,
and  then  studied  chemistry  under  James  P.  Dana.
Subsequently  he  became  assistant  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  New  Hampshire  medical  college,
but  settled  in  Boston  in  1828,  where  he  devoted
himself  to  chemical  investigations,  filling  also  suc-
cessively the  posts  of  director  of  an  extensive  fac-
tory of  colors  and  chemical  products  in  Roxbury
and  of  consulting  chemist  to  some  of  the  most
important  dyeing,  bleaching,  gas,  and  iron  and
copper  smelting  establishments  in  New  England.
Among  his  early  researches  is  that  begun  in  1825
for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  proximate  com-
position of  various  American  medicinal  plants,
which  resulted  in  his  discovery  of  the  organic  alka-
loid sanguinaria,  a  compound  remarkable  for  the
brilliant  colors  of  its  salts.  Later  he  conducted
an  elaborate  investigation  upon  the  economical
generation  of  steam  and  the  relative  value  of  fuels,
which,  in  1838,  led  to  a  novel  arrangement  of
steam-boilers.  He  was  the  first  to  suggest  the  ap-
plication of  the  oxides  of  iron  in  refining  pig-iron,
and  still  earlier  the  refining  of  copper  was,  under
his  direction,  rendered  much  shorter  and  more
certain  by  the  introduction  of  scales  of  oxide  of
copper.  Among  his  other  original  investigations
are  those  in  relation  to  the  chemical  decomposition
of  alcohol  by  chlorine  and  the  formation  of  chloro-
form, on  the  action  of  alcohol  on  the  human  sys-
tem, on  the  formation,  composition,  and  specific
differences  of  the  varieties  of  guano,  and  a  memoir
on  the  difference  in  the  chemical  constitution  and
action  of  sea  waters  on  and  below  the  surface,  on
soundings,  and  at  the  entrance  of  rivers,  being
part  of  an  investigation  executed  under  a  commis-
sion from  the  navy  department  to  examine  and  re-
port on  the  subject  of  copper  and  copper  sheath-
ing as  applied  in  the  construction  of  national  ves-
sels. In  1859-'60,  while  investigating  the  water
supply  of  Charlestown,  Mass.,  he  found  that  the
deep  water  of  Mystic  pond  was  far  less  pure  than
the  surface  water,  and  proved  that  a  copper  strip
or  wire  passing  vertically  through  two  masses  of
water  slightly  unlike  in  composition  would  become
polarized  and  exhibit  electrolytic  action.  This
mode  of  testing  the  exact  limits  of  the  impure
water  was  applied  under  his  direction,  and  a  large


number  of  observations  on  this  and  other  masses
of  water  have  proved  the  practical  value  of  this
test.  After  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  Dr.
Hayes  called  public  attention  to  the  uncertainty  of
the  foreign  supply  of  saltpetre  and  the  necessity  of
domestic  production.  His  efforts  resulted  in  the
manufacture  of  a  very  pure  product  for  the  navy
by  a  novel  process  from  sodium  nitrate  by  the  ac-
tion of  potassium  hydroxide.  Later  he  spent  some
time  abroad,  and  on  his  return  published  a  paper
"  On  the  Cause  of  the  Color  of  Lake  Leman,  Ge-
neva," and  also  one  "  On  the  Red  Oxide  of  Zinc
in  New  Jersey."  For  many  years  he  held  the  of-
fice of  state  assayer  of  Massachusetts,  and  in  1846
received  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  from  Dart-
mouth. He  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies  in
the  United  States,  and  contributed  numerous  pa-
pers of  technical  value  to  their  proceedings  and  to
the  "  American  Journal  of  Science."

HAYES,  Catharine,  vocalist,  b.  in  Limerick,
Ireland,  in  1825;  d.  in  Sydenham,  England,  11
Aug.,  1861.  She  early  displayed  a  good  voice,  at
the  age  of  sixteen  was  placed  under  the  tuition  of
Signor  Sapio,  an  eminent  vocal  instructor  in  Dub-
lin, and  during  her  course  with  him  made  her  first
appearance  at  a  public  concert.  She  studied  in  the
school  of  Manuel  Garcia  in  Paris  in  1844-'6,  and
in  the  autumn  of  1845  appeared  at  Marseilles  in
"  I  Puritani."  In  1846  she  sang  at  Milan  with
much  success.  In  1849  she  appeared  at  the  Royal
Italian  opefra,  Covent  Garden,  London.  Shortly
afterward  the  success  of  Jenny  Lind  during  her
career  in  this  country  attracted  attention,  and  Miss
Hayes  visited  the  United  States  in  1851.  She
sang  in  numerous  concerts,  oratorios,  and  ballad
entertainments  with  success,  extending  her  tour  to
the  principal  cities  of  the  Union  and  British
America.  Her  stay  in  this  country  lasted  eighteen
months,  during  which  time  she  was  married  to  a
Mr.  Bushnell.  She  then  visited  in  succession
South  America,  the  Sandwich  and  other  Polyne-
sian islands,  Australia,  and  the  East  Indies.  Re-
turning to  England  in  1855,  she  made  her  re-en-
trance in  Italian  opera  at  Covent  Garden  theatre,
and  soon  afterward  closed  her  professional  career.
Later  she  and  her  husband  quietly  spent  several
years  in  California  and  returned  to  England  with
an  ample  fortune.  Catharine  Hayes  had  a  remark-
ably full,  sympathetic  mezzo-soprano  voice,  which
she  used  with  great  effect  in  slow  movements  and
in  ballads.  Her  rendering  of  Bellini's  "  Casta
Diva  "  and  of  Crouch's  "  Kathleen  Mavourneen  "
could  scarcely  be  excelled.

HAYES,  Isaac  Israel,  arctic  explorer,  b.  in
Chester  county,  Pa.,  5  March,  1832 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  17  Dec,  1881.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania in

1853,  and  sailed  as  surgeon  of  the  second  Grin-
nell  expedition  in  search  of  Sir  John  Franklin,
better  known,  from  its  commander,  as  the  Kane
expedition.  (See  Kane,  E.  K.)  Dr.  Hayes  proved
an  energetic  and  valuable  coadjutor  of  Kane.  In
addition  to  his  duties  as  surgeon  and  naturalist,
he  made  a  short  trip  on  the  glacier,  inland  from
Van  Rensselaer  harbor,  and  assisted  in  laying  out
depots  in  the  autumn  of  1853.  In  May,  1854,  he
crossed  Kane  sea,  and  was  the  first  civilized  man
to  place  foot  on  Grinnell  Land,  along  the  coast  of
which  he  travelled  to  Cape  Frazer,  about  79°  45'
north  latitude.  The  "  Advance  "  was  frozen  in  on
9  Sept.,  1853,  and  remained  so  in  the  summer  of

1854.  Dr.  Kane  turned  toward  Beechy  island  by
boat  for  assistance,  but  was  obliged  by  the  condi-
tion of  the  ice  to  return  to  his  old  winter-quarters.
On  28  Aug.,  1854,  Dr.  Hayes  and  eight  others  left


I


HAYES


HAYES


133


the  "  Advance,"  in  a  hazardous  attempt  to  reach
Upernavik.  An  account  of  this  trip  is  to  be  found
in  "  An  Arctic  Boat-Journey  "  (Philadelphia,  1860),
where  Dr.  Hayes  justifies  his  leaving  the  ship.  The
journey  was  taken  with  Dr.  Kane's  permission,  but
this  was  given  only  after  he  had  advised  Hayes

to  forego  the  pro-
ject, and  exacted  a
renunciation  of  all
claims  on  those  left
behind.  The  boat
party  reached  a
point  sixteen  miles
south  of  Cape  Par-
ry, where  they  were
stopped  by  ice,  and
dragged  out  a  miser-
able existence,  aided
by  the  charity  of
the  Etah  Esqui-
maux, until  Decem-
ber, when  they  re-
turned, nearly  froz-
en and  starving.  In
the  summer  of  1854
the  entire  party  un-
der Dr.  Kane  by  sledge  and  boat  reached  Upernavik
safely.  On  7  July,  1860,  Dr.  Hayes  sailed  in  com-
mand of  the  "  United  States,"  which  had  been
fitted  out  by  public  subscription  for  exploration  of
the  open  polar  sea.  He  wintered  in  Foulke  Fiord.
lat.  78°  18'  N.,  near  Littleton  island.  In  May,  1861.
he  crossed  Kane  sea,  again  set  foot  on  Grinnell
Land,  attaining  on  18  May  a  point  which  he  called
Cape  Lieber,  and  which  his  observations  placed  in
lat.  81°  35'  N.,  long.  70°  30'  W.  His  various  offi-
cial observations  and  personal  accounts  are  not
entirely  consistent  in  this  respect.  Competent
explorers  who  have  since  visited  Kennedy  channel
surmise  that  his  latitudes  were  incorrect,  and  that
his  farthest  point  was  Cape  Joseph  Good,  about
lat.  80°  15'  N.,  long.  70°  W.  The  "open  polar
sea  "  was  doubtless  the  southern  part  of  Kennedy
channel,  which  opens  early  every  year.  Breaking
out  of  his  ship  on  10  July,  1861.  an  unprece-
dentedly  early  date  for  an  arctic  vessel,  he  ex-

Slored  a  considerable  part  of  the  eastern  shore  of
lllesmere  Land,  being  the  first  known  white  man
to  land  thereon.  In  1869  Hayes  again  entered
the  arctic  circle,  visiting  Greenland  with  the
artist  William  Bradford  in  the  "Panther."  For
his  arctic  work  Dr.  Hayes  received  the  founder's
medal  of  the  Royal  geographical  society  in  1867
and  the  gold  medal  of  the  Paris  society  in  1869,
and  was  made  an  honorary  member  of  many  sci-
entific societies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.
He  returned  from  his  second  expedition  to  find
the  civil  war  begun,  immediately  sought  service,
was  commissioned  surgeon  of  volunteers,  4  April,
1862,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  13
March,  1865.  He  resigned,  3  July,  1865,  and  re-
moved to  New  York  city,  where  he  was  elected  to
the  assembly,  serving  five  years.  He  was  possessed
of  great  native  vigor,  and  won  reputation  not  only
as  an  explorer,  but  as  an  author,  lecturer,  surgeon,
and  legislator.  He  published,  besides  the  book
alluded  to  above.  "  The  Open  Polar  Sea,"  giving  an
account  of  his  second  expedition  (Boston.  1867);
I  Cast  Awav  in  the  Cold,  a  Story  of  Arctic  Ad-
venture for  Boys"  (1868);  and  "The  Land  of
Desolation,"  describing  his  third  voyage  (1871).

HAYES,  John  Lord,  lawyer,  b.  in  South  Ber-
wick, Me.,  13  April,  1812  :•  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
18  April,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1831,  and  studied  law  at  Harvard,  being  ad-


mitted to  the  bar  in  1835.  In  1846  he  organized
the  Katahdin  iron- works  in  Maine,  and  soon  after-
ward was  employed  in  Washington  as  counsel  for
the  Canadian  government  on  the  advocacy  of  the
reciprocity  treaty.  He  had  previously  taken  part
in  politics  in  his  native  state,  and  had  drawn  up
the  call  for  the  first  convention  of  Independent
Democrats,  when  the  party  was  divided  on  the
issue  of  slavery  extension.  He  organized  and
was  secretary  of  the  Mexican,  Rio  Grande,  and
Pacific  railway  company,  and  in  1854  obtained  a
charter  from  the  Mexican  government  that  au-
thorized the  construction  of  a  railroad  across
Mexico.  In  1861-5  he  was  chief  clerk  of  the
U.  S.  patent-office,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  be-
came secretary  of  the  National  association  of  wool
manufacturers,  which  office  he  retained  till  his
death.  In  1860  Dartmouth  college  conferred  upon
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  was  a  student  of
natural  history,  collected  and  mounted  with  taste
and  skill  a  complete  cabinet  of  birds,  made  a
herbarium  of  the  flora,  and  studied  geology  in  the
library  and  the  field.  He  became  a  member  of
the  Boston  society  of  natural  history  in  1845,  and
was  also  connected  with  other  scientific  associa-
tions both  in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe.
As  early  as  1843  he  presented  before  the  American
association  of  geologists  and  naturalists  a  paper
on  glaciers,  which  was  regarded  as  the  most  im-
portant contribution  up  to  that  time  toward  the
history  of  glacial  phenomena  in  relation  to  geol-
ogy. His  writings,  which  are  mainly  devoted  to
legal,  political,  and  scientific  subjects,  comprise
over  sixty  titles,  and  include  "  The  Iron  Mines  of
Nova  Scotia,"  "Jackson's  Vindication  as  the  Dis-
coverer of  Anaesthetics,"  "  The  Hudson  Bay  Ques-
tion," "The  Protective  Question  Abroad  and  at
Home."  "  Sheep  Industry  in  the  South,"  and  many
articles  and  pamphlets  on  wool-growing  and  wool-
manufacturing.  His  pamphlet  entitled  "  Remi-
niscences of  the  Free-Soil  Movement  in  New  Hamp-
shire "  (1845)  attracted  much  attention.

HAYES,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Berwick,
Me.,  14  Sept.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1855,  appointed  major  of  the  18th  Massachu-
setts regiment,  26  Julv,  1861,  lieutenant-colonel,
25  Aug.,  1862,  colonel,  30  Nov..  1862,  and  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  12  May,  1864.  He  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  Confederates,  and  was  for  several
months  confined  in  Libbv  prison,  Richmond,  Va.
He  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers,  13
March,  1865,  and  mustered  out  of  service  on  24
Aug.  In  January,  1865,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
commissioner  of  supplies  in  the  seceded  states.  In
1877  he  introduced  the  American  system  of  hy-
draulic mining  into  the  United  States  of  Colombia.

HAYES,  Philip  Cornelius,  soldier,  b.  in
Granby,  Conn..  3  Feb.,  1833.  He  removed  in
infancy  to  La  Salle  county.  111.,  and  spent  many
of  his  early  years  on  a  farm.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Oberfin  in  1860,  and  at  the  Theological
seminary  in  1863.  He  entered  the  army  as  cap-
tain in  the  103d  Ohio  infantrv,  and  served  with
this  regiment  from  16  July,  1862,  till  22  June.
1865,  its  entire  period  of  service,  being  promoted
successively  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel,  and
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  at  the
close  of  the  war.  He  served  in  Kentucky,  in  West
Tennessee  in  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Knox-
ville,  was  in  the  hundred  days'  campaign  to  At-
lanta, and  was  in  the  battles  of  Resaca  and  At-
lanta. He  took  part  in  the  engagements  of  Frank-
lin and  Nashville,  and  was  with  the  army  in  its
march  from  Fort  Fisher  to  Raleigh,  N.  C,  in  the
capture of  Wilmington, and  at  Johnston's  sur-


134


HAYES


HAYES


render.  During  his  last  year's  service  he  was  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  John  M.  Schofleld.  He  was  then
elected  a  representative  in  congress  as  a  Republi-
can, and  served  from  4  March,  1877,  till  4  March,
1881.  He  has  published  a  "  History  of  the  103d
Ohio  Regiment "  (1872).

HAYES,  Rutherford  Birchard,  nineteenth
president  of  the  United  States,  b.  in  Delaware,
Ohio,  4  Oct.,  1822.  His  father  had  died  in  July,
1822,  leaving  his  mother  in  modest  but  easy  cir-
cumstances. The  boy  received  his  first  education
in  the  common  schools,  and  began  early  the  study
of  Latin  and  Greek  with  Judge  Sherman  Finch,  of
Delaware.  Then  he  was  sent  to  an  academy  at
Norwalk,  Ohio,  and  in  1837  to  Isaac  Webb's  school,
at  Middletown,  Conn.,  to  prepare  for  college.  In
the  autumn  of  1838  he  entered  Kenyon  college,  at
Gambier,  Ohio.  He  excelled  in  logic,  mental  and
moral  philosophy,  and  mathematics,  and  also  made
his  mark  as  a  debater  in  the  literary  societies.  On
his  graduation  in  August,  1842,  he  was  awarded
the  valedictory  oration,  with  which  he  won  much
praise.  Soon  afterward  he  began  to  study  law  in  the
office  of  Thomas  Sparrow,  at  Columbus,  Ohio,  and
then  attended  a  course  of  law  lectures  at  Harvard
university,  entering  the  law-school  on  22  Aug.,  1843,
and  finishing  his  studies  there  in  January,  1845.
As  a  law  student  he  had  the  advantage  of  friendly
intercourse  with  Judge  Story  and  Prof.  Greenleaf,
and  he  also  attended  the  lectures  of  Longfellow  on
literature  and  of  Agassiz  on  natural  science,  prose-
cuting at  the  same  time  the  study  of  French  and
German.  On  10  May,  1845,  after  due  examination,
he  was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  courts  of  Ohio
as  an  attorney  and  counsellor  at  law.  He  estab-
lished himself  first  at  Lower  Sandusky  (now  Fre-
mont), where,  in  April,  1846,  he  formed  a  law  part-
nership with  Ralph  P.  Buckland  (q.  v.),  then  a
member  of  congress.  In  November,  1848,  having
suffered  from  bleeding  in  the  throat,  Mr.  Hayes
went  to  spend  the  winter  in  the  milder  climate  of
Texas,  where  his  health  was  completely  restored.
Encouraged  by  the  good  opinion  and  advice  of
professional  friends  to  seek  a  larger  field  of  activi-
ty, he  established  himself,  in  the  winter  of  1849-'50,
in  Cincinnati.  His  practice  at  first  being  light,
he  earnestly  and  systematically  continued  his
studies  in  law  and  literature,  also  enlarging  the
circle  of  his  acquaintance  by  becoming  a  member
of  various  societies,  among  others  the  literary  club
of  Cincinnati,  in  the  social  and  literary  entertain-
ments of  which  at  that  time  such  men  as  Salmon
P.  Chase,  Thomas  Ewing,  Thomas  Corwin,  Stanley
Matthews,  Moncure  D.  Conway,  Manning  F.  Force,
and  others  of  note,  were  active  participants.  He
won  the  respect  of  the  profession,  and  attracted
the  attention  of  the  public  as  attorney  in  several
criminal  cases  which  gained  some  celebrity,  and
gradually  increased  his  practice.

On  30  Dec,  1852,  he  married  Miss  Lucy  W.  Webb,
daughter  of  Dr.  James  Webb,  a  physician  of  high
standing  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio.  In  January,  1854,
he  formed  a  law  partnership  with  H.  W.  Corwine
and  William  K.  Rogers.  In  1856  he  was  nomi-
nated for  the  office  of  common  pleas  judge,  but
declined.  In  1858  he  was  elected  city  solicitor  by
the  city  council  of  Cincinnati,  to  fill  a  vacancy
caused  by  death,  and  in  the  following  year  he  was
elected  to  the  same  office  at  a  popular  election  by
a  majority  of  over  2,500  votes.  Although  he  per-
formed his  duties  to  the  general  satisfaction  of  the
public,  he  was,  in  April,  1861,  defeated  for  re-elec-
tion as  solicitor,  together  with  the  whole  ticket.
Mr.  Hayes,  ever  since  he  was  a  voter,  had  acted
with  the  Whig  party,  voting  for  Henry  Clay  in


1844,  for  Gen.  Taylor  in  1848,  and  for  Gen.  Scott
in  1852.  Having  from  his  youth  always  cherished
anti-slavery  feelings,  he  joined  the  Republican
party  as  soon  as  it  was  organized,  and  earnestly
advocated  the  election  of  Fremont  in  1856,  and  of
Abraham  Lincoln  in  1860.  At  a  great  mass-meet-
ing, held  in  Cincinnati  immediately  after  the  ar-
rival of  the  news  that  the  flag  of  the  United  States
had  been  fired  upon  at  Fort  Sumter,  he  was  made
chairman  of  a  committee  on  resolutions  to  give
voice  to  the  feelings  of  the  loyal  people.  His  liter-
ary club  formed  a  military  company,  of  which  he
was  elected  captain,  and  this  club  subsequently
furnished  to  the  National  army  more  than  forty
officers,  of  whom  several  became  generals.  On  7
June,  1861,  the  governor  of  Ohio  appointed  Mr.
Hayes  a  major  of  the  23d  regiment  of  Ohio  volun-
teer infantry,  and  in  July  the  regiment  was  ordered
into  West  Virginia.  On  19  Sept.,  1861,  Maj.  Hayes
was  appointed  by  Gen.  Rosecrans  judge  advocate
of  the  Department  of  Ohio,  the  duties  of  which
office  he  performed  for  about  two  months.  On  24
Oct.,  1861,  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel. On  14  Sept.,  1862,  in  the  battle  of
South  Mountain,  he  distinguished  himself  by  gal-
lant conduct  in  leading  a  charge  and  in  holding
his  position  at  the  head  of  his  men,  after  being
severely  wounded  in  his  left  arm,  until  he  was  car-
ried from  the  field.  His  regiment  lost  nearly  half
its  effective  force  in  the  action.  On  24  Oct.,  1862,
he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  same  regiment.
He  spent  some  time  at  his  home  while  under  medi-
cal treatment,  and  returned  to  the  field  as  soon  as
his  wound  was  healed.  In  July,  1863,  while  taking
part  in  the  operations  of  the  National  army  in
southwestern  Virginia,  Col.  Hayes  caused  an  ex-
pedition of  two  regiments  and  a  section  of  artillery,
under  his  own  command,  to  be  despatched  to  Ohio
for  the  purpose  of  checking  the  raid  of  the  Con-
federate Gen.  John  Morgan,  and  he  aided  materi-
ally in  preventing  the  raiders  from  recrossing  the
Ohio  river  and  in  compelling  Morgan  to  surrender.
In  the  spring  of  1864  Col.  Hayes  commanded  a
brigade  in  Gen.  Crook's  expedition  to  cut  the  prin-
cipal lines  of  communication  between  Richmond
and  the  southwest.  He  again  distinguished  him-
self by  conspicuous  bravery  at  the  head  of  his  bri-
gade in  storming  a  fortified  position  on  the  crest  of
Cloyd  mountain.  In  the  first  battle  of  Winches-
ter, 24  July,  1864,  commanding  a  brigade  in  Gen.
Crook's  division,  Col.  Hayes  was  ordered,  together
with  Col.  James  Mulligan,  to  charge  what  proved
to  be  a  greatly  superior  force.  Col.  Mulligan  fell,
and  Col.  Hayes,  flanked  and  pressed  in  front  by
overwhelming  numbers,  conducted  the  retreat  of
his  brigade  with  great  intrepidity  and  skill,  check-
ing the  pursuit  as  soon  as  he  had  gained  a  tenable
position.  He  took  a  creditable  part  in  the  en-
gagement at  Berryville  and  at  the  second  battle  of
Winchester,  19  Sept.,  1864,  where  he  performed  a
feat  of  extraordinary  bravery.  Leading  an  assault
upon  a  battery  on  an  eminence,  he  found  in  his
way  a  morass  over  fifty  yards  wide.  Being  at  the
head  of  his  brigade,  he  plunged  in  first,  and,  his
horse  becoming  mired  at  once,  he  dismounted  and
waded  across  alone  under  the  enemy's  fire.  Wav-
ing his  cap,  he  signalled  to  his  men  to  come  over,
and,  when  about  forty  had  joined  him,  he  rushed
upon  the  battery  and  took  it  after  a  hand-to-hand
fight  with  the  gunners,  the  enemy  having  deemed
the  battery  so  secure  that  no  infantry  supports  had
been  placed  near  it.  At  Fisher's  Hill,  in  pursuing
Gen.  Early,  on  22  Sept.,  1864,  Col.  Hayes,  then  in
command  of  a  division,  executed  a  brilliant  flank
movement  over  mountains  and  through  woods  diffi-


?VrrZ:r:^^.:3:


HAYES


HAYES


135


cult  of  access,  took  many  pieces  of  artillery,  and
routed  the  enemy.  At  the  battle  of  Cedar  Creek,
19  Oct.,  1864,  the  conduct  of  Col.  Hayes  attracted
so  much  attention  that  his  commander,  Gen.  Crook,
on  the  battle-field  took  him  by  the  hand,  saying :
"  Colonel,  from  this  day  you  will  be  a  brigadier-
general."  The  commission  arrived  a  few  days  af-
terward, and  on  13  March,  1865,  he  received  the
rank  of  brevet  major-general  "  for  gallant  and  dis-
tinguished services  during  the  campaign  of  1864
in  West  Virginia,  and  particularly  at  the  battles  of
Fisher's  Hill  and  Cedar  Creek,  Va."  Of  his  mili-
tary services  Gen.  Grant,  in  the  second  volume  of
his  memoirs,  says  :  "  On  more  than  one  occasion  in
these  engagements  Gen.  R.  B.  Hayes,  who  suc-
ceeded me  as  president  of  the  United  States,  bore
a  very  honorable  part.  His  conduct  on  the  field
was  marked  by  conspicuous  gallantry,  as  well  as
the  display  of  qualities  of  a  higher  order  than  mere
personal  daring.  Having  entered  the  army  as  a
major  of  volunteers  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,
Gen.  Hayes  attained,  by  his  meritorious  service,
the  rank  of  brevet  major-general  before  its  close."
While  Gen.  Hayes  was  in  the  field,  in  August,
1864,  he  was  nominated  by  a  Republican  district
convention  at  Cincinnati,  in  the  second  district  of
Ohio,  as  a  candidate  for  congress.  When  a  friend
suggested  to  him  that  he  should  take  leave  of  ab-
sence from  the  army  in  the  field  for  the  purpose  of
canvassing  the  district,  he  answered :  "  Your  sugges-
tion about  getting  a  furlough  to  take  the  stump  was
certainly  made  without  reflection. An  officer  fit


for  duty,  who  at  this  crisis  would  abandon  his  post
to  electioneer  for  a  seat  in  congress,  ought  to  be
scalped."  He  was  elected  by  a  majority  of  2,400.
The  Ohio  soldiers  in  the  field  nominated  him  also
for  the  governorship  of  his  state.  The  accompany-
ing illustration  is  a  view  of  his  home  in  Fremont.
After  the  war  Gen.  Hayes  returned  to  civil  life,
and  took  his  seat  in  congress  on  4  Dec,  1865.  He
was  appointed  chairman  of  the  committee  on  the
library.  On  questions  connected  with  the  recon-
struction of  the  states  lately  in  rebellion  he  voted
with  his  party.  He  earnestly  supported  a  resolu-
tion declaring  the  sacredness  of  the  public  debt
and  denouncing  repudiation  in  any  form ;  also  a
resolution  commending  President  Johnson  for  de-
clining to  accept  presents,  and  condemning  the
practice  as  demoralizing  in  its  tendencies.  He
opposed  a  resolution  favoring  an  increase  of  the
pay  of  members.  He  also  introduced  in  the  Re-
publican caucus  a  set  of  resolutions  declaring  that
the  only  mode  of  obtaining  from  the  states  lately
in  rebellion  irreversible  guarantees  was  by  constitu-
tional amendment,  and  that  an  amendment  basing
representation  upon  voters,  instead  of  population,
ought  to  be  acted  upon  without  delay.  These  reso-
lutions marked  the  line  of  action  of  the  Republi-
cans. In  August,  1866.  Gen.  Hayes  was  renominated
for  congress  by  acclamation,  and,  after  an  active


canvass,  was  re-elected  by  the  same  majority  as  be-
fore. He  supported  the  impeachment  of  Andrew
Johnson.  In  the  house  of  representatives  he  won
the  reputation,  not  of  an  orator,  but  of  a  working
legislator  and  a  man  of  calm,  sound  judgment.
In  June,  1867,  the  Republican  convention  of  Ohio
nominated  him  for  the  governorship.  The  Demo-
crats had  nominated  Judge  Allen  G.  Thurman.
The  question  of  negro  suffrage  was  boldly  pushed
to  the  foreground  by  Gen.  Hayes  in  an  animated
canvass,  which  ended  in  his  election,  and  that  of
his  associates  on  the  Republican  ticket.  But  the
negro-suffrage  amendment  to  the  state  constitution
was  defeated  at  the  same  time  by  50,000  majority,
and  the  Democrats  carried  the  legislature,  which
elected  Judge  Thurman  to  the  United  States  sen-
ate. In  his  inaugural  address,  Gov.  Hayes  laid  espe-
cial stress  upon  the  desirability  of  taxation  in  pro-
portion to  the  actual  value  of  property,  the  evils
of  too  much  legislation,  the  obligation  to  establish
equal  rights  without  regard  to  color,  and  the  neces-
I  sity  of  ratifying  the  14th  amendment  to  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States.  In  his  message  to
the  legislature,  delivered  in  November,  1868,  he
recommended  amendments  to  the  election  laws,
providing  for  the  representation  of  minorities  in
the  boards  of  the  judges  and  clerks  of  election,  and
for  the  registration  of  all  the  lawful  voters  prior
to  an  election.  He  also  recommended  a  compre-
hensive geological  survey  of  the  state,  which  was
promptly  begun.  In  his  second  annual  message  he
warmly  urged  such  changes  in  the  penal  laws,  as
well  as  in  prison  discipline,  as  would  tend  to  pro-
mote the  moral  reformation  of  the  culprit  together
with  the  punishment  due  to  his  crime.

In  June,  1869,  Gov.  Hayes  was  again  nominated
by  the  Republican  state  convention  for  the  govern-
orship, there  being  no  competitor  for  the  nomi-
nation. The  Democratic  candidate  was  George  H.
Pendleton.  The  platform  adopted  by  the  Demo-
cratic state  convention  advocated  the  repudiation
of  the  interest  on  the  U.  S.  bonds  unless  they  be
subjected  to  taxation,  and  the  payment  of  the  na-
tional debt  in  greenbacks.  In  the  discussions  pre-
ceding the  election.  Gov.  Hayes  pronounced  himself
unequivocally  in  favor  of  honestly  paying  the  na-
tional debt  and  an  honest  money  system.  He  was
elected  by  a  majority  of  7,500.  In  his  second  in-
augural address,  delivered  on  10  Jan.,  1870,  he  ex-
pressed himself  earnestly  against  the  use  of  public
offices  as  party  spoils,  and  suggested  that  the  con-
stitution of  the  state  be  so  amended  as  to  secure
the  introduction  of  a  system  making  qualification,
and  not  political  services  and  influence,  the  chief
test  in  determining  appointments,  and  giving  sub-
ordinates in  the  civil  service  the  same  permanence
of  place  that  is  enjoyed  by  officers  of  the  army  and
navy.  He  also  advocated  the  appointment  of
judges,  by  the  executive,  for  long  terms,  with  ade-
quate salaries,  as  best  calculated  to  "afford  to  the
citizen  the  amplest  possible  security  that  impartial
justice  will  be  administered  by  an  independent
judiciary."  In  his  correspondence  with  members
of  congress,  he  urged  a  monthly  reduction  of  the
national  debt  as  more  important  than  a  reduction
of  taxation,  the  abolition  of  the  franking  privilege,
and  the  passage  of  a  civil-service-reform  law.  In
his  message  addressed  to  the  legislature  on  3  Jan.,
1871,  he  recommended  that  the  policy  embodied  in
that  provision  of  the  state  constitution  which  pro-
hibited the  state  from  creating  any  debt,  save  in  a
few  exceptional  cases,  be  extended  to  the  creation
of  public  debts  by  county,  city,  and  other  local  au-
thorities, and  further  that  for  the  remuneration  of
public  officers  a  system  of  fixed  salaries,  without


136


HAYES


HAYES


fees  and  prerequisites,  be  adopted.  Complaint
having  been  made  by  the  state  commissioner  of
railroads  and  telegraphs  that  many  ''  clear  and  pal-
pable violations  of  law"  had  been  committed  by
railroad  companies,  Gov.  Hayes  asked,  in  his  mes-
sage of  1872,  that  a  commission  of  five  citizens  be
organized,  with  ample  power  to  investigate  the
management  of  railroad  companies,  and  to  report
the  information  acquired  with  a  recommendation
of  such  measures  as  they  might  deem  expedient.
He  also,  believing  that  "  publicity  is  a  great  cor-
rector of  official  abuses,"  recommended  that  it  be
made  the  duty  of  the  governor,  on  satisfactory  in-
formation that  the  public  good  required  an  inves-
tigation of  the  affairs  of  any  public  office  or  the
conduct  of  any  public  officer,  whether  state  or
local,  to  appoint  one  or  more  citizens,  who  should
have  ample  powers  to  make  such  investigation.
Gov.  Hayes's  administration  of  the  executive  office
of  his  state  won  general  approval,  without  distinc-
tion of  party.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term,  when
a  senator  of  the  United  States  was  to  be  elected,
and  several  Republican  members  of  the  legislature
were  disinclined  to  vote  for  John  Sherman,  who
controlled  a  majority  of  the  Republican  votes,  Gov.
Hayes  was  approached  with  the  assurance  that  he
could  be  elected  senator  by  the  anti-Sherman  Re-
publicans with  the  aid  of  the  Democratic  members
of  the  legislature ;  but  he  positively  declined.

In  July,  1872,  Gov.  Hayes  was  strongly  urged
by  many  Republicans  in  Cincinnati  to  accept  a
nomination  for  congress.  Wishing  to  retire  perma-
nently from  political  life,  he  declined ;  but  when  he
was  nominated  in  spite  of  his  protests,  he  finally
yielded  his  consent.  In  his  speeches  during  the
canvass  he  put  forward  as  the  principal  issues  an
honest  financial  policy  and  civil-service  reform.
Several  sentences  on  civil-service  reform  that  he
pronounced  in  a  speech  at  Glendale,  on  4  Sept.,
1872,  were  to  appear  again  in  his  letter  accepting
the  nomination  for  the  presidency  four  years  later.
In  1872  the  current  of  public  sentiment  in  Cincin-
nati ran  against  the  Republican  party,  and  Gov.
Hayes  was  defeated  in  the  election  by  a  majority
of  1,500.  President  Grant  offered  him  the  office  of
assistant  treasurer  of  the  United  States  at  Cincin-
nati, which  he  declined.  In  1873  he  established
his  home  at  Fremont,  in  the  northern  part  of  Ohio,
with  the  firm  intention  of  final  retirement  from
public  life.  In  1874  he  came  into  possession  of  a
considerable  estate  as  the  heir  of  his  uncle,  Sardis
Birchard.  In  1875  the  Republican  state  conven-
tion again  nominated  him  for  the  governorship.
He  not  only  had  not  desired  that  nomination,  but
whenever  spoken  or  written  to  about  it,  uniformly
replied  that  his  retirement  was  absolute,  and  that
neither  his  interests  nor  his  tastes  permitted  him
to  accept.  But  the  circumstances  were  such  as  to
overcome  his  reluctance.  In  1873  the  Democratic
candidate,  William  Allen  (q.  v.),  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Ohio.  His  administration  was  honest  and
economical,  and  he  was  personally  popular,  and  his
renomination  by  the  Democratic  party  in  1875
seemed  to  be  a  foregone  conclusion.  It  was  equal-
ly certain  that  the  Democratic  convention  would
declare  itself  in  favor  of  a  circulation  of  irredeem-
able paper  money,  and  against  the  resumption  of
specie  payments.  Under  such  circumstances  the
Republicans  felt  themselves  compelled  to  put  into
the  field  against  him  the  strongest  available  candi-
date they  had,  and  a  large  majority  of  them  turned
at  once  to  Gov.  Hayes.  But  he  had  declared  him-
self in  favor  of  Judge  Taft,  of  Cincinnati,  and
urged  the  delegates  from  his  county  to  vote  for
that  gentleman,  which  they  did. Notwithstanding


this,  the  convention  nominated  Hayes  on  the  first
ballot  by  an  overwhelming  majority.  When  he,
at  Fremont,  received  the  telegraphic  announce-
ment of  his  nomination,  he  at  once  wrote  a  letter
declining  the  honor;  but  upon  the  further  infor-
mation that  Judge  Taft's  son,  withdrawing  the
name  of  his  father,  had  moved  in  the  convention
to  make  the  nomination  unanimous,  he  accepted.
Thus  he  became  the  leader  of  the  advocates  of  a
sound  and  stable  currency  in  that  memorable  state
canvass,  the  public  discussions  in  which  did  so
much  to  mould  the  sentiments  of  the  people,
especially  in  the  western  states,  with  regard  to  that
important  subject.  The  Democratic  convention
adopted  a  platform  declaring  that  the  volume  of
the  currency  (meaning  the  irredeemable  paper  cur-
rency of  the  United  States)  should  be  made  and  kept
equal  to  the  wants  of  trade ;  that  the  national  ban
currency  should  be  retired,  and  greenbacks  issued
in  its  stead ;  and  that  at  least  half  of  the  customs
duties  should  be  made  payable  in  the  government
paper  money.  The  Republicans  were  by  no  means
as  united  in  favor  of  honest  money  as  might  have
been  desired,  and  Gov.  Hayes  was  appealed  to  by
many  of  his  party  friends  not  to  oppose  an  increase
of  the  paper  currency ;  but  he  resolutely  declared
his  opinions  in  favor  of  honest  money  in  a  series  of
speeches,  appealing  to  honor  and  sober  judgment
of  the  people  with  that  warmth  of  patriotic  feeling
and  that  good  sense  in  the  statement  of  political
issues  which,  uttered  in  language  always  temper-
ate and  kindly,  gave  him  the  ear  of  opponents  as
well  as  friends.  The  canvass,  on  account  of  the
national  questions  involved  in  it,  attracted  atten-
tion in  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  Gov.  Hayes
was  well  supported  by  speakers  from  other  states.
Another  subject  had  been  thrust  upon  the  people
of  Ohio  by  a  legislative  attempt  to  divide  the
school  fund  between  Catholics  and  Protestants,
and  Hayes  vigorously  advocated  the  cause  of  secu-
lar education.  After  an  ardent  struggle,  he  carried
the  election  by  a  majority  of  5,500.  He  had  thus
not  only  won  the  distinction  of  being  elected  three
times  governor  of  his  state,  but,  as  the  successful
leader  in  a  campaign  for  an  honest  money  system,
he  was  advanced  to  a  very  prominent  position
among  the  public  men  of  the  country,  and  his
name  appeared  at  once  among  those  of  possible,
candidates  for  the  presidency.

Whde  thus  spoken  of  and  written  to,  he  earnest-
ly insisted  upon  the  maintenance  by  his  party  of
an  uncompromising  position  concerning  the  money
question.  To  James  A.  Garfield  he  wrote  in  March,
187G :  "  The  previous  question  will  again  be  irre-
deemable paper  as  a  permanent  policy,  or  a  policy
which  seeks  a  return  to  coin.  My  opinion  is  de-
cidedly against  yielding  a  hair-breadth."  On  29
March,  1876,  the  Republican  state  convention  of
Ohio  passed  a  resolution  to  present  Rutherford  B.
Hayes  to  the  National  Republican  convention  for
the  nomination  for  president,  and  instructing  the
state  delegation  to  support  him.  The  National
Republican  convention  met  at  Cincinnati  on  14
June,  1876.  The  principal  candidates  before  it
were  James  G.  Blaine,  Oliver  P.  Morton.  Benjamin
H.  Bristow,  Roscoe  Conkling,  Gov.  Hayes,  and
John  F.  Hartranft.  The  name  of  Hayes  was  pre-
sented to  the  convention  by  Gen.  Noyes  in  an  ex-
ceedingly judicious  and  well-tempered  speech,
dwelling  not  only  upon  his  high  personal  charac-
ter, but  upon  the  fact  that  he  had  no  enemies  and
possessed  peculiarly  the  qualities  "  calculated  best
to  compromise  all  difficulties  and  to  soften  all  an-
tagonisms." Hayes  had  sixty-one  votes  on  the  first
ballot,  378  being  necessary  to  a  choice,  and  his


HAYES


HAYES


137


support  slowly  but  steadily  grew  until  on  the
seventh  ballot  the  opposition  to  Mr.  Blaine,  who
had  been  the  leading  candidate,  concentrated  upon
Hayes,  and  gave  him  the  nomination,  which,  on
nint  ion  of  William  P.  Frye,  of  Maine,  was  made
unanimous.  In  his  letter  of  acceptance,  dated  8
July,  1876,  Mr.  Hayes  laid  especial  stress  upon
three  points,  civil-service  reform,  the  currency,  and
the  pacification  of  the  south.  As  to  the  civil  ser-
vice, he  denounced  the  use  of  public  offices  for  the
purpose  of  rewarding  party  services,  and  especially
for  services  rendered  to  party  leaders,  as  destroy-
ing the  independence  of  the  separate  departments
of  the  government,  as  leading  directly  to  extrava-
gance and  official  incapacity,  and  as  a  temptation
to  dishonesty.  He  declared  that  a  reform,  "  thor-
ough, radical,  and  complete,"  should  lead  us  back
to  the  principles  and  practices  of  the  founders  of
the  government,  who  "neither  expected  nor  de-
sired from  the  public  officer  any  partisan  service,"
who  meant  "  that  public  officers  should  owe  their
whole  service  to  the  government  and  to  the  peo-
ple," and  that  "  the  officer  should  be  secure  in  his
tenure  as  long  as  his  personal  character  remained
untarnished,  and  the  performance  of  his  duties
satisfactory."  As  to  the  currency,  he  regarded  "  all
the  laws  of  the  United  States  relating  to  the  pay-
ment of  the  public  indebtedness,  the  legal-tender
notes  included,  as  constituting  a  pledge  and  moral
obligation  of  the  government,  which  must  in  good
faith  be  kept."  He  therefore  insisted  upon  as
early  as  possible  a  resumption  of  specie  payments,
pledging  himself  to  "approve  every  appropriate
measure  to  accomplish  the  desired  end,"  and  to
"oppose  any  step  backward."  As  to  the  pacifica-
tion of  the  south,  he  pointed  out,  as  the  first  neces-
sity, "an  intelligent  and  honest  administration  of
the  government,  which  will  protect  all  classes  of
citizens  in  all  their  political  and  private  rights."
He  deprecated  "  a  division  of  political  parties  rest-
ing merely  upon  distinctions  of  race,  or  upon  sec-
tional lines,"  as  always  unfortunate  and  apt  to  be-
come disastrous.  He  expressed  the  hope  that  with
"  a  hearty  and  generous  recognition  of  the  rights
of  all  by  all,"  it  would  be  "  practicable  to  promote,
by  the  influence  of  all  legitimate  agencies  of  the
general  government,  the  efforts  of  the  people  of
those  states  to  obtain  for  themselves  the  blessings
of  honest  and  capable  local  government."  He  also
declared  his  "  inflexible  purpose,"  if  elected,  not  to
be  a  candidate  for  election  to  a  second  term.

The  Democrats  nominated  for  the  presidency
Samuel  J.  Tilden,  who,  having,  as  governor  of  New
York,  won  the  reputation  of  a  reformer,  attracted
the  support  of  many  Republicans  who  were  dis-
satisfied with  their  party.  The  result  of  the  elec-
tion became  the  subject  of  acrimonious  dispute.
Both  parties  claimed  to  have  carried  the  states  of
Louisiana,  South  Carolina,  and  Florida.  Each
charged  fraud  upon  the  other,  the  Republicans
affirming  that  Republican  voters,  especially  colored
men,  all  over  the  south  had  been  deprived  of  their
rights  by  intimidation  or  actual  force,  and  that
ballot-boxes  had  been  foully  dealt  with,  and  the
Democrats  insisting  that  their  candidates  in  Louisi-
ana, Florida,  and  South  Carolina  had  received  a
majority  of  the  votes  actually  cast,  and  that  the
Republican  canvassing  boards  were  preparing  to
falsify  the  result  in  making  up  the  returns.  The
friends  of  both  the  candidates  for  the  presidency
sent  prominent  men  into  the  states  in  dispute,
for  the  purpose  of  watching  the  proceedings  of
the  canvassing  boards.  The  attitude  maintained
by  Mr.  Hayes  personally  was  illustrated  by  a  let-
ter addressed  to  John  Sherman  at  New  Orleans,


which  was  brought  to  light  by  a  subsequent  con-
gressional investigation.  It  was  dated  at  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  27  Nov.,  1876,  and  said :  "lam  greatly
obliged  for  your  letter  of  the  23d.  You  feel,  I  am
sure,  as  I  do  about  this  whole  business.  A  fair
election  would  have  given  us  about  forty  electoral
votes  at  the  south — at  least  that  many.  But  we
are  not  to  allow  our  friends  to  defeat  one  outrage
and  fraud  by  another.  There  must  be  nothing
crooked  on  our  part.  Let  Mr.  Tilden  have  the
place  by  violence,  intimidation,  and  fraud,  rather
than  undertake  to  prevent  it  by  means  that  will
not  bear  the  severest  scrutiny."  The  canvassing
boards  of  the  states  in  question  declared  the  Re-
publican electors  chosen,  which  gave  Mr.  Hayes  a
majority  of  one  vote  in  the  electoral  college,  and
the  certificates  of  these  results  were  sent  to  Wash-
ington by  the  governors  of  the  states.  But  the
Democrats  persisted  in  charging  fraud ;  and  other
sets  of  certificates,  certifying  the  Democratic  elec-
tors to  have  been  elected,  arrived  at  Washington.
To  avoid  a  deadlock,  which  might  have  happened
if  the  canvass  of  the  electoral  votes  had  been  left
to  the  two  houses  of  congress  (the  senate  having  a
Republican  and  the  house  of  representatives  a
Democratic  majority),  an  act.  advocated  by  mem-
bers of  both  parties,  was  passed  to  refer  all  con-
tested cases  to  a  commission  composed  of  five  sena-
tors, five  representatives,  and  five  judges  of  the
supreme  court ;  the  decision  of  this  commission  to
be  final,  unless  set  aside  by  a  concurrent  vote  of
the  two  houses  of  congress.  The  commission,  re-
fusing to  go  behind  the  certificates  of  the  govern-
ors, decided  in  each  contested  case  by  a  vote  of
eight  to  seven  in  favor  of  the  Republican  electors,
beginning  with  Florida  on  7  Feb..  and  Rutherford
B.  Hayes  was  at  last,  on  2  March,  declared  duly
elected  president  of  the  United  States.  Thus  ended
the  long  and  painful  suspense.  The  decision  was
generally  acquiesced  in,  and  the  popular  excite-
ment subsided  quickly.

President  Hayes  was  inaugurated  on  5  March.
1877.  In  his  inaugural  address  he  substantially
i  restated  the  principles  and  views  of  policy  set
forth  in  his  letter  of  acceptance,  adding  that,
while  the  president  of  necessity  owes  his  election
to  the  suffrage  and  zealous  labors  of  a  party,  he
should  be  always  mindful  that  "  he  serves  his  party
best  who  serves  his  country  best,"  and  declaring
also,  referring  to  the  contested  election,  that  the
general  acceptance  of  the  settlement  by  the  two
great  parties  of  a  dispute,  "in  regard  to  which
good  men  differ  as  to  the  facts  and  the  law.  no
less  than  as  to  the  proper  course  to  be  pursued  in
solving  the  question  in  controversy,"  was  an  "  oc-
casion for  general  rejoicing."  The  cabinet  that  he
appointed  consisted  of  William  M.  Evarts,  secre-
tary of  state ;  John  Sherman,  secretary  of  the  treas-
ury ;  George  W.  McCrary,  secretary  of  war ;  Rich-
ard W.  Thompson,  secretary  of  the  navy;  David
M.  Key,  postmaster-general ;  Charles  Devens,  at-
torney-general ;  and  Carl  Schurz,  secretary  of  the
interior.  The  administration  began  under  very
unfavorable  circumstances,  as  general  business
stagnation  and  severe  distress  had  prevailed
throughout  the  country  since  the  crash  of  1873.
As  soon  as  the  cabinet  was  organized,  the  new
president  addressed  himself  to  the  composition  of
difficulties  in  several  southern  states.  He  had
given  evidence  of  his  conciliatory  disposition  by
taking  into  his  cabinet  a  prominent  citizen  of  the
south  who  had  been  an  officer  in  the  Confederate
army  and  had  actively  opposed  his  election.  In
both  South  Carolina  and  Louisiana  there  were  two
sets  of  state  officers  and  two  legislatures,  one  Re-


138


HAYES


HAYES


publican  and  the  other  Democratic,  each  claiming
to  have  been  elected  by  a  majority  of  the  popular
vote.  The  presence  of  Federal  troops  at  or  near
the  respective  state-houses  had  so  far  told  in  favor
of  the  Republican  claimants,  while  the  Democratic
claimants  had  the  preponderance  of  support  from
the  citizens  of  substance  and  influence.  President
Hayes  was  resolved  that  the  upholding  of  local  gov-
ernments in  the  southern  states  by  the  armed
forces  of  the  United  States  must  come  to  an  end,
and  that,  therefore,  the  Federal  troops  should  be
withdrawn  from  the  position  they  then  occupied ;
but  he  was  at  the  same  time  anxious  to  have  the
change  effected  without  any  disturbance  of  the
peace,  and  without  imperilling  the  security  or  rights
of  any  class  of  citizens.  His  plan  was  by  concilia-
tory measures  to  put  an  end  to  the  lawless  commo-
tions and  distracting  excitements  that,  ever  since
the  close  of  the  war,  had  kept  a  large  part  of  the
south  in  constant  turmoil,  and  thus  to  open  to
that  section  a  new  career  of  peace  and  prosperity.
He  obtained  from  the  southern  leaders  in  congress
assurances  that  they  would  use  their  whole  influ-
ence for  the  maintenance  of  good  order  and  the
protection  of  the  rights  and  security  of  all,  and
for  a  union  of  the  people  in  a  natural  understand-
ing that,  as  to  their  former  antagonisms,  by-gones
should  be  treated  as  by-gones.  To  the  same  end
he  invited  the  rival  governors  of  South  Carolina,
Daniel  H.  Chamberlain  and  Wade  Hampton,  to
meet  him  in  conference  at  Washington ;  and  he
appointed  a  commission  composed  of  eminent  gen-
tlemen, Democrats  as  well  as  Republicans — Gen.
Joseph  R.  Hawley,  of  Connecticut;  Charles  B.
Lawrence,  of  Illinois ;  John  M.  Harlan,  of  Ken-
tucky; Ex-Gov.  John  C.  Brown,  of  Tennessee;
and  Wayne  McVeagh,  of  Pennsylvania — to  go  to
Louisiana  and  there  to  ascertain  what  were  "  the
real  impediments  to  regular,  loyal,  and  peaceful
procedures  under  the  laws  and  constitution  of
Louisiana,"  and  further,  by  conciliatory  influences,
to  endeavor  to  remove  "  the  obstacles  to  an  ac-
knowledgment of  one  government  within  the
state,"  or,  if  that  were  found  impracticable,  at
least  "  to  accomplish  the  recognition  of  a  single
legislature  as  the  depositary  of  the  representative
will  of  the  people  of  Louisiana."  The  two  rival
governors — S.  B.  Packard,  Republican,  and  Fran-
cis T.  Nichols,  Democrat  —  stoutly  maintained
their  respective  claims;  but  the  two  legislatures
united  into  one,  a  majority  of  the  members  of  both
houses,  whose  election  was  conceded  on  both  sides,
meeting  and  organizing  under  the  auspices  of  the
Nichols  government.  President  Hayes,  having  re-
ceived the  necessary  assurances  of  peace  and  good-
will, issued  instructions  to  withdraw  the  troops  of
the  United  States  from  the  state-house  of  South
Carolina  on  10  April,  1877,  and  from  the  state-
house  of  Louisiana  on  20  April,  1877,  whereupon
in  South  Carolina  the  state  government  passed
peaceably  into  the  hands  of  Wade  Hampton,  and
m  Louisiana  into  those  of  Francis  T.  Nichols.
The  course  thus  pursued  by  President  Hayes  was,
in  the  north  as  well  as  in  the  south,  heartily  ap-
proved by  a  large  majority  of  the  people,  to  whom
the  many  scandals  springing  from  the  interference
of  the  general  government  in  the  internal  affairs
of  the  southern  states  had  become  very  obnoxious,
and  who  desired  the  southern  states  to  be  permit-
ted to  work  out  their  own  salvation.  But  this
policy  was  also  calculated  to  loosen  the  hold  that
the  Republican  party  had  upon  the  southern  states,
and  was  therefore  severely  criticised  by  many  Re-
publican politicians.
President  Hayes  began  his  administration  with


earnest  efforts  for  the  reform  of  the  civil  service.
In  some  of  the  departments  competitive  examina-
tions were  resumed  for  the  appointment  of  clerks.
In  filling  other  offices,  political  influence  found
much  less  regard  than  had  been  the  custom  before.
The  pretension  of  senators  and  representatives
that  the  "patronage"  in  their  respective  states
and  districts  belonged  to  them  was  not  recognized,
although  in  many  cases  their  advice  was  taken.
The  president's  appointments  were  generally  ap-
proved by  public  opinion,  but  he  was  blamed  for
appointing  persons  connected  with  the  Louisana
returning-board.  On  26  May,  1877,  he  addressed  a
letter  to  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  expressing
the  wish  "  that  the  collection  of  the  revenues  should
be  free  from  partisan  control,  and  organized  on  a
strictly  business  basis,  with  the  same  guarantees
for  efficiency  and  fidelity  in  the  selection  of  the
chief  and  subordinate  officers  that  would  be  re-
quired by  a  prudent  merchant,"  and  that  "  party
leaders  should  have  no  more  influence  in  appoint-
ments than  other  equally  respectable  citizens."  On
22  June,  1877,  he  issued  the  following  executive
order :  "  No  officer  should  be  required  or  permitted
to  take  part  in  the  management  of  political  or-
ganizations, caucases,  conventions,  or  election
campaigns.  Their  right'  to  vote  or  to  express
their  views  on  public  questions,  either  orally  or
through  the  press,  is  not  denied,  provided  it  does
not  interfere  with  the  discharge  of  their  official
duties.  No  assessment  for  political  purposes,  on
officers  or  subordinates,  should  be  allowed.  '  This
rule  is  applicable  to  every  department  of  the  civil
service.  It  should  be  understood  by  every  officer
of  the  general  government  that  he  is  expected  to
conform  his  conduct  to  its  requirements."  The
policy  thus  indicated  found  much  favor  with  the
people  generally,  and  not  a  few  men  in  public  life
heartily  approved  of  it.  But  the  bulk  of  the  pre
fessional  politicians,  who  saw  themselves  threat
ened  in  their  livelihood,  and  many  members  of
congress,  who  looked  upon  government  patronag
as  a  part  of  their  perquisites,  and  the  distribution
of  offices  among  their  adherents  as  the  means  by
which  to  hold  the  party  together  and  to  maintain
themselves  in  public  office,  became  seriously
alarmed  and  began  a  systematic  warfare  upon  the
president  and  his  cabinet.

The  administration  was  from  the  beginning  sur-
rounded with  a  variety  of  difficulties.  Congress
had  adjourned  on  3  March,  1877,  without  making
the  necessary  appropriations  for  the  support  of
the  army,  so  that  from  30  June  the  army  would
remain  without  pay  until  new  provision  could  be
made.  The  president,  therefore,  on  5  May,  1877,
called  an  extra  session  of  congress  to  meet  on  15
Oct.  But  in  the  mean  time  a  part  of  the  army
was  needed  for  active  service  of  a  peculiarly  try-
ing kind.  In  July  strikes  broke  out  among  the
men  employed  upon  railroads,  beginning  on  the
line  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  and  then
rapidly  spreading  over  a  large  part  of  the  north-
ern states.  It  is  estimated  that  at  one  time  more
than  100,000  men  were  out.  Grave  disorders  oc-
curred, and  the  president  found  himself  appealed
to  by  the  governors  of  West  Virginia,  of  Mary-
land, and  of  Pennsylvania  to  aid  them  with  the
Federal  power  in  suppressing  domestic  violence,
which  the  authorities  of  their  respective  states
were  not  able  to  master.  He  issued  his  proclama-
tions on  18,  21,  and  23  July,  and  sent  into  the
above-mentioned  states  such  detachments  of  the
Federal  army  as  were  available.  Other  detach-
ments were  ordered  to  Chicago.  Whenever  the
troops  of  the  United  States  appeared,  however


HAYES


HAYES


139


small  the  force,  they  succeeded  in  restoring  order
without  bloodshed — in  fact,  without  meeting  with
any  resistance,  while  the  state  militia  in  many  in-
stances had  bloody  encounters  with  the  rioters,
sometimes  with  doubtful  result.

In  his  first  annual  message,  3  Dec,  1877,  Presi-
dent Hayes  congratulated  the  country  upon  the
results  of  the  policy  he  had  followed  with  regard
to  the  south.  He  said :  "  All  apprehension  of  dan-
ger from  remitting  those  states  to  local  self-govern-
ment is  dispelled,  and  a  most  salutary  change  in
the  minds  of  the  people  has  begun  and  is  in  prog-
ress in  every  part  of  that  section  of  the  country
once  the  theatre  of  unhappy  civil  strife ;  substi-
tuting for  suspicion,  distrust,  and  aversion,  con-
cord, friendship,  and  patriotic  attachment  to  the
Union.  No  unprejudiced  mind  will  deny  that  the
terrible  and  often  fatal  collisions  which  for  several
years  have  been  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  have
agitated  and  alarmed  the  public  mind,  have  almost
entirely  ceased,  and  that  a  spirit  of  mutual  forbear-
ance and  hearty  national  interest  has  succeeded.
There  has  been  a  general  re-establishmerit  of  order,
and  of  the  orderly  administration  of  justice ;  in-
stances of  remaining  lawlessness  have  become  of
rare  occurrence ;  political  turmoil  and  turbulence
have  disappeared  ;  useful  industries  have  been  re-
sumed; public  credit  in  the  southern  states  has
been  greatly  strengthened  and  the  encouraging
benefit  of  a  revival  of  commerce  between  the  sec-
tions of  country  lately  embroiled  in  civil  war  are
fully  enjoyed."  He  also  strongly  urged  the  re-
sumption of  specie  payments.  As  to  the  difficul-
ties to  be  met  in  this  respect  he  said :  "  I  must  ad-
here to  my  most  earnest  conviction  that  any
wavering  in  purpose  or  unsteadiness  in  methods,  so
far  from  avoiding  or  reducing  the  inconvenience
inseparable  from  the  transition  from  an  irredeem-
able to  a  redeemable  paper  currency,  would  only
tend  to  increased  and  prolonged  disturbance  in
values,  and,  unless  retrieved,  must  end  in  serious
disorder,  dishonor,  and  disaster  in  the  financial
affairs  of  the  government  and  of  the  people."  As
to  the  restoration  of  silver  as  a  legal  tender,  which
was  at  the  time  being  agitated,  he  insisted  that  "  all
the  bonds  issued  since  12  Feb.,  1873,  when  gold  be-
came the  only  unlimited  legal-tender  metallic  cur-
rency of  the  country,  are  justly  payable  in  gold
coin,  or  in  coin  of  equal  value'';  and  that  "the
bonds  issued  prior  to  1873  were  issued  at  a  time
when  the  gold  dollar  was  the  only  coin  in  circula-
tion or  contemplated  by  either  the  government  or
the  holders  of  the  bonds  as  the  coin  in  which  they
were  to  be  paid."  He  added :  "  It  is  far  better  to
pay  these  bonds  in  that  coin  than  to  seem  to  take
advantage  of  the  unforeseen  fall  in  silver  bullion  to
pay  in  a  new  issue  of  silver  coin  thus  made  so
much  less  valuable.  The  power  of  the  United
States  to  coin  money  and  to  regulate  the  value
thereof  ought  never  to  be  exercised  for  the  pur-
pose of  enabling  the  government  to  pay  its  obliga-
tions in  a  coin  of  less  value  than  that  contemplated
by  the  parties  when  the  bonds  were  issued.  He
favored  the  coinage  of  silver,  but  only  in  a  limited
quantity,  as  a  legal  tender  to  a  limited  amount.
He  expressed  the  fear  "  that  only  mischief  and  mis-
fortune would  flow  from  a  coinage  of  silver  dollars
with  the  quality  of  unlimited  legal  tender,  even
in  private  transactions.  Any  expectation  of  tem-
porary ease  from  an  issue  of  silver  coinage  to  pass
as  a  legal  tender,  at  a  rate  materially  above  its  com-
mercial value,  is,  I  am  persuaded,  a  delusion."  As
to  the  reform  of  the  civil  service,  he  reiterated
what  he  had  said  in  his  letter  of  acceptance  and
inaugural  address,  and  insisted  that  the  constitution


imposed  upon  the  executive  the  sole  duty  and  re-
sponsibility of  the  selection  of  Federal  officers  who,
by  law,  are  appointed,  not  elected ;  he  deprecated
the  practical  confusion,  in  this  respect,  of  the
duties  assigned  to  the  several  departments  of  the
government,  and  earnestly  recommended  that  con-
gress make  a  suitable  appropriation  for  the  civil-ser-
vice commission,  to  be  made  immediately  available.
He  also  recommended  efficient  legislation  for  the
work  of  civilization  among  the  Indian  tribes,  and
for  the  prevention  of  the  destruction  of  the  for-
ests on  lands  of  the  United  States.

The  recommendations  thus  made  by  President
Hayes  were  not  heeded  by  congress.  No  appro-
priation was  made  for  the  civil-service  commission ;
on  the  contrary,  the  dissatisfaction  of  Republican
senators  and  representatives  with  the  endeavors  of
the  administration  in  the  direction  of  civil-service
reform  found  vent  in  various  attacks  upon  the
president  and  the  heads  of  departments.  The
nomination  of  one  of  the  foremost  citizens  of  New
York  for  the  office  of  collector  of  customs  at  that
port  was  rejected  by  the  senate.  The  efforts  of  the
administration  to  check  depredations  on  the  tim-
ber-lands of  the  United  States,  and  to  prevent  the
destruction  of  the  forests,  were  denounced  as  an
outlandish  policy.  Instead  of  facilitating  the  re-
sumption of  specie  payments,  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives passed  a  bill  substantially  repealing  the
resumption  act.  A  resolution  was  offered  by  a  Re-
publican senator,  and  adopted  by  the  senate,  de-
claring that  to  restore  the  coinage  of  412$  -grain
silver  dollars  and  to  pay  the  government  bonds,
principal  and  interest,  in  such  silver  coin,  was  "  not
in  violation  of  the  public  faith,  nor  in  derogation
of  the  rights  of  the  public  creditor."  A  '*  silver
bill "  passed  both  houses  providing  that  a  silver
dollar  should  be  coined  at  the  several  mints  of  the
United  States,  of  the  weight  of  412i  grains,  which,
together  with  all  silver  dollars  of  like  weight  and
fineness  coined  theretofore  by  the  United  States,
should  be  a  full  legal  tender  for  all  debts  and  dues,
public  and  private,  except  where  otherwise  ex-
pressly stipulated  in  the  contract,  and  directing  the
secretary  of  the  treasury  to  buy  not  less  than  two
million  dollars'  worth  of  silver  a  month,  and  cause
it  to  be  coined  into  dollars  as  fast  as  purchased.
President  Hayes  returned  this  bill  with  his  veto,
mainly  on  the  ground  that  the  commercial  value  of
the  silver  dollar  was  then  worth  eight  to  ten  per
cent,  less  than  its  nominal  value,  and  that  its  use
as  a  legal  tender  for  the  payment  of  pre-existing
debts  would  be  an  act  of  bad  faith.  He  said :  "  As
to  all  debts  heretofore  contracted,  the  silver  dollar
should  be  made  a  legal  tender  only  at  its  market
value.  The  standard  of  value  should  not  be
changed  without  the  consent  of  both  parties  to  the
contract.  National  promises  should  be  kept  with
unflinching  fidelity.  There  is  no  power  to  compel
a  nation  to  pay  its  just  debts.  Its  credit  depends
on  its  honor.  A  nation  owes  what  it  has  led  or
all6wed  its  creditors  to  expect.  I  cannot  approve
a  bill  which  in  my  judgment  authorizes  the  viola-
tion of  sacred  obligations."  But  the  bill  was
passed  over  the  veto  in  both  houses  by  majorities
exceeding  two  thirds.  During  the  same  session
the  house  of  representatives,  which  had  a  Demo-
cratic majority,  on  motion  of  Clarkson  N.  Pot-
ter, of  New  York,  resolved  to  institute  an  inquiry
into  the  allegations  of  fraud  said  to  have  been  com-
mitted in  Louisiana  and  Florida  in  making  the
returns  of  the  votes  cast  for  presidential  electors
at  the  election  of  1876.  The  Republicans  charged
that  the  investigation  was  set  on  foot  for  the  pur-
pose of  ousting  Mr.  Hayes  from  the  presidency  and


140


HAYES


HAYES


putting  in  Mr.  Tilden.  The  Democrats  disclaimed
any  such  intention.  The  result  of  the  investiga-
tion was  an  elaborate  report  from  the  Democratic
majority  of  the  committee,  impugning  the  action
of  the  returning  boards  in  Louisiana  and  Florida
as  fraudulent,  and  a  report  from  the  Republican
minority  dissenting  from  the  conclusions  of  the
majority  as  unwarranted  by  the  evidence,  and  al-
leging that  the  famous  "  cipher  despatches  "  sent
to  the  south  by  friends  of  Mr.  Tilden  showed  "  that
the  charges  of  "corruption  were  but  the  slanders  of
foiled  suborners  of  corruption."  The  investigation
led  to  no  further  action;  the  people  generally  ac-
quiescing in  the  decision  of  the  electoral  commis-
sion, and  the  counting  of  the  electoral  vote  by  con-
gress based  thereon,  as  irreversible.

President  Hayes  was  again  obliged  to  resort  to
the  employment  of  force  by  the  outbreak  of  serious
disturbances  caused  by  bands  of  desperadoes  in  the
territory  of  New  Mexico,  which  amounted  to
organized  resistance  to  the  enforcement  of  the
laws.  He  issued,  on  7  Oct.,  1878,  a  proclamation
substantially  putting  the  disturbed  portion  of  New
Mexico  under  martial  law,  and  directing  the  U.  S.
military  forces  stationed  there  to  restore  and  main-
tain peace  and  order.

In  his  message  of  2  Dec,  1878,  President  Hayes
found  himself  obliged  to  say  that  in  Louisiana  and
South  Carolina,  and  in  some  districts  outside  of
those  states,  "  the  records  of  the  recent  [congres-
sional] elections  compelled  the  conclusion  that  the
rights  of  the  colored  voters  had  been  overridden,
and  their  participation  in  the  elections  not  been
permitted  to  be  either  general  or  free."  He  added
that,  while  it  would  be  for  congress  to  examine
into  the  validity  of  the  claims  of  members  to  their
seats,  it  became  the  duty  of  the  executive  and
judicial  departments  of  the  government  to  inquire
into  and  punish  violations  of  the  laws,  and  that
every  means  in  his  power  would  be  exerted  to  that
end.  At  the  same  time  he  expressed  his  "  absolute
assurance  that,  while  the  country  had  not  yet
reached  complete  unity  of  feeling  and  confidence
between  the  communities  so  lately  and  so  seriously
estranged,  the  tendencies  were  in  that  direction,
and  with  increasing  force."  He  deprecated  all
interference  by  congress  with  existing  financial
legislation,  with  the  confident  expectation  that  the
resumption  of  specie  payments  would  be  "  suc-
cessfully and  easily  maintained,"  and  would  be
"  followed  by  a  healthful  and  enduring  revival  of
business  prosperity."  On  1  Jan.,  1879,  the  resump-
tion act  went  into  operation  without  any  difficulty.
No  preparation  had  been  made  for  that  event  until
the  beginning  of  the  Hayes  administration.  The
secretary  of  the  treasury,  in  1877,  began  to  accumu-
late coin,  and,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  it
found,  even  among  Republicans,  this  policy  was
firmly  pursued  by  the  administration  until  the
coin  reserve  held  against  the  legal-tender  notes  was
sufficient  to  meet  all  probable  demands.  Thus  the
country  was  lifted  out  of  the  bog  of  an  irredeemable
paper  currency.  The  operation  was  facilitated  by
increased  exports  and  a  general  revival  of  business.
Although  his  first  nominee  for  the  office  of  col-
lector of  customs  in  New  York  had  been  rejected
by  the  senate,  President  Hayes  made  a  second
nomination  for  the  same  place,  as  well  as  for  that
of  naval  officer  of  the  same  port,  and  in  a  special
message  addressed  to  the  senate  on  31  Jan.,  1879,
he  gave  the  following  reasons  for  the  suspension  of
the  incumbents,  Chester  A.  Arthur  and  Alonzo  B.
Cornell,  who  had  failed  to  conform  their  conduct
to  the  executive  order  of  22  June,  1877 :  "  For  a
long  period  of  time  it  [the  New  York  custom-


house] has  been  used  to  manage  and  control  politi-
cal affairs.  The  officers  suspended  by  me  are,  and
for  several  years  have  been,  engaged  in  the  active
personal  management  of  the  party  politics  of  the
city  and  state  of  New  York.  The  duties  of  the
offices  held  by  them  have  been  regarded  as  of  sub-
ordinate importance  to  their  partisan  work.  Their
offices  have  been  conducted  as  part  of  the  political
machinery  under  their  control.  They  have  made
the  custom-house  a  centre  of  partisan  political
management."  [For  the  other  side  of  this  disputed
question,  see  Arthur,  Chester  Alan,  vol.  i.,  pp.
100,  101.]  For  like  reasons,  President  Hayes  re-
moved an  influential  party  manager  in  the  west,
the  postmaster  of  St.  Louis.  With  the  aid  of
Democratic  votes  in  the  senate,  the  new  nomina-
tions were  confirmed.  _  President  Hayes  then  ad-
dressed a  letter  to  the  new  collector  of  customs  at
New  York,  Gen.  Edwin  A.  Merritt,  instructing
him  to  conduct  his  office  "on  strictly  business
principles,  and  according  to  the  rules  which  were
adopted,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  civil-ser-
vice commission,  by  the  administration  of  Gen.
Grant."  He  added:  "Neither  my  recommenda-
tion, nor  that  of  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  nor
the  recommendation,  of  any  member  of  congress,
or  other  influential  person,  should  be  specially  re-
garded. Let  appointments  and  removals  be  made
on  business  principles,  and  by  fixed  rules."  Thus
the  system  of  competitive  examinations,  which
under  the  preceding  administration  had  been
abandoned  upon  the  failure  of  congress  to  make
appropriations  for  the  civil-service  commission,
was,  by  direction  of  President  Hayes,  restored  in
the  custom-house  of  New  York.  A  like  system
was  introduced  in  the  New  York  post-office  under
the  postmaster,  Thomas  L.  James.

Congress  passed  a  bill  "  to  restrict  the  immigra-
tion of  Chinese  to  the  United  States,"  requiring
the  president  immediately  to  give  notice  to  the
government  of  China  of  the  abrogation  of  certain
articles  of  the  treaty  of  1858  between  the  United
States  and  China,  which  recognized  "  the  inherent
and  inalienable  right  of  a  man  to  change  his  home
and  allegiance,"  and  provided  that  "  the  citizens
of  the  United  States  visiting  or  residing  in  China
shall  enjoy  the  same  privileges,  immunities,  or  ex-
emptions, in  respect  to  travel  or  residence,  as  may
there  be  enjoyed  by  the  citizens  or  subjects  of  the
most  favored  nation,"  and  reciprocally  that  Chinese
subjects  should  enjoy  the  same  advantages  in  the
United  States.  The  bill  further  limited  the  num-
ber of  Chinese  passengers  that  might  be  brought
to  this  country  by  any  one  vessel  to  fifteen.  Presi-
dent Hayes,  on  1  March,  1879,  returned  the  bill  to
congress  with  his  veto.  While  recognizing  some  of
the  difficulties  created  by  the  immigration  of  the
Chinese  as  worthy  of  consideration,  he  objected  to
the  bill  mainly  on  the  ground  that  it  was  incon-
sistent with  existing  treaty  relations  between  the
United  States  and  China;  that  a  treaty  could  be
abrogated  or  modified  by  the  treaty-making  power,
and  not,  under  the  constitution,  by  act  of  congress ;
and  that  "  the  abrogation  of  a  treaty  by  one  of  the
contracting  parties  is  justifiable  only  upon  reasons
both  of  the  highest  justice  and  of  the  highest
necessity  " ;  and  "  to  do  this  without  notice,  with-
out fixing  a  day  in  advance  when  the  act  shall  take
effect,  without  affording  an  opportunity  to  China
to  be  heard,  and  without  the  happening  of  any
grave  unforeseen  emergency,  would  be  regarded  by
the  enlightened  judgment  of  mankind  as  the  denial
of  the  obligation  of  the  national  faith."

The  45th  congress  adjourned  on  4  March,  1879,
without  making  the  usual  and  necessary  appro-


HAYES


HAYES


141


priations  for  the  expenses  of  the  government.  The
house,  controlled  by  a  Democratic  majority,  at-
tached to  the  army  appropriation  bill  a  legisla-
tive provision  substantially  repealing  a  law  passed
in  1865,  under  President  Lincoln,  which  permitted
the  use  of  troops  "  to  keep  the  peace  at  the  polls  "
on  election-days.  The  house  also  attached  to  the
legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  appropriation
bill  a  repeal  of  existing  laws  providing  for  the  ap-

nntment  of  supervisors  of  election  and  special
leputy  marshals  to  act  at  elections  of  members  of

sngress. The  Republican  majority  of  the  senate

truck  out  these  legislative  provisions,  and,  the  two
louses  disagreeing,  the  appropriation  bills  failed.

resident  Hayes,  on  4  March,  1879,  called  an  extra
session  of  congress  to  meet  on  18  March.  The
Democrats  then  had  a  majority  in  the  senate  as
well  as  in  the  house,  and  attached  to  the  army  ap-
propriation bill  the  same  legislative  provision  on
which  in  the  preceding  congress  the  two  houses
Tiad  disagreed.  President  Hayes  returned  the  bill
rith  his  veto  on  29  April,  1879.  He  took  the
ground  that  there  was  ample  legislation  to  prevent
military  interference  at  elections;  that  there  never
had  been  any  such  interference  since  the  passage
of  the  act  of  1865,  and  was  no  danger  of  any ;  that
if  the  proposed  legislation  should  become  law,
there  would  be  no  power  vested  in  any  officer  of
the  government  to  protect  from  violence  the  officers
of  the  United  States  engaged  in  the  discharge  of
their  duties ;  that  the  states  may  employ  both  mili-
tary and  civil  power  to  keep  the  peace,  and  to  en-
force the  laws  at  state  elections,  but  that  it  was
now  proposed  to  deny  to  the  United  States  even  the
necessary  civil  authority  to  protect  the  national
elections.  He  pointed  out  also  that  the  tacking  of
legislative  provisions  to  appropriation  bills  was  a
practice  calculated  to  be  used  as  a  means  of  coer-
cion as  to  the  other  branches  of  the  government,
and  to  make  the  house  of  representatives  a  despotic
power.  Congress  then  passed  the  army  appropri-
ation bill  without  the  obnoxious  clause,  but  con-
taining the  provision  that  no  money  appropriated
should  be  paid  for  the  subsistence,  equipment,
transportation,  or  compensation  of  any  portion  of
the  army  of  the  United  States  "  to  be  used  as  a  po-
lice force  to  keep  the  peace  at  the  polls  at  any  elec-
tion held  within  any  state."  This  President  Hayes
approved.  The  two  houses  then  passed  a  separate
bill,  substantially  embodying  the  provision  ob-
jected to  by  the  president  in  the  vetoed  army-ap-
propriation bill.  This  "act  to  prohibit  military
interference  at  elections  "  President  Hayes  returned
with  his  veto.  He  said :  "  The  true  rule  as  to  the
employment  of  military  force  at  the  elections  is
not  doubtful.  No  intimidation  or  coercion  should
be  allowed  to  influence  citizens  in  the  exercise  of
their  right  to  vote,  whether  it  appears  in  the  shape
of  combinations  of  evil-disposed  persons,  or  of
armed  bodies  of  the  militia  of  a  state,  or  of  the
military  force  of  the  United  States.  The  elec-
tions should  be  free  from  all  forcible  interference,
and,  as  far  as  practicable,  from  all  apprehension  of
such  interference.  No  soldiery,  either  of  the  United
States  or  of  the  state  militia,  should  be  present  at
the  polls  to  perform  the  duties  of  the  ordinary
civil  police  force.  There  has  been  and  will  be  no
violation  of  this  rule  under  orders  from  me  during
this  administration.  That  there  should  be  no
denial  of  the  right  of  the  national  government  to
employ  its  military  force  on  any  day  and  at  any
place  in  case  such  employment  is  necessary  to  en-
force the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  United
States."  The  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial
appropriation  bill  passed  by  congress  contained  a


legislative  provision  not,  indeed,  abolishing  the
supervisors  of  election,  but  divesting  the  govern-
ment of  the  power  to  protect  them,  or  to  prevent
interference  with  their  duties,  or  to  punish  any
violation  of  the  law  from  which  their  power  was
derived.  President  Hayes  returned  this  bill  also
with  his  veto,  referring  to  his  preceding  veto  mes-
sage as  to  the  impropriety  of  tacking  general  legis-
lation to  appropriation  bills.  He  further  pointed
out  that,  in  the  various  legal  proceedings  under
the  law  sought  to  be  repealed,  its  constitutionality
had  never  been  questioned ;  and  that  the  necessity
of  such  a  law  had  been  amply  demonstrated  by
the  great  election  frauds  in  New  York  city  in
1868.  He  added :  "  The  great  body  of  the  people
of  all  parties  want  free  and  fair  elections.  They
do  not  think  that  a  free  election  means  freedom
from  the  wholesome  restraints  of  law,  or  that  the
place  of  an  election  should  be  a  sanctuary  for  law-
lessness and  crime."  If  any  oppression,  any  parti-
san partiality,  had  been  shown  in  the  execution  of
the  existing  law,  he  added,  efficient  correctives  of
the  mischief  should  be  applied ;  but  as  no  congres-
sional election  was  immediately  impending,  the
matter  might  properly  be  referred  to  the  regular
session  of  congress.

In  a  bill  "  making  appropriations  for  certain  judi-
cial expenses,"  passed  by  congress,  it  was  attempted
not  to  repeal  the  election  laws,  but  to  make  their
enforcement  impossible  by  prohibiting  the  pay-
ment of  any  salaries,  fees,  or  expenses  under  or  in
virtue  of  them,  and  providing  also  that  no  con-
tract should  be  made,  and  no  liability  incurred,
under  any  of  their  provisions.  President  Hayes
vetoed  this  bill,  23  June,  1879.  on  the  ground  that
as  no  bill  repealing  the  election  laws  had  been
passed  over  his  veto,  those  laws  were  still  in  exist-
ence, and  the  present  bill,  if  it  became  a  law,  would
make  it  impossible  for  the  executive  to  perform  his
constitutional  duty  to  see  to  it  that  the  laws  be
faithfully  executed.  On  the  same  ground  the
president  returned  with  his  veto  a  bill  making  ap-
propriations to  pay  fees  of  United  States  marshals
and  their  general  deputies,  in  which  the  same  at-
tempt was  made  to  defeat  the  execution  of  the
election  laws  by  withholding  the  necessary  funds
as  well  as  the  power  to  incur  liabilities  under  them.
All  the  appropriation  bills  were  passed  without  the
obnoxious  provisions  except  the  last.  President
Hayes  appealed  to  congress  in  a  special  message
on  30  June,  1879,  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  not  to
permit  the  marshals  and  their  general  deputies,
officers  so  necessary  to  the  administration  of  jus-
tice, to  go  unprovided  for,  but  in  vain.  The  attor-
ney-general then  admonished  the  marshals  to  con-
tinue in  the  performance  of  their  duties,  and  to
rely  Upon  future  legislation  by  congress,  which
would  be  just  to  them.

In  his  annual  message  of  1  Dec,  1879,  President
Hayes  found  occasion  to  congratulate  the  country
upon  the  successful  resumption  of  specie  payments
and  upon  "  a  very  great  revival  of  business."  He
announced  a  most  gratifying  reduction  of  the  in-
terest on  the  public  debt  by  refunding  at  lower
rates.  He  strongly  urged  congress  to  authorize
the  secretary  of  the  treasury  to  suspend  the  silver
coinage,  as  the  cheaper  coin,  if  forced  into  circula-
tion, would  eventually  become  the  sole  standard  of
value.  He  also  recommended  the  retirement  of
United  States  notes  with  the  capacity  of  legal  tend-
er in  private  contracts,  it  being  his  "firm  con-
viction that  the  issue  of  legal-tender  paper  money
based  wholly  upon  the  authority  and  credit  of  the
government,  except  in  extreme  emergency,  is  with-
out warrant  in  the  constitution,  and  a  violation  of


142


HAYES


HAYES


sound  financial  principles."  He  recommended  a
vigorous  enforcement  of  the  laws  against  polygamy
in  the  territory  of  Utah.  He  presented  a  strong
argument  in  favor  of  civil-service  reform,  pointed
out  the  successful  trial  of  the  competitive  system
in  the  interior  department,  the  post-office  depart-
ment, and  the  post-office  and  the  custom-house  in
New  York,  and  once  more  earnestly  urged  that  an
appropriation  be  made  for  the  civil-service  com-
mission, and  that  those  in  the  public  service  be
protected  by  law  against  exactions  in  the  pay  of
party  assessments.  But  these  recommendations
remained  without  effect.

On  12  Feb.,  1880,  President  Hayes  issued  a  second
proclamation  —  the  first  having  been  issued  in
April,  1879 — against  the  attempts  made  by  lawless

i>ersons  to  possess  themselves  for  settlement  of
ands  within  the  Indian  territory,  and  effective
measures  were  taken  to  expel  the  invaders.  On
8  March,  1880,  he  sent  to  the  house  of  representa-
tives a  special  message  communicating  correspond-
ence in  relation  to  the  interoceanic  canal,  which
had  passed  between  the  American  and  foreign  gov-
ernments, and  expressing  his  own  opinion  on  the
subject  as  follows :  "  The  policy  of  this  country  is
a  canal  under  American  control.  The  United
States  cannot  consent  to  the  surrender  of  this  con-
trol to  any  European  power,  or  to  any  combination
of  European  powers.  If  existing  treaties  be-
tween the  United  States  and  other  nations,  or  if
the  rights  of  sovereignty  or  property  of  other  na-
tions, stand  in  the  way  of  this  policy — a  contin-
gency which  is  not  apprehended  —  suitable  steps
should  be  taken  by  just  and  liberal  negotiations  to
promote  and  establish  the  American  policy  on  this
subject,  consistently  with  the  rights  of  the  nations
to  be  affected  by  it.  An  interoceanic  canal  across
the  American  isthmus  will  be  the  great  ocean  thor-
oughfare between  our  Atlantic  and  our  Pacific
shores,  and  virtually  a  part  of  the  coast-line  of  the
United  States.  No  other  great  power  would,  under
similar  circumstances,  fail  to  assert  a  rightful  con-
trol over  a  work  so  closely  and  vitally  affecting  its
interest  and  welfare."  Congress  passed  a  deficiency
appropriation  bill,  which  contained  provisions  ma-
terially changing,  and,  by  implication,  repealing
certain  important  parts  of  the  election  laws.  Presi-
dent Hayes,  on  4  May,  1880,  returned  the  bill  with
his  veto,  whereupon  congress  made  the  appropria-
tion without  re-enacting  the  obnoxious  clauses.

In  November,  1880,  was  held  the  election  that
put  James  A.  Garfield  into  the  presidential  chair
and  proved  conclusively  that  the  Republican  party
had  gained  largely  in  the  confidence  of  the  public
during  the  Hayes  administration.  In  his  last  an-
nual message,  6  Dec,  1880,  President  Hayes  again
mentioned  the  occurrence  of  election  disorders  in  a
part  of  the  Union,  and  the  necessity  of  their  re-
pression and  correction,  but  declared  himself  satis-
fied, at  the  same  time,  that  the  evil  was  diminishing.
Again  he  argued  in  favor  of  civil-service  reform,
especially  competitive  examinations,  which  had
been  conducted  with  great  success  in  some  of  the
executive  departments  and  adopted  by  his  direction
in  the  larger  custom-houses  and  post-offices.  He
reiterated  his  recommendation  of  an  appropriation
for  the  civil-service  commission,  and  of  a  law
against  political  assessments.  He  also,  to  stop  the
interference  of  members  of  congress  with  the  civil
service,  suggested  that  an  act  be  passed  "  de-
fining the  relations  of  members  of  congress  with
regard  to  appointments  to  office  by  the  president,"
and  that  the  tenure-of-office  act  be  repealed.  He
recommended  "  that  congress  provide  for  the  gov-
ernment  of  Utah  by  a  governor  and  judges,  or


commissioners,  appointed  by  the  president  and
confirmed  by  the  senate — a  government  analogous
to  the  provisional  government  established  for  the
territory  northwest  of  the  Ohio,  by  the  ordinance  of
1787,"  dispensing  with  an  elected  territorial  legis-
lature. He  announced  that  on  17  Nov.  two  treaties
had  been  signed  at  Peking  by  the  commissioners
of  the  United  States  and  the  plenipotentiaries  of
the  emperor  of  China — one  purely  commercial,  and
the  other  authorizing  the  government  of  the  United
States,  whenever  the  immigration  of  Chinese  labor-
ers threatened  to  affect  the  interests  of  the  country,
to  regulate,  limit,  or  suspend  such  immigration,
but  not  altogether  to  prohibit  it,  said  government
at  the  same  time  promising  to  secure  to  Chinese
permanently  or  temporarily  residing  in  the  United
States  the  same  protection  and  rights  as  to  citizens
or  subjects  of  the  most  favored  nation.  President
Hayes  further  suggested  the  importance  of  making
provision  for  regular  steam  postal  communication
with  the  Central  and  South  American  states  ;  he
recommended  that  congress,  by  suitable  legislation
and  with  proper  safeguards,  supplement  the  local
educational  funds  in  the  several  states  where  the
grave  duties  and.  responsibilities  of  citizenship
have  been  devolved  upon  uneducated  people,  by
devoting  to  the  purpose  grants  of  lands,  and,  if
necessary,  by  appropriations  from  the  treasury  of
the  United  States;  he  repeated  his  recommenda-
tions as  to  the  suspension  of  the  silver  coinage,  and
as  to  the  retirement  from  circulation  of  the  United
States  notes,  and  added  one  that  provision  be  made
by  law  to  put  Gen.  Grant  upon  the  retired  list  of
the  army,  with  rank  and  pay  befitting  the  great
services  he  had  rendered  to  the  country.

On  1  Feb.,  1880,  he  addressed  a  special  message
to  congress  in  relation  to  the  Ponca  Indians,  m
which  he  pointed  out  the  principles  that  should
guide  our  Indian  policy :  preparation  for  citizen-
ship by  industrial  and  general  education ;  allot-
ment of  land  in  severalty,  inalienable  for  a  certain
period ;  fair  compensation  for  Indian  lands  not  re-
quired for  allotment;  and,  finally,  investment  of
the  Indians,  so  educated  and  provided  for,  with
the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  citizenship.  His
last  communication  to  congress,  3  March,  1881,
was  a  message  returning  with  his  veto  a  bill  "  to
facilitate  the  refunding  of  the  national  debt,"
which  contained  a  provision  seriously  impairing
the  value  and  tending  to  the  destruction  of  the
national  banking  system.  On  the  following  day
he  assisted  at  the  inauguration  of  his  successor.

The  administration  of  President  Hayes,  although
much  attacked  by  the  politicians  of  both  parties,
was  on  the  whole  very  satisfactory  to  the  people
large.  By  withdrawing  the  Federal  troops  fron
the  southern  state-houses,  and  restoring  to  the
people  of  those  states  practical  self-government,  it
prepared  the  way  for  that  revival  of  patriotism
among  those  lately  estranged  from  the  Union,  that
fraternal  feeling  between  the  two  sections  of  the
country,  and  the  wonderful  material  advancement
of  the  south  which  we  now  witness.  It  conducted
with  wisdom  and  firmness  the  preparations  for  the
resumption  of  specie  payments,  as  well  as  the  fund-
ing of  the  public  debt  at  lower  rates  of  interest,
and  thus  facilitated  the  development  of  the  re-
markable business  prosperity  that  continued  to  its
close.  While  in  its  endeavors  to  effect  a  thorough
and  permanent  reform  of  the  civil  service  ther
were  conspicuous  lapses  and  inconsistencies,  it
accomplished  important  and  lasting  results.  Not
only  without  any  appropriations  of  money  anc
without  encouragement  of  any  kind  from  congres
but  in  the  face  of  the  decided  hostility  of  a  large


HAYES


HAYNE


143


majority  of  its  members,  the  system  of  competitive
examinations  was  successfully  applied  in  some  of
the  executive  departments  at  Washington  and  in
the  great  government  offices  at  New  York,  thus
proving  its  practicability  and  usefulness.  The  re-
moval by  President  Hayes  of  some  of  the  most
powerful  party  managers  from  their  offices,  avow-
edly on  the  ground  that  the  offices  had  been  used
as  part  of  the  political  machinery,  was  an  act  of
high  courage,  and  during  his  administration  there
was  far  less  meddling  with  party  politics  on  the
part  of  officers  of  the  government  than  at  any
period  since  Andrew  Jackson's  time.  The  success
of  the  Republican  party  in  the  election  of  1880  was
largely  owing  to  the  general  satisfaction  among
the  people  with  the  Hayes  administration.

On  the  expiration  of  his  term,  ex-President
Hayes  retired  to  his  home  at  Fremont,  Ohio.  He
was  the  recipient  of  various  distinctions.  The  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Kenyon
college,  Harvard  university,  Yale  college,  and
Johns  Hopkins  university.  He  was  made  senior
vice-commander  of  the  military  order  of  the  Loyal
legion,  commander  of
the  Ohio  command-
ery  of  the  same  or-
der, the  first  presi-
dent of  the  Society
of  the  Army  of  West
Virginia,  and  presi-
dent of  the  23d  regi-
ment Ohio  volunteers
association.  Much
of  his  time  is  devoted
to  benevolent  and
useful  enterprises.
He  is  president  of  the
trustees  of  the  John
F.  Slater  education-
fund,-  one  of  the  trus-
tees of  the  Peabody
education-fund,  pres-
ident of  the  Xational
Srison-reform  association,  an  active  member  of  the
rational  conference  of  corrections  and  charities,  a
trustee  of  the  Western  Reserve  university  at  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  of  the  Wesleyan  university  of  Dela-
ware, Ohio,  of  Mount  Union  college,  at  Alliance,
Ohio,  and  of  several  other  charitable  and  educa-
tional institutions.  On  the  occasion  of  a  meeting
of  the  National  prison-reform  association,  held  at
Atlanta,  Ga.,  in  November,  1886,  he  was  received
with  much  popular  enthusiasm,  and  greeted  by  an
ex-governor  of  Georgia  as  one  to  whom,  more  than
to  any  other,  the  people  were  indebted  for  the  era
of  peace  and  union  which  they  now  enjoyed,  and
by  the  present  governor,  John  B.  Gordon,  as  the
man  who  had  "  made  a  true  and  noble  effort  to  com-

?>lete  the  restoration  of  the  Union  by  restoring
raternal  feeling  between  the  estranged  sections."
See  "  Life,  Public  Services,  and  Select  Speeches  of
Rutherford  B.  Hayes,"  by  James  Quay  Howard
(Cincinnati,  1876).  Campaign  lives  were  also
written  by  William  D.  Howells  (New  York,  1876)
and  Russell  H.  Conwell  (Boston,  1876).— His  wife,
Lucy  Ware  Webb,  b.  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio,  28  Aug.,
1831 ;  d.  in  Fremont,  Ohio,  25  June,  1889.  She  was
the  daughter  of  a  physician,  and  married  in  1852.
Of  eight  children,  four  sons  and  one  daughter  are
living.  Mrs.  Hayes  was  noted  for  her  devotion  to
the  wounded  soldiers  during  the  war.  She  refused
to  permit  wine  to  be  served  on  the  White  House
table,  and  for  this  innovation  incurred  much  cen-
sure in  some  political  circles,  but  received  high
praise  from  the  advocates  of  total  abstinence,  who,


on  the  expiration  of  her  husband's  term  of  office,
presented  her  with  various  testimonials,  including
an  album  filled  with  autograph  expressions  of  ap-
proval from  many  prominent  persons.

HAYGOOD,  Atticus  Green,  clergyman,  b.  in
Watkinsville,  Ga.,  19  Nov.,  1839.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Emory  college,  Ga.,  in  1859,  and  licensed
to  preach  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in
the  same  year.  In  1870-'5  he  edited  the  Sunday-
school  publications  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church,  south,  and  in  1876  he  was  elected  president
of  Emory  college,  where  he  remained  eight  years.
He  was  appointed  general  agent  of  the  "  John  F.
Slater  fund  "  in  1883,  for  the  education  of  colored
youth  in  the  southern  states,  and  has  since  devoted
himself  to  this  work  and  to  efforts  for  the  progress
of  the  negro  race.  In  1872  he  was  elected  bishop
in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  but  de-
clined. In  1878-'82  he  edited  the  "Wesleyan
Christian  Advocate."  Emory  college  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870,  and  the  South-
western university,  Texas,  that  of  LL.  D.  in  ^884.
Dr.  Haygood  is  the  author  of  "  Go  or  Send,  an  Es-
say on  Missions"  (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1873);  "Our
Children"  (New  York,  1876);  "Our  Brother  in
Black"  (1881);  "Close  the  Saloons"  (Macon,  Ga.,
1882) ;  and  "  Speeches  and  Sermons  "  (Nashville,
1884) ;  and  has  edited  "  Sermons  bv  Bishop  George
Foster  Peirce  "  (Nashville.  Tenn.,  1886).

HAYMAN,  Samuel  Brinkle,  soldier,  b.  in
Chester  county,  Pa.,  5  June,  1820.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1842,  became
1st  lieutenant  of  infantry  in  1847,  captain  in  1855,
major  in  1863.  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  1867.  Dur-
ing the  Mexican  war  he  was  in  several  important
battles,  participating  in  the  assault  and  capture  of
the  city  of  Mexico.  He  served  throughout  the
civil  war  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallantry  at  Chan-
cellorsville.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer
service  in  June,  1863,  and  afterward  participated
in  the  battles  of  Kelly's  Ford,  Mine  Run.  and  the
battle  of  the  Wilderness,  6  May.  1864,  where  he  was
wounded  and  brevetted  colonel.  In  March,  1865,
he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
for  gallantry  at  Fair  Oaks.  In  1865-6  he  was  act-
ing assistant  provost-marshal-general,  and  disburs-
ing officer  at  Elmira,  N.  Y.  He  took  command  at
Fort  Dakota  in  1866,  and  was  retired  in  1872.

HAYNE,  Isaac,  patriot,  b.  in  South  Carolina,
23  Sept.,  1745  ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  4  Aug.,  1781.
He  was  a  wealthy  planter  in  the  districts  of  Beau-
fort and  Colleton,  and  the  proprietor  of  extensive
iron-works  in  York  district,  which  were  afterward
destroyed  by  the  British.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  took  the  field,  was  a  captain  of
artillery,  and  at  the  same  time  state  senator.  In
1780,  on  the  invasion  of  the  state  by  the  British,
he  served  in  a  cavalry  regiment  during  the  final
siege  of  Charleston,  and,  being  included  in  the
capitulation  of  that  place,  was  paroled  on  con-
dition that  he  would  not  serve  against  the  British
while  they  held  possession.  When  in  1781  the
fortunes  of  the  British  began  to  decline,  he,  with
all  the  others  who  were  paroled  on  the  same
terms,  was  required  to  join  the  royal  army  or  be
subjected  to  close  confinement.  Hayne  would
gladly  have  accepted  imprisonment,  but  his  wife
and  several  of  his  children  lay  at  the  point  of  death
from  small-pox.  He  went  to  Charleston,  and,  being
assured  by  the  deputy  British  commandant,  Patter-
son, that  he  would  not  be  required  to  bear  arms
against  his  country,  took  the  oath  of  allegiance.
After  the  successes  of  Gen.  Greene  had  left  the
British  nothing  but  Charleston,  Hayne  was  sum-


144


HAYNE


HAYNE


moned  to  join  the  royal  army  immediately.  This,
being  in  violation  of  the  agreement  that  had  been
made,  consequently  released  him  from  all  his  obli-
gations to  the  British.  He  went  to  the  American
camp,  and  was  commissioned  colonel  of  a  militia
company.  In  July,  1781,  he  made  an  incursion  to
the  Quarter  House,  a  precinct  within  five  miles  of
Charleston,  and  captured  Gen.  Andrew  Williamson,
a  former  patriot,  who  had  gone  over  to  the  British
service.  It  was  feared  that  Williamson  would  be
hanged  as  a  traitor,  and  the  British  commandant
at  Charleston,  Col.  Nesbit  Balfour,  ordered  out  his
entire  force  in  pursuit.  Hayne's  party  was  sur-
prised and  scattered ;  he  was  captured,  taken  to
Charleston,  thrown  into  the  provost's  prison,  and
after  a  brief  examination  before  a  board  of  officers,
without  trial  or  examination  of  witnesses,  was  sen-
tenced to  be  hanged  by  the  joint  orders  of  Col.
Balfour  and  Lord  Itawdon.  Hayne  protested
against  this  summary  proceeding,  which  was  illegal
whether  he  was  regarded  as  a  British  subject  or  a
prisoner  who  had  broken  his  parole.  The  citizens
of  Charleston  united  in  petitioning  for  his  pardon,
but  the  court  was  inexorable.  A  respite  of  forty-
eight  hours  was  allowed  him  in  which  to  take
leave  of  his  orphan  children,  for  his  wife  had  lately
died,  and  at  the  end  of  this  time  he  was  hanged.
The  conduct  of  Rawdon  and  Balfour  excited  the
liveliest  indignation  among  the  Americans,  and
Gen.  Greene  issued  a  proclamation,  on  26  Aug.,  an-
nouncing his  determination  to  make  reprisals.  The
matter  was  discussed  with  great  ability  in  the
British  parliament,  and,  while  both  Rawdon  and
Balfour  justified  it,  each  attempted  to  attribute  it
to  the  agency  of  the  other.  Thirty-two  years  after-
ward Lord  Rawdon,  then  the  Earl  of  Moira,  in  a
letter  to  Gen.  Henry  Lee,  attempted  to  justify  his
conduct.  His  "  Justification  "  was  analyzed  and
criticised  in  "  The  Southern  Review  "  for  February,
1828,  by  Hayne's  great-nephew,  Robert  Y.  Hayne.
— His  great-nephew,  Arthur  Peronnean,  senator,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  12  March,  1790 ;  d.  there,
7  Jan.,  1867,  received  a  classical  education  and  en-
gaged in  business.  He  joined  the  army  in  1812,
was  1st  lieutenant  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  major  of
cavalry  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  inspector-general  in
1814,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  gal-
lant conduct  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  He
commanded  the  Tennessee  volunteers  during  the
Florida  war,  and  retired  in  1820.  He  then  stud-
ied law  in  Pennsylvania,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  returning  to  South  Carolina  was  a  member
of  the  state  legislature,  and  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Jackson  and  Calhoun  ticket  in  1828.  He
was  U.  S.  naval  agent  for  five  years  in  the  Medi-
terranean, and  was  offered  and  declined  the  mis-
sion to  Belgium.  In  1858  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  South  Carolina,  as  a  state-rights
Democrat,  in  place  of  Josiah  J.  Evans,  deceased,
serving  from  May,  1858,  till  January,  1859. — His
brother,  Robert  Young,  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Paul's
parish,  Colleton  district,  S.  C,  10  Nov.,  1791 ;  d.
in  Asheville,  N.  C,  24  Sept.,  1839.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Charleston,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  eight  days  before  he  had  attained  his
majority,  and  began  practice  at  Charleston.  He
served  in  the  3d  South  Carolina  regiment  during
the  war  of  1812,  and  at  its  close  resumed  practice
in  Charleston.  He  was  then  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture of  the  state,  serving  in  1814-'18,  the  last  year
as  speaker.  He  was  attorney-general  of  the  state
in  1818-'22,  and  in  1823  was  elected  a  U.  S.  sena-
tor. Among  the  questions  that  came  up  for  con-
sideration during  his  term  was  that  of  protection
to  American  industry. Mr.  Hayne  took  an  active


"^7^?  .^  <^<«^-


part  in  the  debates  on  the  subject  and  vehemently
opposed  the  protective  system.  When  the  tariff
bill  of  1829  was  before  the  senate,  he  made  an
elaborate  and  powerful  speech  in  which  he  asserted
that  congress  had
not  the  constitu-
tional power  to  im-
pose duties  on  im-
ports for  the  pur-
pose of  protecting
domestic  manufac-
tures. His  opposi-
tion to  the  tariff  of
1828  was  equally
bold  and  vigorous.
In  1832  Henry  Clay
proposed  a  resolu-
tion in  the  senate
declaring  the  expe-
diency of  repealing
forthwith  the  duties
on  all  imported  ar-
ticles which  did  not
come  in  competition  with  American  manufac-
tures. Mr.  Hayne  met  this  proposition  with
prompt  and  vigorous  resistance,  and  submitted  an
amendment  to  the  effect  that  all  the  existing  duties
should  be  so  reduced  as  to  afford  the  revenue  neces-
sary to  defray  the  actual  expenses  of  the  govern-
ment. He  supported  this  amendment  in  a  speech
of  great  power,  but  it  was  rejected,  and  the  prin-
ciples of  Mr.  Clay's  resolution  were  embodied  in  a
bill  which  was  passed  after  full  discussion.  In  this
debate  the  doctrine  of  nullification  was  for  the  first
time  announced  in  congress ;  Mr.  Hayne  asserted
the  right  of  a  state,  under  the  Federal  compact,  to
arrest  the  operation  of  a  law  adopted  by  congress,
and  sanctioned  by  the  president,  which  she  in  con-
vention should  decide  to  be  unconstitutional.  This
statement  of  the  senator  from  South  Carolina  led
to  the  great  debate  between  Daniel  Webster  and
Mr.  Hayne,  upon  the  principles  of  the  constitution,
the  authority  of  the  general  government,  and  the
rights  of  the  states.  In  consequence  of  the  adop-
tion of  the  tariff  bill  of  Mr.  Clay,  the  legislature  of
South  Carolina  called  a  state  convention,  which
met  at  Columbia,  24  Nov.,  1832,  and  adopted  an
ordinance  of  nullification.  In  the  following  De-
cember, Mr.  Hayne  was  elected  governor  of  South
Carolina,  while  Mr.  Calhoun  resigned  the  vice-
presidency  of  the  United  States,  and  succeeded  him
in  the  senate.  President  Jackson,  on  10  Dec,  is-
sued his  proclamation  denouncing  the  nullification
ordinance,  and  the  proceedings  in  the  state  of
South  Carolina.  Gov.  Hayne  replied  with  a  proc-
lamation of  defiance,  and  South  Carolina  prepared
for  armed  resistance.  At  this  critical  hour,  at  the
instance  of  Mr.  Clay  and  President  Jackson,  a  com-
promise was  finally  agreed  on,  which  adjusted  the
system  of  collecting  the  revenue  and  lowered  the
import  duties  on  certain  articles  of  necessity  and
convenience.  South  Carolina  called  another  con-
vention, over  which  Gov.  Hayne  presided,  and
the  ordinance  of  nullification  was  repealed.  Gov.
Hayne  retired  from  the  executive  office  in  Decem-
ber, 1834,  and  in  1835-'7  was  mayor  of  Charleston)
He  was  president  of  the  Cincinnati  and  Charles-
ton railroad  in  1836-'9,  and  was  attending  a  rail-
road convention  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He
was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Southern  Review."  See
"  Life  and  Speeches  of  Robert  Y.  Hayne "  (1845).
— Robert  Young's  nephew,  Paul  Hamilton,  poet,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  1  Jan.,  1830 ;  d.  near  Au-
gusta, Ga.,  6  July,  1886,  was  the  only  child  of  a
naval  officer,  who  died  at  sea  when  Paul  was  a


■


HAYNE


HAYNES


145


infant,  so  that  Gov.  Hayne  stood  very  much  in  the
place  of  a  father  to  his  nephew,  superintending  his
education,  and  always  guiding  him  by  his  counsel.
The  family  had  independent  means,  so  that  young
Hayne  had  every  advantage  of  education  that  his
native  city  could  offer.  Under  the  eye  of  his
mother,  a  woman  of  rare  character,  and  the  guard-
ianship of  his  uncle,  he  was  thoroughly  educated,
and  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South  Caro-
lina with  distinction  at  an  early  age.  He  studied
law  and  entered  on  its  practice,  but  from  his  earli-
est years  the  bent  of  his  mind  had  been  toward
literature.  As  a  mere  child,  he  had  pored  over
Froissart's  "  Chronicles,"  the  old  dramatists,  Shake-
speare, and  the  earlier  poets.  His  study  of  the
literature  of  the  Elizabethan  age  never  ceased,  and
probably  no  man  in  the  United  States  was  more
saturated  with  its  spirit  than  he.  As  a  conse-
quence of  this  taste  he  gave  up  the  practice  of  law,
and  addressed  himself  wholly  to  literary  life.
When  only  twenty-three  years  of  age  he  edited
"  Russell's  Magazine,"  a  southern  literary  periodi-
cal, and  afterward  the  "  Charleston  Literary  Ga-
zette"; and  with  his  friends  William  Gilmore
Simms,  Henry  Timrod,  and  others,  he  helped  to
create  such  a  literary  atmosphere  in  his  native  city
as  had  not  existed  before  that  time.  The  civil  war
interrupted  all  Mr.  Hayne's  life-plans.  He  entered
at  once  into  service  as  one  of  Gov.  Pickens's  aides,
remaining  on  duty  till  his  naturally  delicate  health
entirely  disabled  him  for  active  service.  During
the  war  he  continued  constantly  to  write  stirring
lyrics,  which  exerted  no  small  influence  throughout
the  south.  During  the  bombardment  of-  Charleston
his  home  was  burned  to  the  ground,  consuming  his
large  library,  and  all  the  ancestral  belongings  of
generations.  Thenceforth  he  became  an  exile  from
his  native  city,  and,  having  been  impoverished  by
the  war,  went  to  Augusta,  Ga.,  where  he  supported
his  farmly  by  editorial  work.  He  established  him-
self at  length  on  a  few  acres  of pine-land,  and

built  a  small  cot-
tage, where  with
his  wife  and  son,
he  resided  until
his  death.  Here  he
labored  unremit-
tingly, suffering
continually  from
feeble  health,  and
keeping  the  wolf
from  his  door  only
by  the  point  of  his
pen.  His  health
began  seriously  to
fail  about  1882,
though  he  labored
with  untiring  en-
ergy at  his  literary
work  till  within  a
short  period  of  his
death.  Mr.  Hayne
left  enough  manu-
script to  fill  two
volumes.  No  southern  poet  has  ever  written  so
much  or  done  so  much  to  give  a  literary  impulse
to  his  section,  so  that  he  well  deserves  the  title
that  has  been  bestowed  upon  him  by  his  English
friends,  as  well  as  by  his  own  people,  "  the  Laure-
ate of  the  South."  Among  the  tributes  to  Mr.
Hayne  was  a  sonnet  by  Philip  Bourke  Marston,
the  English  poet.  Hie  published  volumes  are
"Poems"  (Boston,  1855);  "Sonnets  and  Other
Poems  "  (New  York,  1857) ;  "  Avolio,  a  Legend  of
the  Island  of  Cos  "  (Boston,  1859) ;  "  Legends  and
vol.  m. — 10


PoyViX 14. /4~Cuy*u,.


Lyrics  "  (Philadelphia,  1872) ;  "  The  Mountain  of
the  Lovers,  and  Other  Poems  "  (New  York,  1873) ;
Lives  of  Robert  Y.  Hayne  and_Hugh  S.  Legare
(1878) ;  and  a  complete  illustrated  edition  of  his
poems  (Boston,  1882).  He  also  edited  Henry  Tim-
rod's  poems,  with  a  memoir  (New  York,  1872).

HAYNES,  Henry  Williamson,  archaeologist,
b.  in  Bangor,  Me.,  20  Sept.,  1831.  He  was  the  son
of  Nathaniel  Haynes,  who  was  editor  of  the  "  East-
ern Republican,"  one  of  the  principal  Democratic
newspapers  in  New  England  during  Andrew  Jack-
son's administration.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1851,  and,  after  teaching,  studied  law,
and  practised  for  several  years.  Subsequently  he
was  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  Latin  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Vermont,  and  later  he  became  professor  of
Greek  in  the  same  institution,  but  resigned  in  1873
to  devote  his  time  to  archaeology.  He  then  sailed
for  Europe,  where  he  spent  six  years  in  systematic
study  among  the  antiquities  of  various  countries,
also  taking  part  in  several  international  congresses.
The  winter  of  1877-8  he  spent  in  Egypt,  seeking
for  evidences  of  the  paheolithic  age  in  that  country.
The  results  of  his  investigations  were  presented  at
the  International  congress  of  anthropological  sci-
ences that  was  held  in  Paris  in  1878,  where  he
was  rewarded  with  a  medal  and  a  diploma,  and  his
paper  was  afterward  published  in  the  "  Memoirs  of
the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences."
Since  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  has  re-
sided in  Boston,  where  he  is  a  member  of  the
school-board  and  a  trustee  of  the  public  library,
and  has  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  archaeology.
He  has  contributed  to  scientific  and  literary  jour-
nals, and  to  the  proceedings  of  learned  bodies.

HAYNES,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Copford  Hall,
Essex,  England ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  1  March,
1654.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1633  with  the
Rev.  Edward  Hooker,  and  in  1634  was  assistant,
and  in  1635  governor,  of  Massachusetts  Bay  colo-
ny. Removing  to  Connecticut  in  1636,  he  became
its  first  governor,  and  served  every  alternate  year
until  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  five  authors  of
the  first  constitution  of  Connecticut  in  1638,  which
embodies  the  main  points  of  all  subsequent  state
constitutions  and  of  the  Federal  constitution.  He
is  described  as  of  "  large  estate  and  larger  affec-
tions ;  of  heavenly  mind  and  spotless  life,  saga-
cious, accurate,  and  dear  to  the  people  by  his  be-
nevolent virtues  and  disinterested  conduct." — His
son,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hartford  in  1638;
d.  there,  24  May,  1679,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1658,  supplied  the  pulpit  at  Wethersfield.  Conn.,
and  was  pastor  of  the  1st  church  in  Hartford  in
1664.  He  was  ordained  as  a  colleague  of  the  Rev.
John  Whiting,  who  held  Congregationalist  doc-
trines, while  Mr.  Haynes  represented  the  Presby-
terian element.  The  disputes  which  ensued  divided
the  Hartford  church,  Mr.  Whiting  refusing  to  hold
communion  with  Mr.  Haynes  and  his  party.  In
February,  1670,  Mr.  Whiting,  with  thirty-one
members,  withdrew,  and  formed  the  2d  church  of
Hartford,  leaving  Mr.  Haynes  in  possession.

HAYNES,  Lemuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  West  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  18  July,  1753 ;  d.*in  Granville,  N.  Y.,  28
Sept.,  1833.  He  was  a  mulatto,  and  his  early  life
was  spent  in  domestic  service.  In  1775  he  enlisted
as  a  minute-man  in  the  colonial  army,  joined  the
forces  at  Roxbury,  Mass.,  and  in  1776  was  a  volun-
teer in  the  expedition  to  Ticonderoga.  At  the  close
of  the  northern  campaign  he  returned  to  his  home
in  Granville,  worked  on  a  farm,  and  acquired  an
education  without  masters,  becoming,  in  a  com-

Earatively  short  time,  a  respectable Greek and
iatin  scholar. In  November  of  1780  he  was  ap-


146


HAYNIE


HAYS


proved  as  a  candidate  for  the  ministry  and  invited
to  supply  the  pulpit  of  the  Congregational  church
at  Granville.  In  September.  1783,  he  was  married
to  Miss  Elizabeth  Babbat,  of  Hartford,  a  young
white  woman  of  intelligence  and  respectability,
and  in  1785  was  ordained  by  the  Association  of
ministers  of  Litchfield  county.  He  preached  two
years  at  Torrington,  but  resigned  on  account  of  a
prejudice  in  his  congregation  against  his  race,  and
was  then  called  to  Rutland,  ministering  with  great
success  for  thirty  years.  In  1818  he  removed  to
Manchester,  where  he  was  involved  in  the  cele-
brated trial  of  the  Boom  brothers,  who  were  con-
victed and  sentenced  to  be  hanged  for  the  sup-
posed murder  of  an  insane  man  named  Russel
Calvin.  Mr.  Haynes  visited  them  in  prison,  be-
came convinced  of  their  innocence,  and  appeared
as  their  advocate.  When  Calvin  returned  to  Man-
chester a  few  days  previous  to  the  date  fixed  for
the  execution,  it  was  regarded  by  the  masses  as  a
direct  answer  to  the  prayers  of  the  colored  preach-
er. In  1822  he  was  called  to  Granville,  N.  Y.,  where
he  remained  pastor  until  his  death.  He  was  char-
acterized by  subtle  intellect,  keen  wit,  and  an  eager
thirst  for  knowledge.  He  published  "  Sermon
against  Universalism,"  in  reply  to  Hosea  Ballou
(Torrington.  1805).  His  life  was  written  by  James
E.  Cooley  (New  York,  1848).

HAYNIE,  Ishain  Nicolas,  soldier,  b.  in  Dover,
Tenn.,  18  Nov.,  1824  ;  d.  in  Springfield,  111.,  in  No-
vember, 1868.  He  removed  to  Illinois  in  early
childhood,  received  little  education,  and  worked
on  a  farm  to  obtain  means  to  study  law,  in  which
he  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1846.  He  served
throughout  the  Mexican  war  as  1st  lieutenant  of
the  6th  Illinois  volunteers,  resumed  his  profession
in  1849,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in
1850.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Kentucky  law-
school  in  1852,  and  in  1856  was  appointed  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  at  Cairo,  111.  He
canvassed  the  state  as  presidential  elector  on  the
Douglas  ticket  in  1860,  and  in  1861  raised  and  or-
ganized the  48th  Illinois  infantry,  being  commis-
sioned its  colonel.  He  participated  in  the  battles
of  Port  Henry,  Fort  Donelson,  Shiloh,  where  he
was  severely  wounded,  and  Corinth.  He  was  de-
feated as  war  candidate  for  congress  in  1862,  and
on  29  Nov.  of  this  year  received  the  appointment
of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  resumed
his  profession  in  1864,  and  subsequently  became
adjutant-general  of  Illinois.

HAYS,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Franklin,
Venango  co.,  Pa.,  8  July,  1819 ;  killed  in  the  battle

of  the  Wilderness,
5  May,  1864.  He
was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1844
with  Winfield  S.
Hancock  and  Al-
fred Pleasonton.
As  2d  lieutenant
of  the  8th  infan-
try, he  entered  on
the  Mexican  cam-
paign, and  won
special  distinction
in  the  engagement
near  Atlixco.  In
>^W/.  April  1848,  he  re-
r Js  signed  his  commis-

v  sion  in  the  army,

and  settled  in  Venango  county,  Pa.,  where  he  en-
gaged in  the  manufacture  of  iron  in  1848-'50,  was
assistant  engineer  on  railroads  in  1850-'4,  and  from


1854  till  1861  was  a  civil  engineer  in  Pittsburg.
When  the  war  began  in  1861,  Hays  re-entered  the
service  as  colonel  of  the  63d  Pennsylvania  regi-
ment, and  with  the  rank  of  captain  in  the  16th
regular  infantry,  to  date  from  14  May,  1861.  In  the
peninsula  he  was  attached  with  his  regiment  to
the  first  brigade  of  Kearny's  division  of  Heintzel-
man's  corps,  and  at  the  close  of  the  seven  days'  con-
test he  was  brevet  ted  lieutenant-colonel.  He  took
part  in  the  Maryland  campaign,  and  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  29  Sept.,  1862.  He
was  wounded  at  Chancellorsville  while  at  the  head
of  his  brigade.  He  commanded  the  3d  division
of  his  corps  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  and,  after
Hancock  was  wounded,  was  temporarily  in  com-
mand, gaining  the  brevet  of  colonel  in  the  United
States  army.  He  was  engaged  at  Auburn  and  Mine
Run.  When  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  re-
organized, Hays  was  placed  in  command  of  the
second  brigade  of  Birney's  3d  division  of  the
2d  corps.  In  this  capacity  he  fought,  and  gal-
lantly met  his  death  during  the  terrible  struggle
toward  {he  junction  of  the  Plank  and  Brock  roads,
which  was  the  feature  of  the  first  day's  fighting
in  the  Wilderness.  Gen.  Hays  was  frank  and
brave,  quick  and  full  of  energy,  and  was  a  great
favorite  with  his  men.

HAYS,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
5  July,  1796;  d.  there,  13  April,  1879.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1816,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  that  insti-
tution in  1820.  Dr.  Hays  became  known  to  the
public  principally  through  his  editorial  work  on
medical  journals  and  books.  In  February,  1827,
he  joined  the  staff  of  the  "  Philadelphia  Journal
of  the  Medical  and  Physical  Sciences,"  which  had
been  established  in  1820,  becoming  its  sole  editor
in  November  of  the  same  year,  when  with  enlarge-
ment this  paper  assumed  the  name  of  "  The  Ameri-
can Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,"  and  he  contin-
ued in  that  capacity  until  1869,  when  his  son,  Dr.  I.
Minis  Hays,  became  his  associate.  Of  all  the  other
medical  journals  in  existence  at  the  time  of  its  es-
tablishment, the  sole  survivor  (1887)  is  the  "  Edin-
burgh Medical  Journal."  In  1843  he  established
the  "  Medical  News,"  and  in  1874  the  "  Monthly
Abstract  of  Medical  Science,"  both  of  which  jour-
nals were  also  published  in  Philadelphia.  He  was
elected  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  natural  sci-
ences of  Philadelphia  in  1818,  and  was  its  president
from  1865  till  1869,  also  one  of  the  founders,  and  for
many  years  secretary,  of  the  Franklin  institute,  be-
ing at  the  time  of  his  death  its  oldest  member.
Dr.  Hays  was  one  of  the  oldest  members  of  the  Col-
lege of  physicians  in  Philadelphia,  and  for  many
years  one  of  its  censors.  Besides  being  a  member
of  scientific  bodies  both  at  home  and  abroad,  he
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  medical
association,  and  author  of  its  code  of  ethics,  which
has  been  since  adopted  by  every  state  and  county
medical  society  in  the  United  States.  In  addition
to  his  journals,  he  edited  Wilson's  "American
Ornithology  "  (Philadelphia,  1828) ;  Hoblyn's  "  Dic-
tionary of  Terms  used  in  Medicine  and  the  Collateral
Sciences  "  (1846 ;  new  ed.,  1855) ;  Laurence's  "  Trea-
tise on  Diseases  of  the  Eye"  (1847 :  several  new  eds.) ;
and  Arnott's  "  Elements  of  Physics  "  (1855).

HAYS,  Jacob,  high-constable,  b.  in  Bedford,
Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  May,  1772 ;  d.  in  New
York  city  in  June,  1850.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  soon  afterward  came  to  New
York  city,  where  he  became  a  policeman.  In  1801
Edward  Livingston,  then  mayor,  appointed  him
high-constable,  which  office  "he  held  forty-nine
years,  until  his  death. Mr.  Hays  became  a  noted


HAYS


HAYWARD


147


thief-taker,  and  was  known  throughout  the  Union
for  his  many  captures  of  criminals.  His  name  was
a  terror  to  evil-doers,  and  it  was  a  common  custom
of  the  day  to  threaten  unruly  boys  with  his  atten-
tions. On  "  Evacuation  day "  and  "  Fourth  of
July"  parades,  "old  Hays,"  as  he  was  called,
headed  the  city  officials,  shouldering  a  drawn
sword,  his  hat  decked  with  a  flaming  cockade,  and
his  person  decorated  with  the  glittering  insignia
of  his  office.  Hays  was  a  small,  thin,  comic-look-
ing old  gentleman,  with  a  well-marked  Jewish  vis-
age, set  off  by  an  amusing  strut. — His  grandson,
William  Jacob,  painter,  b.  in  New  York  citv,  8
Aug.,  1830;  d.  there,  13  March,  1875,  was  self-
taught  in  the  art  of  painting,  and  began  on  fruit
and  flower  pieces.  Later  he  visited  the  western
territories,  where  he  painted  landscapes  and  animal
life.  In  1850  he  exhibited  his  first  picture,  "  Dogs
in  a  Field,"  at  the  New  York  academy  of  design,
and  in  1852  his  "  Head  of  a  Bull-Dog."  On  the
merits  of  the  latter  he  was  elected  an  associate
of  the  academy.  His  largest  painting  is  "The
Wounded  Buffalo."  Among  the  best  of  his  works
are  "The  Stampede,"  "A  Herd  on  the  Move,"
"  Setter  and  Game,"  and  "  Noah's  Head."  Some
of  his  pictures  have  been  engraved.

HAYS,  Will  Shakespeare,  balladist,  b.  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  19  July,  1837.  He  was  educated
at  Hanover  college,  Ind.,  and  Georgetown,  Ky.
He  early  gave  evidence  of  the  exuberance  of
fancy  and  the  genius  for  melody  that  have  made
him  one  of  the  most  successful  ballad-authors  in
the  United  States.  From  his  boyhood,  without
the  aid  of  a  master,  he  has  been  able  to  perform
on  any  musical  instrument.  While  yet  at  school
in  1856  he  wrote  his  first  published  ballad,  "  Little
Ones  at  Home,"  and  from  that  time  his  composi-
tions have  appeared  constantly.  "  Evangeline  "
was  the  first  ballad  that  he  set  to  music,  and  is
probably  as  popular  as  any  that  he  ever  produced,
the  sales  having  reached  about  half  a  million.  He
was  at  one  time  amanuensis  for  George  D.  Pren-
tice, when  the  latter  was  editor  of  the  Louisville
"Journal,"  and  has  done  editorial  service  for
that  paper  and  the  Louisville  "  Democrat "  and
"Courier-Journal"  until  a  late  date.  It  is  esti-
mated that  the  sales  of  his  songs  in  this  coun-
try and  England  have  reached  over  six  million
copies.  They  are  characterized  by  the  pathos
and  sentiment  of  natural  simplicity.  His  bal-
lads include  "  Mollie  Darling,"  "  Nora  O'Neal."
I  Driven  from  Home,"  "  Write  Me  a  Letter,"  "  Lit-
tle Old  Cabin  in  the  Lane."  "  Susan  Jane,"  "  We
Parted  by  the  Riverside,"  "  My  Southern  Sunny
Home,"  "Nobody's  Darling,"  "You've  Been  a
Friend  to  Me,"  "  Shamus  O'Brien,"  "  The  Wander-
ing Refugee,"  "  Do  not  turn  Me  from  Your  Door,"
"Good-by,  Old  Home,"  "Moon  is  out  To-night,
Love,"  and  "  Save  One  Bright  Crown  for  Me."

HAYS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va.,
in  1819 ;  d.  in  Fort  Independence,  Boston  harbor,  7
Feb.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1840,  and  promoted  1st  lieutenant
in  1847,  captain  in  1853,  and  major  in  1863.  He
served  throughout  the  Mexican  war  with  the  light-
artillery.  He  was  wounded  at  Molino  del  Rey,  and
bre vetted  captain  and  major.  From  1853  till  1854
he  was  engaged  in  the  Seminole  Indian  wars,  and
was  on  frontier  duty  in  1856-'60.  He  commanded
a  brigade  of  horse-artillery  in  1861-2  in  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  participating  in  the  battles  of  An-
tietam  and  Fredericksburg,  and  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  November,  1862.
He  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  at  Chancel-
lorsville,  6  May,  1863,  rejoined  the  army  at  Gettys-


burg, and  in  November  was  appointed  provost-
marshal  of  the  southern  district  of  New  York.  At
the  expiration  of  his  term  in  February,  1865,  he
rejoined  his  regiment  at  Petersburg,  and  served
with  the  2d  corps,  and  in  command  of  the  reserve
artillery  until  the  close  of  the  war,  when  he  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  for
gallant  conduct.  He  was  mustered  out  of  volun-
teer service  in  1866  with  the  rank  of  major,  and
served  on  various  posts,  commanding  Fort  Inde-
pendence from  29  April,  1873,  till  his  death.

HAYTHORNE,  Robert  Poore,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Bristol,  England,  in  1815.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  town,  and  in  1842  came
to  Prince  Edward  Island,  where,  in  1867,  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  provincial  legislative  coun-
cil. Soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  a  member
of  the  Cole  administration,  and  after  Mr.  Cole's
retirement  he  continued  to  sit  in  the  administra-
tion of  Joseph  Hensley.  When  the  latter  was  ap-
pointed a  judge,  Mr.  Haythorne  succeeded  him  as
president  of  the  council  and  leader  of  the  govern-
ment, retaining  those  portfolios  till  his  resignation
in  1870.  On  2  April,  1872,  he  was  assigned  the
duty  of  forming  a  new  government,  which  he  suc-
cessfully accomplished,  and  in  February,  1873,  he
and  his  colleague  in  office,  Mr.  Laird,  formed  a
delegation  to  Ottawa  on  the  subject  of  the  union
of  Prince  Edward  Island  with  the  Dominion.  As
the  result  of  this  mission  his  government  appealed
to  the  voters  of  the  province,  but,  not  being  sus-
tained, he  resigned,  18  April,  1873.  He  sat  in  the
legislative  council  of  Prince  Edward  Island  from
1867  till  1874,  and  was  made  a  Dominion  senator
on  the  admission  of  that  province  into  the  Con-
federation, 18  Oct.,  1873.

HAYWARD,  James,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Con-
cord, Mass.,  12  June,  1786;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27
July,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1819,  and  was  a  tutor  in  mathematics  there  for  six
years.  In  1826  he  became  a  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  philosophy  at  Harvard,  but  in
1829  he  severed  his  relations  with  the  college  to
enter  on  the  practice  of  civil  engineering.  The
original  survey  of  the  Boston  and  Providence  rail-
road was  made  by  him.  Later  he  was  profession-
ally retained  by  the  Boston  and  Maine  railroad,
projecting  and  having  entire  charge  of  the  con-
struction of  this  road,  including  the  building  of
the  bridge  at  Haverhill,  and  ultimately  being
made  president  of  the  corporation.  Prof.  Hayward
was  recognized  as  a  high  authority  in  his  profes-
sion, and  was  a  frequent  co-laborer  with  Loammi
Baldwin,  with  whom  and  Lemuel  Shaw  he  was  se-
lected, as  a  commission  of  three,  to  determine  the
water-power  question  that  was  at  issue  between
the  Boston  and  Roxbury  water-power  company
and  the  Boston  iron  company.  He  published
"  Elements  of  Geometrv,  upon  the  Inductive  Meth-
od "  (Cambridge,  1829)!

HAYWARD,  John,  author,  b.  in  Boston  in
January,  1781 ;  d.  there,  13  Oct.,  1862.  He  is  the
author  of  "View  of  the  United  States"  (New
York,  1833) ;  "  Religious  Creeds  of  the  United
States  and  of  the  British  Provinces"  (Boston,
1837) ;  "  New  England  Gazetteer  "  (1839) ;  "  Book
of  Religions"  (1842);  "Gazetteer  of  the  United
States  "  (Portland,  1843 ;  Philadelphia,  1854,  new
ed.) ;  and  "  Gazetteer  of  Massachusetts,  New  Hamp-
shire, and  Vermont "  (Boston,  1849).

HAYWARD,  Lemuel,  physician,  b.  in  Brain-
tree,  Mass.,  22  March,  1749 ;  d.  in  Jamaica  Plain,  20
March,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1768,  and,  after  studying  medicine  in  Boston  in
1769  under  Dr.  Joseph  Warren,  established  himself


148


HAYWARD


HAZARD


at  Jamaica  Plain,  and  acquired  a  lucrative  practice.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  entered  the
army  as  surgeon,  served  throughout  the  war,  and
at  its  close  removed  to  Boston,  and  was  distin-

fuished  in  his  profession.  In  1798  he  returned  to
is  former  residence  at  Jamaica  Plain. — His  son,
George,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  March,
1791 ;  d.  there,  7  Oct.,  1863,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1809,  and  took  his  medical  degree  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1812.  He  then  es-
tablished himself  in  Boston,  and  soon  attained
eminence  in  his  profession.  In  1835-49  he  was
professor  of  clinical  surgery  in  the  medical  school
at  Harvard.  He  was  president  of  the  Massachu-
setts medical  society,  and  a  member  of  the  Acade-
my of  arts  and  sciences  of  Boston,  and  the  corpo-
ration of  Harvard.  He  spent  several  years  in
Europe  and  acquired  a  continental  reputation  as  a
surgeon.  Dr.  Hayward  translated  Bichat's  "  Gen-
eral Anatomy  "  (Boston,  1822) ;  Beckland's  "  Addi-
tions to  Bichat's  Anatomy  "  (1823) ;  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Outlines  of  Physiology  "  (Boston,  1834) ;
and  "  Surgical  Records  "  (1855).

HAYWARD,  Nathaniel,  inventor,  b.  in  Easton,
Mass.,  19  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Colchester,  Conn.,  18
July,  1865.  While  keeping  a  livery-stable  in  Bos-
ton in  1834  he  bought  some  India-rubber  cloth  for
a  carriage-top,  and,  noticing  that  it  was  sticky,  be-
gan to  make  experiments  with  a  view  to  remedy-
ing the  difficulty.  He  sold  his  stable  in  1835,  and
a  few  months  later  engaged  to  work  for  the  Eagle
India-rubber  company  of  Boston,  having,  as  he
thought,  succeeded  in  making  firm  rubber  cloth
from  a  mixture  of  rubber,  turpentine,  lamp-black,
and  other  materials.  In  1836  he  tried  to  bleach
some  of  the  cloth  by  exposing  it  to  the  fumes  of
sulphur,  and  thus  discovered  the  use  of  that  sub-
stance in  hardening  rubber.  He  then  adopted  the
plan  of  sprinkling  his  cloth  with  powdered  sulphur
and  afterward  exposing  it  to  the  sun,  and  in  1838
patented  his  process  and  assigned  the  patent  to
Charles  Goodyear,  thus  leading  to  the  latter's  dis-
covery of  the  present  vulcanizing  process.  (See
Goodyear,  Charles.)  Hayward  continued  to  ex-
periment, and,  having  learned  from  Mr.  Goodyear
of  his  discovery  in  1839,  endeavored  to  perfect  the
vulcanizing  process,  and  succeeded  in  1843  in  mak-
ing several  hundred  pounds  of  the  hardened  rub-
ber. The  right  to  use  Goodyear's  patent  for  the
manufacture  of  shoes  was  assigned  to  him  in  1844,
and  shortly  afterward  he  discovered  a  method  for
giving  them  a  high  polish.  He  organized  the
Hayward  rubber  company,  with  Gov.  William  A.
Buckingham  and  others,  at  Colchester,  Conn.,  in
1847,  was  its  active  manager  till  1854,  and  its
president  from  1855  till  his  death.  Mr.  Hayward
was  active  in  works  of  benevolence  and  utility.

HAYWOOD,  Benjamin,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Southwell,  England,  in  1792;  d.  in  Pottsville,  Pa.,
9  July,  1878.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States
in  1803,  and  worked  as  a  journeyman  blacksmith
in  Pottsville.  In  1833  he  purchased  the  first
steam-engine  that  was  put  up  in  Schuylkill  county,
and  established  a  machine-shop.  He  became  sen-
ior partner  in  the  firm  of  Haywood  and  Snyder  in
1835,  and  engaged  on  an  extensive  scale  in  build-
ing steam-engines  and  mining-machinery.  His
firm  constructed  the  first  rolls  for  •'  T  "  rails,  and
the  first  apparatus  for  sawing  hot  iron  that  was
ever  used  in  the  United  States.  At  the  same  time
he  carried  on  extensive  mining  operations.  He
sold  his  interests  in  Pennsylvania  in  1850,  removed
to  California,  and  built  at  Sonora  the  first  saw-
mill in  the  state  outside  of  San  Francisco.  He
organized  in  1852  the  San  Francisco  mechanics'  in-


stitute, and  was  its  president  till  1855.  In  the
autumn  of  this  year  he  sold  his  California  busi-
ness, returned  to  Pottsville,  Pa.,  and  purchased
large  interests  in  the  Palo  Alto  rolling-mill.  Mr.
Haywood  was  one  of  the  commissioners  for  organ-
izing the  Union  Pacific  railroad.

HAYWOOD,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Halifax  county,
N.  C,  in  1753 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  Decem-
ber, 1826.  He  was  the  son  of  Egbert  Haywood,  a
Revolutionary  officer.  The  son  entered  the  pro-
fession of  law  at  an  early  age,  was  elected  attor-
ney-general in  1791,  and  in  1794  judge  of  the  su-
Serior  court,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1809  to
efend  a  client,  James  Glasgow,  against  the  charge
of  fraud  in  issuing  land-warrants  while  secretary
of  state.  Glasgow  was  convicted,  and  Judge  Hay-
wood's course  in  becoming  his  advocate  brought
on  him  so  much  odium  that  he  was  compelled  to
leave  the  state.  He  settled  in  Tennessee  in  1810,
took  high  rank  as  an  advocate,  and  was  judge  of
the  supreme  court  from  1812  until  his  death.  He
is  the  author  of  "  A  Manual  of  the  Laws  of  North
Carolina  "  (Raleigh,  1801) ;  "  Haywood's  Justice
and  North  Carolina  Law  Reports"  (1789-1806);
"Tennessee  Reports"  (Nashville  and  Knoxville,
1816-'18) ;  "  Statute  Laws  of  Tennessee,"  in  con-
junction with  R.  L.  Cobbs  (Knoxville,  1831);
"  Natural  and  Aboriginal  History  of  Tennessee "
(1823) ;  and  '"  The  Civil  and  Political  History  of
Tennessee  from  its  Earliest  Settlement  to  1796"
(1823). — His  nephew,  William  Henry,  senator,  b.
in  Wake  county,  N.  C,  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,  6
Oct.,  1852,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
North  Carolina  in  1819,  studied  law,  and  estab-
lished himself  in  practice  in  Raleigh.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  between  1831  and  1836,
served  one  term  in  the  house  of  commons,  and  was
elected  as  a  Democrat  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving
from  1843  till  1846,  when  he  resigned  and  returned
to  practice.  Failure  of  health  forced  him  to  re-
tire from  active  duties  several  years  before  his
death. — William  Henry's  cousin,  Edmund  Burke,
physician,  b.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  13  June,  1825,  was
educated  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  and
took  his  medical  degree  in  1849  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania.  He  began  practice  in  Raleigh,
where  he  now  (1887)  resides.  In  1861  he  was  ap-
pointed surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army  in  charge
of  the  hospitals  in  Raleigh  and  in  Richmond,  Va.,
and  was  acting  medical  director  of  the  Depart-
ment of  North  Carolina,  and  president  of  the  board
to  grant  discharges  from  1863  till  the  close  of  the
war,  when  he  returned  to  practice.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Medical  association  of  North  Carolina
in  1868,  and  from  1871  till  1877,  of  the  State  in-
sane asylum.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Interna-
tional medical  congress  in  Philadelphia  in  1876.
He  has  contributed  various  professional  papers  to
surgical  and  medical  journals.

HAZARD,  Jonathan  J.,  member  of  the  Con-
tinental congress,  b.  in  Rhode  Island  in  1728 ;
d.  in  the  state  of  New  York  in  1812.  He  took  an
early  stand  in  favor  of  liberty  in  the  Revolution-
ary struggle.  In  1776  he  appeared  in  the  general
assembly  as  a  representative  from  Charlestown,
was  elected  paymaster  of  the  Continental  battalion
in  1777,  and  joined  the  army  in  New  Jersey.  In
1778  he  was  re-elected  a  member  of  the  general
assembly,  constituted  one  of  the  council  of  war,
and  continued  a  member  of  the  house  most  of  the
time  during  the  Revolution.  In  1787  he  was
elected  to  congress  from  Rhode  Island,  and  he
was  re-elected  in  1788.  Mr.  Hazard  was  one  of
the  most  efficient  leaders  of  the  paper-money
party  in  1786,  and  their  ablest  debater  in  the  gen-


HAZARD


HAZELIUS


149


eral  assembly.  He  was  the  leader  of  the  same
party  under  the  name  of  Anti-Federalists,  and
was  bitterly  opposed  to  the  adoption  of  the  na-
tional constitution.  As  a  delegate  to  the  conven-
tion that  assembled  at  South  Kingston  in  March,
1790,  to  consider  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,
he  so  successfully  resisted  the  measure  that,  upon
an  informal  vote,  there  was  a  majority  of  seven-
teen against  it.  In  the  following  May  the  assem-
bly met  at  Newport,  and,  Mr.  Hazard's  opposition
having  been  withdrawn,  the  constitution  was
adopted  by  a  majority  of  one.  He  was  subse-
quently a  representative  in  the  general  assembly,
but  his  defection  from  his  party  greatly  impaired
his  influence.  In  1805  he  removed  to  the  Friends'
settlement  near  City  Hill,  N.  Y.,  where  he  pur-
chased a  valuable  estate.  He  was  fluent  of  speech
and  subtle  and  ingenious  in  debate.

HAZARD,  Samuel,  merchant,  b.  in  1714;  d.
in  1758.  He  was  engaged  in  business  in  Phila-
delphia, and  was  one  of  the  chief  movers  in  a
scheme  of  colonization,  having  for  its  ultimate  aim
the  Christianization  of  the  Indians.  To  carry  the
project  into  effect  he  explored  the  territory  to  be
colonized,  had  meetings  with  the  Indians,  with
whom  he  bargained  for  the  land,  and  obtained  a
release  from  Connecticut  of  its  claim  to  that  sec-
tion of  country.  The  defeat  of  Braddock  at  Fort
Duquesne,  near  Pittsburg,  and  the  early  death  of
Mr.  Hazard,  prevented  this  project  from  being
executed.  He  was  one  of  the  original  trustees  of
Princeton,  and  before  his  removal  from  Mew  York
to  Philadelphia  was  one  of  the  elders  in  the  Wall
street  Presbyterian  church. — His  son,  Ebenezer,
author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  15  Jan.,  1744:  d.  there,
13  June,  1817,  was  educated  at  Nottingham  acad-
emy, Md.,  and  at  Princeton,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1762.  From  1770  till  1775  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  publishing  firm  of  Xoel  and  Hazard,  of
New  York.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  appointed
postmaster,  and  while  acting  in  this  capacity  un-
der the  committee  of  safety  he  applied  to  Con-
necticut for  a  confirmation  of  the  grant  made  to  his
father,  but  was  refused.  On  28  Jan.,  1782,  he  was
appointed  to  succeed  Richard  Bache  as  postmas-
ter-general, retaining  the  office  till  29  Sept.,  1789.
He  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1791,  and  engaged
in  business.  He  was  active  in  efforts  to  improve
the  moral  condition  of  the  Indians,  was  a  trustee
of  the  Presbyterian  general  assembly,  and  one  of
the  founders  of  the  North  American  insurance
company,  of  Philadelphia.  He  aided  in  writing
Gordon's  "  History  of  the  American  War,"  in  the
preparation  of  Thompson's  translation  of  the
Bible,  and  in  the  publication  of  Belknap's  "  His-
tory of  New  Hampshire."  He  published  "  Histor-
ical Collections"  (2  vols.,  1792-4)  and  "Remarks
on  a  Report  concerning  Western  Indians."  An
extensive  collection  of  his  autograph  letters  is  in
the  Massachusetts  historical  society's  library. —
Ebenezer's  son,  Samuel,  archaeologist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 26  May,  1784;  d.  there,  22  May,  1870,
spent  his  early  life  in  commercial  pursuits,  and
made  several  voyages  to  the  East  Indies  before  he
began  his  literary  career.  He  published  "Regis-
ter of  Pennsylvania  "  (16  vols.,  1828-'36) ;  "  United
States  Commercial  and  Statistical  Register"  (6
vols.,  1839-'42) ;  "  Annais  of  Pennsylvania,  1609-'82  "
(Philadelphia,  1850) :  and  "  Pennsylvania  Archives,
1682-1790  "  (12  vols.,  1853).

HAZARD,  Thomas  Robinson,  author,  b.  in
South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  in  1784 ;  d.  in  New  York
in  March,  1876.  He  was  educated  at  the  Friends'
school  in  Westtown,  Chester  co„  Pa.,  and  subse-
quently engaged in farming, and assisted his


father  in  the  woollen  business.  He  then  estab-
lished a  woollen  mill  at  Peacedale,  R.  I.,  and
acquired  a  fortune.  In  1836  he  purchased  an
estate  at  Vaueluse,  R.  I.,  and  in  1840  retired  from
his  manufacturing  business.  He  caused  many
reforms  to  be  introduced  in  the  management  of
insane  asylums  and  poor-houses  in  Rhode  Island.
He  was,  for  years  preceding  his  death,  an  enthu-
siastic spiritualist,  and  wrote  much  in  support  of
their  views.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Facts  for  the
Laboring  Man"  (1840);  "Capital  Punishment"
(1850) ;  "  Report  on  the  Poor  and  Insane  "  (1850) ;
"  Handbook  of  the  National  American  Party "
(1856) ;  "  Appeal  to  the  People  of  Rhode  Island  "
(1857) ;  and  "  Ordeal  of  Life "  (Boston,  1870).—
His  brother,  Rowland  Gibson,  author,  b.  in
South  Kingston,  R.  1.,  9  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Peace-
dale,  R.  I.,  24  June.  1888.  He  was  engaged  from
his  youth  in  mercantile  and  manufacturing  pur-
suits at  Peacedale,  where  he  accumulated  a  fortune.
While  in  New  Orleans  in  1841-'2,  though  threat-
ened with  lynching,  he  obtained  with  great  effort
the  release  of  large  numbers  of  free  negroes,  who
belonged  to  ships  from  the  north,  and  who  had
been  placed  in  the  chain-gang.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Rhode  Island  legislature  in  1851-'2  and
1854-5,  and  was  in  the  state  senate  in  1866-'7.
Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1845.  and
that  of  LL.  D.  in  1869.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Language,  its  Connection  with  the  Constitution
and  Prospects  of  Man,"  under  the  pen-name  of
"  Heteroscian  "  (Providence.  1836);  "Lectures  on
the  Adaptation  of  the  Universe  to  the  Cultivation
of  the  Mind  "  (1840) ;  "  Lecture  on  the  Causes  of
the  Decline  of  Political  and  National  Morality "
(1841) ;  "  Essay  on  the  Philosophical  Character  of
Channing  "  (1844) ;  "  Essay  on  the  Duty  of  Indi-
viduals to  support  Science  and  Literature  "  (1855) ;
"  Essays  on  the  Resources  of  the  United  States  "
(1864) ;  "  Freedom  of  the  Mind  in  Willing  "  (New
York,  1864) ;  "  Essays  on  Finance  and  Hours  of
Labor  "  (1868) ;  and  two  letters  addressed  to  John
Stuart  Mill  on  "  Causation  and  Freedom  in  Will-
ing "  (London  and  Boston,  1869).

HAZELIUS,  Ernest  Lewis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Neusalz,  Silesia,  Prussia,  6  Sept.,  1777;  d.  in  South
Carolina,  20  Feb.,  1853.  On  his  father's  side  he
was  descended  from  a  long  line  of  Swedish  Luther-
an ministers,  extending  back  to  the  time  of  Gus-
tavus  Yasa.  His  father  left  his  native  land,  settled
in  Neusalz,  and  married  a  member  of  the  Moravian
church,  and  young  Hazel  ius  was  therefore  brought
up  in  that  faith.  He  pursued  his  theological  course
at  Niesky,  a  Moravian  institution,  after  which  he
was  licensed  to  preach  the  gospel.  In  1800  he  was
appointed  classical  teacher  in  the  Moravian  semi-
nary at  Nazareth,  Pa.,  and  accepted,  notwithstand-
ing the  opposition  of  his  friends,  and  the  fact  that
many  lucrative  posts  had  been  offered  him  in  his
native  land.  He  continued  here  for  eight  years,
during  which  period  he  was  promoted  to  the  chair
of  principal  professor  of  theology.  Having  re-
solved to  sever  his  connection  with  the  Moravians,
he  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1809,  and  in  the  lat-
ter part  of  the  year  took  charge  of  several  Lutheran
congregations  in  New  Jersey.  He  was  then  or-
dained by  the  New  York  ministerium,  and  resided
at  New  Germantown,  where  he  also  conducted  a
classical  academy.  In  1815  Hartwick  seminary
was  opened,  and  Hazelius  elected  professor  of  the-
ology and  principal  of  the  classical  department.
By  his  activity  the  new  institution  was  established
on  a  solid  basis,  and  soon  became  widely  known.
In  1824  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  simulta-
neously from  Union  and  Columbia. He  left  Hart-


150


IIAZELWOOD


HAZEN


wick  in  1830  in  order  to  accept  the  professorship
of  biblical  and  oriental  literature  and  the  German
language  in  the  theological  seminary  at  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  but  resigned  in  1833,  to  accept  a  chair  in  the
theological  seminary  of  the  synod  of  South  Caro-
lina, which  was  at  the  time  in  great  need  of  an
efficient  instructor  and  manager.  Here  he  labored
successfully  until  a  few  days  before  his  death.  In
the  year  1842  he  visited  his  native  land,  where  the
strongest  influences  were  unsuccessfully  brought  to
bear  to  induce  him  to  remain,  the  king  of  Prussia
offering  him  a  lucrative  office.  Dr.  Hazelius  was
elected  to  professorships  in  Lafayette  and  Prince-
ton, both  of  which  he  declined.  He  was  an  able
instructor,  and  was  well  versed  in  general  and  ec-
clesiastical history,  and  as  a  theologian  was  solid
and  sound.  As  an  author  he  was  widely  known.
Besides  editing  for  several  years  the  "  Evangelical
Magazine,"  a  German  periodical  published  at  Get-
tysburg, Pa.,  he  published  "  Life  of  Luther  "  (New
York.  1813) ;  "  Augsburg  Confession,  with  An-
notations "  (1813) ;  "  Materials  for  Catechization  "
(Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  1823):  "Life  of  Stilling,"
from  the  German  (Gettysburg,  1831) ;  "  Church
History"  (Baltimore,  1842):  and  "History  of  the
Lutheran  Church  in  America"  (Zanesville,  1846).

HAZELWOOD,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1726;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  about
1  March,  1800.  It  is  not  known  at  what  time  he
settled  in  this  country.  He  had  been  a  captain  in
the  merchant  service,  sailing  between  London  and
Philadelphia,  for  several  years,  and  in  1772  be-
came one  of  the  founders  of  the  St.  George  society
in  the  latter  city.  He  was  appointed  superintendent
of  fire- vessels  in  December,  1775,  in  October,  1776,
was  promoted  to  be  commodore  in  the  Pennsyl-
vania navy,  and  on  6  Sept.,  1777,  the  full  "com-
mand of  the  naval  force  of  the  state "  was  com-
mitted to  him.  Afterward  the  continental  vessels
in  the  Delaware  river  were  put  under  his  command.
In  July,  1776,  he  was  one  of  the  three  men  that
were  sent  by  the  council  of  safety  of  Pennsylvania
to  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  to  devise  plans  with  the
secret  committee  there  for  obstructing  by  means
of  fire-ships  the  enemy's  navigation  of  the  North
river.  For  services  rendered  on  this  mission  a
convention  of  the  representatives  of  New  York
voted  him  the  thanks  of  the  body  and  the  sum  of
£300.  According  to  a  letter  of  Col.  William  Brad-
ford, dated  7  Oct.,  1777,  while  Lord  Howe  was  with
his  fleet  in  Delaware  bay.  he  sent  Com.  Hazel-
wood  a  request  that  he  give  up  the  Pennsylvania
fleet,  promising  him  his  majesty's  pardon  and  kind
treatment.  He  refused  the  request,  and  notified
Howe  that  he  would  "  defend  the  fleet  to  the  last."
At  a  later  period  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
"  commissioners  of  purchase "  in  Philadelphia.
The  artist  and  patriot,  Charles  Wilson  Peale,
thought  Hazelwood  worthy  for  his  collection  of
American  heroes,  and  the  picture  of  him  painted
by  Peale  was  afterward  purchased  by  the  city  of
Philadelphia  and  placed  in  Independence  hall.

HAZEN,  Moses,  soldier,  b.  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,
in  1733 ;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  30  Jan.,  1802.  He  was
a  lieutenant  in  the  expeditions  against  Crown
Point  in  1756,  and  against  Louisburg  in  1758.  He
accompanied  Gen.  Wolfe  to  Quebec  in  1759,  and
distinguished  himself  near  that  city  in  an  engage-
ment with  the  French,  and  in  the  battle  of  Sillery,
28  April,  1760.  As  a  reward  for  his  services  he  was
given  a  lieutenancy  in  the  44th  regiment.  When
the  Revolution  began  he  was  an  officer  on  half-pay
and  wealthy,  and  resided  near  St.  John,  New
Brunswick.  He  furnished  supplies  and  rendered
other  aid  to  the  army  of  Montgomery  in  the  latter's


WH^p^


expedition  against  Quebec,  and  his  property  was
therefore  destroyed  by  the  British.  He  was  in-
demnified by  congress  for  his  loss,  and  was  also  ap-
pointed, in  January,  1776,  colonel  of  the  2d  Cana-
dian regiment,  known  as  "  Congress's  Own."  He
fought  in  the  battles  of  Brandywine  and  German-
town,  and  performed  efficient  service  during  the
whole  war.  He  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  29
June,  1781,  and  after  the  war  he  and  his  two
brothers,  both  of  whom  held  commands  in  the
army,  settled  in  Vermont  on  land  that  had  been
granted  to  them  for  their  services.

HAZEN,  William  Babcock,  soldier,  b.  in  West
Hartford,  Vt,  27  Sept.,  1830;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  16  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Moses
Hazen,  noticed  above.  His  parents  removed  to
Ohio  in  1833.  Will-
iam was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1855,
and,  after  serving
against  the  Indians
in  California  and
Oregon,  joined  the
8th  infantry  in  Texas
in  1857.  He  com-
manded successfully
in  five  engagements,
until,  in  December,
1859,  he  was  severely
wounded  in  a  per-
sonal encounter  with
the  Comanches.  He
was  appointed  assist-
ant professor  of  in-
fantry tactics  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
February,  1861,  1st  lieutenant,  6  April,  and  pro-
moted captain  on  14  May.  In  the  autumn  of  1861
he  raised  the  41st  Ohio  volunteers,  of  which  he  be-
came colonel  on  29  Oct.,  1861,  and  commanded  in
the  defence  of  the  Ohio  frontier  and  in  operations
in  Kentucky.  On  6  Jan.,  1862,  he  took  command
of  a  brigade  and  served  with  distinction  at  Shiloh
and  Corinth.  In  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  12  Oct.,
1862,  he  protected  the  left  wing  of  the  army  from
being  turned  by  simultaneous  attacks  in  front  and
flank.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  commanded  a  brigade  in
the  operations  that  resulted  in  the  battle  of  Chicka-
mauga,  and,  by  a  well-executed  movement  on
27  Oct.,  at  Brown's  Ferry,  enabled  the  army  at
Chattanooga  to  receive  its  supplies.  He  captured
eighteen  pieces  of  artillery  at  Mission  Ridge,  served
through  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  in  Sherman's
march  to  the  sea  commanded  the  2d  division  of
the  15th  corps.  He  assaulted  and  captured  Fort
McAllister,  13  Dec,  1864,  for  which  service  he  was
promoted  a  major-general  of  volunteers  the  same
day.  He  was  in  command  of  the  15th  army  corps
from  19  May  till  1  Aug.,  1865.  At  the  end  of  the
war  he  had  received  all  the  brevets  in  the  regular
army  up  to  major-general.  He  was  made  colonel
of  the  38th  infantry  in  1866,  was  in  France  during
the  Franco-Prussian  war,  and  was  IT.  S.  military
attache  at  Vienna  during  the  Russo-Turkish  war.
In  the  interval  between  those  two  visits,  while
stationed  at  Fort  Buford,  Dakota,  he  made
charges  of  fraud  against  post-traders,  which  re-
sulted in  revelations  that  were  damaging  to  Sec.
Belknap.  On  8  Dec,  1880,  he  succeeded  Gen.  Al-
bert J.  Myer  as  chief  signal-officer,  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general.  His  administration  was
marked  bv  the  expedition  of  Lieut.  A.  W.  GreeH
to  Lady  Franklin  bay,  and  by  another  to  Point
Barrow,  Alaska,  to  make  meteorological  and  other


I


HAZEWELL


HEAD


151


observations  in  co-operation  with  European  nations.
(See  Greely.  A.  W.)  In  September,  1883,  after  the
return  of  Lieut.  Garlington's  unsuccessful  relief
expedition,  Gen.  Hazen  urged  the  secretary  of  war
to  despatch  a  sealer  immediately  to  rescue  Greely,
and,  his  recommendation  not  having  been  acted
upon,  he  severely  censured  Sec.  Lincoln.  In  conse-
quence of  this,  Gen.  Hazen  was  court-martialed  and
reprimanded.  Gen.  Hazen  introduced  the  "cold-
wave  signal,"  promoted  the  use  of  local  and  railway
weather  signals,  organized  special  observations  for
the  cotton-producing  states,  established  frost  warn-
ings, and  initiated  forecasts  for  vessels  coming  to
this  country  from  Europe.  He  published  "The
School  and  the  Army  in  Germany  and  Prance,
with  a  Diary  of  Siege-Life  at  Versailles"  (New
York,  1872) ;  "  Barren  Lands  of  the  Interior  of  the
United  States  "  (Cincinnati,  1874) ;  and  "  Narrative
of  Military  Service"  (Boston,  1885).

HAZEWELL,  Charles  Creighton,  journalist,
b.  in  Cranston,  R.  I.,  1  Oct.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Revere,
Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1883.  He  was  chiefly  self-educated,
and  learned  printing  in  the  office  of  the  "  Provi-
dence Journal."  From  Providence  he  went  to
Boston,  and  was  employed  for  a  time  on  the  "  Ad-
vocate," and  then  on  the  "  Post,"  where  he  was
both  printer  and  editor.  Mr.  Hazewell  then  edited
the  "  Nantucket  Islander,"  and  was  editor  and  pro-
prietor of  the  Concord,  Mass.,  "  Freeman,"  for  some
time  before  1845,  when  he  removed  to  Columbus,
Ohio.  There  he  edited  the  "  Statesman,"  and  was
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Western  Review."
He  wrote  the  entire  contents  of  the  few  numbers  of
the  "  Review  "  that  were  published,  in  the  intervals
of  his  journalistic  duties.  He  then  returned  to  the
east,  took  up  his  residence  in  Concord,  and  became
connected  with  the  "  Middlesex  Freeman."  In
1852  he  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate,
and  in  1853  represented  Concord  in  the  constitu-
tional convention.  Leaving  the  "Freeman,"  he
formed  an  editorial  connection  with  the  Boston
"  Atlas,"  then  with  the  "Times,"  and  in  1857  be-
came an  editorial  writer  on  the  "  Traveller,"  remain-
ing with  it  until  his  death.  He  was  for  many  years
the  American  correspondent  of  the  London  "  Morn-
ing Post."  He  acquired  French  and  Italian  to  aid
him  in  his  historical  researches,  and  was  regarded
as  an  excellent  authority  on  biographical  and  his-
torical subjects.  He  is  credited  with  having  writ-
ten a  two-page  New- Year's  article,  containing  a
summary  of  the  events  of  the  past  year,  entirely
from  memory,  and  substantially  free  from  error.
He  wrote  a  long  and  critical  obituary  of  Daniel
Webster,  on  the  announcement  of  his  death,  with-
out reference  to  a  book ;  and  on  one  occasion  desig-
nated correctly  the  page  and  paragraph  in  which
would  be  found  certain  episodes,  mentioned  by
Gibbon,  in  two  editions,  British  and  American,  and
widely  different  in  size  and  paging.  He  was  offered
an  important  diplomatic  appointment  by  President
Lincoln,  but  declined  it. — His  son,  Edward  Went-
worth,  b.  in  1853,  is  a  journalist  in  Boston,  and
has  written  short  poems  that  are  popular.

HEAD,  Sir  George,  b.  near  Rochester,  Eng-
land, in  1782;  d.  in  England,  22  July,  1875,  en-
tered the  British  army,  and  served  in  the  penin-
sula from  1809  till  1814.  He  was  sent  to  Canada
in  1814,  and  while  there  went  to  Lake  Huron  to
superintend  the  commissariat  duties  of  a  proposed
naval  establishment  on  the  Canadian  lakes.  He
went  to  Nova  Scotia  in  1816,  and  in  1831  he  was
knighted.  Among  other  works  he  wrote  "  Forest
Scenes  and  Incidents  in  the  Wilds  of  North  Ameri-
ca "  (1829) ;  "  A  Home  Tour  "  (1836-'7) ;  "  Rome  :
A  Tour  of  Many  Days  "  (London,  1849) ;  and  trans-


lations of  Cardinal  Pacca's  "  Memoirs  "  (1850),  and
of  "  The  Golden  Ass  of  Apuleius  "  (1851). — His
brother,  Sir  Francis  Bond,  British  author,  b.
near  Rochester,  England,  1  Jan.,  1793  ;  d.  in  Croy-
don, England,  20  July,  1875.  He  entered  the  army
at  an  early  age,  and  served  in  the  corps  of  engineers
at  Waterloo  and  in  the  campaign  under  Welling-
ton. In  1825  he  took  charge  of  an  expedition  that
left  England  to  work  the  gold  and  silver  mines  on
the  Rio  de  la  Plata.  While  there  he  crossed  the
pampas  four  times  and  the  Andes  twice,  and  rode
about  6,000  miles,  most  of  the  time  unaccompanied.
In  1828  he  was  retired  on  half -pay  from  the  army,
and  in  November,  1835,  he  was  appointed  lieuten-
ant-governor of  Upper  Canada,  which  office  he
held  until  the  latter  part  of  1837,  when  he  resigned.
In  dealing  with  the  rebellion  that  existed  in  Cana-
da during  his  administration  he  has  been  accused
of  trifling  with  the  disaffected,  though  this  charge
was  generally  regarded  as  fully  refuted  in  his  "  Nar-
rative "  of  these  events  (1839).  In  recognition  of
his  services  in  suppressing  the  rebellion  and  in  re-
pelling incursions  from  the  United  States,  he  was
created  a  baronet  in  1838,  and  in  1867  became  a
privy  councillor.  Some  time  previous  to  his  death
the  government  granted  him  a  pension  of  £100  per
annum  for  his  services  to  literature.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  numerous  clever  and  amusing  books,  many
of  which  were  re-published  in  the  United  States.
These  include  "Life  of  James  Bruce"  (London,
1830) ;  "  Bubbles  from  the  Brunnen  of  Nassau "
(1833);  "The  Emigrant"  (1846);  "Stokers  and
Pokers  "  (1850) ;  "  The  Defenceless  State  of  Great
Britain  "  (1850) ;  "  A  Faggot  of  French  Sticks  "
(1851) ;  "  A  Fortnight  in  Ireland  "  (1852) ;  "  Descrip-
tive Essavs  "  (2  vols.,  1857) ;  "  The  Horse  and  his
Rider"  (1860);  "The  Royal  Engineer"  (1869);  and
"Sketch  of  the  Life  of  Field-Marshal  Sir  John
Burgoyne  "  (1872).  His  "  Rough  Notes,"  giving
his  South  American  experiences  (1828),  was  written
in  such  a  spirited  style  that  it  obtained  for  him
the  name  of  "  Galloping  Head." — Another  brother,
Sir  Edmund  Walker,  bart.,  governor-general  of
Canada,  b.  in  Maidstone,  Kent,  England,  in  1805 ;
d.  in  London,  28  Jan.,  1868.  He  was  the  son  of  the
Rev.  Sir  John  Head,  whom  he  succeeded  in  the
baronetcy  in  1838.  He  was  educated  at  Winchester
and  Oxford,  becoming  a  fellow  of  Merton  college
in  1830,  and  was  a
tutor  there  for  five
years.  After  serv-
ing as  poor-law  com-
missioner he  was
lieutenant  -  govern-
or of  Nova  Scotia  in  ^JWl^_A  g**
1847-54,  when  he
succeeded  Lord  El-
gin as  governor-
Seneral  of  Canada,
[is  administration
was  distinguished
in  Upper  Canada
by  the  settlement  of
the  matter  of  the
clergy  reserves,  and
in  Lower  Canada
by  that  of  seignorial

tenure,  by  the  construction  of  the  Victoria  tubu-
lar bridge,  the  selection  of  Ottawa  as  the  capital
of  Canada,  and  by  the  visit  of  the  Prince  of  W  ales
in  1860.  In  1861  he  retired  from  the  government.
In  1863  he  was  made  a  civil-service  commissioner,
and  in  1867  he  became  a  privy  councillor.  He  has
written  "Shall  and  Will";  "Hand-Book  of  the
History  of  the  Spanish  and  French  Schools  of


fyw^.


i\u^>


152


HEAD


HEALY


Painting  "  (London,  1848) ;  and  "  The  Temple  of
Serapis  at  Pozzuoli "  (London,  1858),  and  frequent-
ly contributed  to  periodical  literature.

HEAD,  Natt,  governor  of  New  Hampshire,  b.
in  Hookset,  N.  H.,  20  May,  1828;  d.  there,  12
Nov.,  1883.  His  great-grandfather  was  a  lieuten-
ant-colonel in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  losing  his
life  at  the  battle  of  Bennington,  and  his  grand-
father served  also  in  that  war.  Natt  engaged  in
the  manufacture  of  bricks  and  lumber  in  Hook-
set,  and  later  became  a  railroad  and  general
building  contractor.  He  early  connected  himself
with  military  organizations,  held  various  offices,
and  sat  in  the  legislatures  of  1861  and  1862.  From
1864  till  1870  he  was  adjutant-general  of  the  state.
"When  he  was  called  to  this  office  New  Hampshire
had  furnished  26,000  men  to  the  national  service,
but  had  not  a  complete  set  of  the  muster-rolls  of  a
single  organization,  nor  was  there  a  record  of  the
deeds  of  New  Hampshire  men  on  the  battle-fields.
Gen.  Head  obtained  the  records  of  the  career  of  every
officer  and  enlisted  man,  and  published  them  in
four  volumes  (1865-?6),  with  biographical  sketches
of  field-officers  killed  or  who  died  in  the  service,
besides  sketches  of  the  regiments  and  battalions.
Gen.  Head  also  compiled  the  military  records  of
the  state  from  1823  to  1861.  When  the  Soldiers'
asylum  at  Augusta,  Me.,  was  burned  he  was  placed
in  charge  of  the  institution  during  the  illness  of
the  deputy-governor,  and  subsequently  rebuilt  it.
Gen.  Head  was  president  of  the  New  Hampshire
agricultural  society,  and  was  prominent  in  further-
ing the  agricultural  interests  of  the  state,  and  of
the  Patrons  of  husbandry.  He  was  chosen  to  the
state  senate  in  1876  and  1877,  and  was  president
of  the  senate  the  last  year.  Under  the  new  con-
stitutional amendment  of  the  state  providing  for
biennial  elections,  he  was  chosen  governor,  to  serve
for  two  years,  1879-'80.

HEADE,  Martin  Johnson,  artist,  b.  in  Bucks
county,  Pa.  He  began  his  career  as  a  portrait-
painter,  studied  in  Italy,  travelled  in  the  west,
and  then  settled  in  Boston  as  a  landscape-painter.
This  brought  him  into  relations  with  Rev.  James
C.  Fletcher,  who  induced  him  to  visit  Brazil  with
a  view  to  preparing  an  illustrated  work  on  hum-
ming-birds. The  difficulties  then  existing  in  prop-
erly chromo-lithographing  his  fine  designs  caused
the  abandonment  of  the  work,  but  the  pictures
were  purchased  by  Sir  Morton  Peto  and  taken  to
London.  Mr.  Heade  has  painted  many  western
and  tropical  scenes,  also  views  on  the  Hudson  and
the  Massachusetts  coast,  which  are  characterized
by  rich  effects  of  color  and  light,  and  by  poetic
sentiment.  His  studio  is  in  New  York  city.
Among  his  best-known  works  are  "  High  Tide  on
the  Marshes,"  "  Nicaragua,"  "  Off  the  California
Coast "  (which  was  exhibited  at  the  Centennial  ex-
hibition at  Philadelphia  in  1876),  and  "South
American  Scene."  He*  has  recently  sent  to  exhibi-
tions of  the  Academy  "  On  the  St.  John's  River,
Florida"  (1885),  and  "Sunset,  Florida"  (1886).

HEADLEY,  Joel  Tyler,  author,  b.  in  Walton,
Delaware  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  Dec,  1813.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  in  1839,  and  studied  theology  at
Auburn  seminary.  Being  compelled  by  ill  health
to  abandon  his  profession  at  the  outset,  he  spent  a
year  in  foreign  travel,  and  then  engaged  in  literary
work.  In  1846  he  became  associate  editor  of  the
New  York  "  Tribune,"  succeeding  Henry  J.  Ray-
mond. He  passed  the  following  summer  in  the
Adirondack  region  for  his  health,  and  repeated  his
visit  for  several  successive  seasons.  The  results  of
his  wanderings  were  published  in  letters  to  the
New  York  papers,  which  were  afterward  issued  in


book-form  under  the  title  of  "  The  Adirondacks,  or
Life  in  the  Woods  "  (New  York,  1849).  This  vol-
ume first  attracted  attention  to  the  Adirondack  re-
gion. Shortly  afterward,  in  a  series  of  articles  in
"  Harper's  Magazine,"  he  described  the  adventures
of  Lieut.  Strain's  party,  which  was  sent  by  the  U.
S.  government  to  explore  a  route  for  a  canal  across
the  isthmus  of  Darien.  These  articles  were  re-
issued in  a  volume  in  1885.  His  other  works  in-
clude "  Napoleon  and  his  Marshals,"  which  was  the
first  American  book  that  was  issued  by  the  house  of
Scribner  and  Co.  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1846) ;  "  Wash-
ington and  his  Generals  "  (1847) ;  "  Life  of  Crom-
well "  (1848) ;  "  Sacred  Scenes  and  Characters,"  il-
lustrated by  Darley  (1849) ;  "  Life  of  Washington,"
which  reached  a  sale  of  over  100,000  copies  (1857) ;
"Life  of  Havelock"  (1859);  "Chaplains  of  the
Revolution"  (1861);  "The  Great  Rebellion"  (2
vols.,  1864);  "Grant  and  Sherman,  their  Cam-
paigns and  Generals"  (1865);  "  Farragut  and  our
Naval  Commanders  "  (1867) ;  "  Sacred  Heroes  and
Martyrs  "  (1865) ;  and  "  The  Achievements  of  Stan-
ley and  other  African  Explorers,"  including  Liv-
ingstone, Cameron,  and  Baker  (1877). — His  cousin,
Phineas  Camp,  author,  b.  in  Walton,  N.  Y.,  24
June,  1819,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to-
the  bar  in  1847 ;  afterward  studied  theology,  was-
graduated  at  the  seminary  at  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  and
held  pastorates  in  the  Presbyterian  and  Congrega-
tional churches.  He  contributed  to  the  "  Christian
Parlor  Magazine,"  the  New  York  "  Observer  "  and
"  Tribune,"  and  other  newspapers  and  periodicals.
His  first  book  was  "  Historical  and  Descriptive-
Sketches  of  the  Women  of  the  Bible  "  (Auburn,
1850) ;  and  he  has  also  published  "  Life  of  the  Em-
press Josephine  "  (New  York,  1851) ;  popular  biog-
raphies of  Kossuth  (1852),  Lafayette  (1853),  Mary.
Queen  of  Scotts,  and  other  works  of  the  same
character ;  "  Hero  Boy,  or  Life  of  Gen.  Grant,"
"  Patriot  Boy,  or  Life  of  Gen.  0.  M.  Mitchell,"  and
"  Life  of  Ericsson  "  (1863) ;  and  biographies  of  Gen.
Sheridan  and  Admiral  Farragut  (1864).  Among
his  later  works  are  the  "  Life  and  Military  Career
of  Maj.-Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman  "  (New  York,  1865)  -r
"Life  and  Campaigns  of  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant"  (1866);
"  Massachusetts  in  the  Rebellion  "  (Boston,  1866) ;.
"  Half-Hours  in  Bible  Lands  "  (1867) ;  "  Court  and
Camp  of  David  "  (Boston,  1869) ;  "Island  of  Fire"
(1874) ;  "  Evangelists  in  the  Church  "  (Boston,  1875) ;
and  "  Public  Men  of  To-Day  "  (1882).

HEALY,  George  Peter  Alexander,  artist,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  15  July,  1813.  He  went  to  Paris
in  1836,  and  remained  there  several  years,  with  oc-
casional visits  to  the  United  States.  He  painted
portraits  of  Louis  Philippe,  Marshal  Soult,  Lewis
Cass,  Clay,  Calhoun,  Webster,  Seward,  Pierce,  Gen.
Sherman,  Orestes  A.  Brownson,  William  H.  Pres-
cott,  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  Cardinal  McCloskey,
and  Stephen  A.  Douglas.  In  twenty  years  he  exe-
cuted nearly  600  portraits.  His  large  historical
picture  of  "  Webster's  Reply  to  Hayne,"  which
contains  130  portraits,  was  completed  in  1851,  and
now  hangs  in  Faneuil  hall,  Boston.  At  the  Paris
international  exhibition  in  1855  he  exhibited  a  se-
ries of  thirteen  portraits  and  a  large  picture  repre-
senting Franklin  urging  the  claims  of  the  Ameri-
can colonies  before  Louis  XVI.  He  resided  in
Chicago  from  1855  till  1867,  when  he  went  to  Eu-
rope, and  made  his  residence  in  Rome.  For  the
past  ten  years  he  has  lived  in  Paris.  He  sent  to
the  Philadelphia  centennial  exhibition  portraits  of
Thiers,  the  Princess  of  Roumania,  Elihu  B.  Wash-
burne,  and  Lord  Lyons.  At  the  Paris  salon  of
1878  he  exhibited  a  "  Portrait  of  a  Lady  "  and  one
of  Gen.  Grant. He  has  frequently  exhibited  in  the


HEALY


HEARD


153


National  academy  of  design,  New  York,  of  which
he  is  an  honorary  member.  He  is  one  of  the  best
American  portrait-painters  of  the  French  school.
His  style  is  vigorous  and  characteristic,  but  has
been  criticised  as  lacking  delicacy  and  not  always
happy  in  coloring. — His  daughter,  Mary,  is  the
author  of  "  Lakeville  "  (New  York,  1871),  "  Storm-
Driven  "  (Philadelphia,  1876),  and  other  novels.

HEALY,  James  Augustine,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
near  Macon,  Ga.,  in  1830.  At  an  early  age  he  came
to  the  northern  states  and  studied  in  Quaker
schools  in  Long  Island  and  New  Jersey.  He  after-
ward became  a  student  in  Holy  Cross  college,
Worcester,  Mass.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1849.
He  began  his  theological  studies  in  the  Sulpitian
seminary  of  Montreal,  and  completed  them  in  that
of  Paris.  After  his  ordination  he  began  mission-
ary work  in  the  diocese  of  Boston.  He  was  after-
ward appointed  chancellor  of  the  diocese  and  sec-
retary to  the  bishop,  and  was  stationed  at  the
cathedral.  He  next  held  the  post  of  pastor  of  St.
James's  church,  Boston,  where  he  remained  nine
years.  He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Portland,  2
June,  1875.  From  1875  till  1884  over  thirty  new
churches  were  built  in  his  diocese,  and  the  number
of  the  clergy  increased  from  fifty-two  to  eighty-
nine.  There  has  been  a  large  immigration  of
French  Canadians  into  his  diocese,  for  whose  wants
he  obtained  French  priests.  He  has  founded  va-
rious convents.  In  1884  his  diocese  was  divided,
the  state  of  New  Hampshire  being  erected  into  the
see  of  Manchester,  while  that  of  Maine  continued
to  constitute  the  see  of  Portland.

HEALY,  John  Plummer,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Sullivan  co.,  N.  H.,  28  Dec,  1810;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1882.  His  father,  Joseph,
was  a  representative  in  congress  from  1825  till
1829,  and  a  friend  of  Daniel  Webster.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1835,  supporting
himself  while  in  college  by  teaching.  He  then  en-
tered the  office  of  Daniel  Webster  in  Boston,  won
his  confidence  and  friendship,  and  as  soon  as  he
had  completed  his  studies  became  the  law  partner
of  the  latter,  which  relation  was  maintained  till
Mr.  Webster's  death.  During  the  incumbency  of
his  partner  as  secretary  of  state  Mr.  Healy  was
offered  the  chief  justiceship  of  California,  but  de-
clined. In  1840  he  was  elected  to  the  lower  house
of  the  legislature,  serving  several  terms,  and  in
1854  he  entered  the  state  senate.  He  declined  sev-
eral times  the  post  of  chief  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  Massachusetts.  From  1856  till  the  close
of  his  life  he  was  solicitor  of  the  city  of  Boston.

HEAP,  Crwynn  Harris,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Ches-
ter, Pa.,  23  March,  1817 ;  d.  in  Constantinople,  Tur-
key, 6  March,  1887.  His  great-grandfather,  George,
was  sent  by  the  British  government  to  Pennsylva-
nia as  surveyor-general.  One  of  the  earliest  maps
of  Philadelphia  was  made  by  him,  and  is  pre-
served in  the  Pennsylvania  library  in  that  city.  In
1839-40  Gwynn  served  as  vice  and  acting  consul  in
Tunis,  where  his  father  had  been  appointed  consul
in  1825.  He  was  appointed  a  government  clerk  in
Washington,  D.  C,  in  1846,  and  in  1855-'7  was  em-
ployed by  the  war  department  in  Turkey  in  the
purchase  of  camels.  In  1861,  being  then  a  clerk
m  the  navy  department,  he  volunteered  for  secret
service  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  and  in  1863-4  had  charge
of  the  pilots  of  Admiral  Porter's  squadron  on  the
Mississippi.  He  was  appointed  consul  at  Belfast,
Ireland,  in  1866,  and  the  following  year  sent  to
Tunis  as  consul,  where  he  remained  until  1878.
In  that  year  he  was  made  secretary  of  legation
and  consul-general  at  Constantinople,  occasionally
serving  as  charge  d'affaires. During  his official


residence  in  Tunis  he  organized  the  department
devoted  to  that  country  in  the  Centennial  exhibi-
tion at  Philadelphia  in  1876.  Mr.  Heap  compiled
"  A  Synoptical  Index  to  the  Statutes  at  Large  "
(1849-50),  and  is  the  author  of  " Exploration  of
the  Central  Route  to  the  Pacific "  (Philadelphia,
1853)  and  "  Itinerary  of  the  Central  Route  to  the
Pacific"  (1854). — His  son,  David  Porter,  engi-
neer, b.  in  San  Stefano,  Turkey,  24  March,  1843,
was  educated  at  Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  and
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1864.  He  was  assigned  to  the  engineer
corps,  served  in  the  civil  war  in  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  and  was  brevetted  captain,  2  April,  1865,
"■for  gallant  and  meritorious  services."  He  was
promoted  captain,  7  March,  1867,  and  major  of
engineers,  23  June,  1882.  Since  the  war  he  has
been  engaged  in  the  construction  of  fortifications,
the  improvement  of  harbors,  and  other  duties.  In
1871  he  was  engaged  in  the  exploration  of  the  re-
gion afterward  known  as  the  Yellowstone  park,
and  in  1876  had  charge  of  the  engineering  section
of  the  war  department  exhibit  at  the  Philadelphia
centennial  exhibition.  In  1881  he  was  ordered  on
detached  service  as  military  representative  of  the
United  States  at  the  Paris  congress  of  electricians,
and  honorary  commissioner  to  the  Paris  electrical
exhibition.  Maj.  Heap  has  travelled  extensively
in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  North  America.  He
is  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  the  Application
of  the  Electric  Light  to  Lighting  the  Coasts  of
France  "  (Washington,  D.  C,  1883) ;  "  Report  of
Engineer  Department  of  the  Philadelphia  Exhibi-
tion "  (1884) ;  "  Electrical  Appliances  of  the  Pres-
ent Day "  (New  York,  1884) ;  and  "  Ancient  and
Modern  Lights  "  (Boston,  1887).

HEARD,  Franklin  Fiske,  jurist,  b.  in  Way-
land,  Middlesex  co.,  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1825.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1848,  studied  law  in  the
office  of  Chief-Justice  Edward  Mellen,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1850.  After  practising  for
five  years  in  Middlesex  county,  he  removed  to  Bos-
ton, and  acquired  a  reputation  as  an  authority
on  pleading.  From  1861  till  1866  he  was  asso-
ciated with  George  P.  Sawyer  in  the  editorship  of
the  "  Monthly  Law  Reporter."  He  revised  Davis's
"  Criminal  Justice  "  (Boston,  1853) ;  prepared,  with
the  assistance  of  Charles  R.  Train,  a  standard
work  on  "  Precedents  of  Indictments,  Special  Pleas,
etc.,  Adapted  to  American  Practice"  (1855) ;  con-
tributed to  the  third  edition  of  "  Greenleaf  on  Evi-
dence "  the  chapter  on  criminal  law  (1856) ;  and
published,  in  conjunction  with  Edmund  H.  Bennett,
'•  A  Selection  of  Leading  Cases  in  Criminal  Law  "
(1856).  His  other  publications  include  "  Libel  and
Slander  "  (1860) :  "  Digest  of  the  Massachusetts  Re-
ports," with  Edmund  H.  Bennett  (1862-'3);  an
edition  of  "  Stephen  on  Pleading "  (Philadelphia,
1867) ;  standard  works  on  "  Criminal  Pleading "
(Boston,  1879),  and  "Civil  Pleading"  (1880);  a  re-
print of  the  "  Star  Chamber  Cases,  with  an  Intro-
duction "  (1881) ;  also  an  edition  of  "  The  Report-
ers," by  John  W.  Wallace  (1882) ;  and  the  "  Heard
on  Equity  Pleading  "  (1882) ;  "  Curtis's  Decisions
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,"  edit-
ed (1882).  His  other  works  on  legal  subjects  are
"  Heard  on  Criminal  Law  "  (2d  ed.,  1882) ;  "  Acts
and  Resolves,  General  and  Special,  of  Massachu-
setts" (1882-'3);  "Precedents  of  Equity  Plead-
ings" (1884);  an  American  edition  of  "Seton  on
Decrees  "  (1884) ;  "  Precedents  of  Pleadings  in  Per-
sonal Actions  in  the  Superior  Courts  of  Common
Law"  (1886);  and  an  edition  of  "Gould  on  Plead-
ing "  (Albany,  1887).  Mr.  Heard  has  contributed
to  general  literature  an  edition  of  Bacon's  "Es-


154


HEARD


HEATHCOTE


says  "  (Boston,  1867) ;  "  Curiosities  of  the  Law  Re-
porters "  (1871) ; "  Oddities  of  the  Law  "  (1881) ;  and
«*  Shakespeare  as  a  Lawyer  "  (1883).

HEARD,  Thomas  Jefferson,  physician,  b.  in
Morgan  county,  Ga.,  14  May,  1814.  He  studied
medicine  at  Transylvania  university,  and  began
practice  in  Washington,  Texas,  in  1837.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  University  of
Louisiana  in  1845.  In  1857  he  removed  to  Galves-
ton. He  exerted  his  influence  to  modify  the  treat-
ment of  malarial  fevers  in  the  southwest,  and
introduced  into  Texas  the  treatment  by  quinine,
opiates,  ammonia,  and  salts,  in  the  place  of  bleed-
ing, purgatives,  and  mercury.  In  1868  he  con-
tributed to  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  American
medical  association  a  paper  on  "  The  Epidemics,
Topography,  and  Climatology  of  Texas,"  contain-
ing observations  on  the  yellow  fever,  and  in  1869
a  more  general  article  on  epidemics  and  climatol-
ogy. He  held  the  chair  of  the  theory  and  prac-
tice of  medicine  in  the  Galveston  medical  school
in  1866,  and  that  of  materia  medica  and  thera-
peutics in  the  University  of  Louisiana  in  1876,  but
resigned  his  chair  in  each  of  these  colleges  after  de-
livering a  single  course  of  lectures.  He  was  active
in  organizing  the  Texas  medical  association,  and
was  its  first  president.

HEARNE,  Saninel,  English  explorer,  b.  in
London  in  1745 ;  d.  in  1792.  In  early  life  he
served  as  a  midshipman  under  Hood,  and  after  the
seven  years'  war  he  entered  the  employment  of
the  Hudson  bay  company,  and  made  several  jour-
neys in  northern  British  America  in  quest  of  a
northwest  passage  and  of  mines  of  the  precious
metals.  He  started  on  an  expedition  to  the  north
on  15  July,  1771,  reached  the  Coppermine  river
after  a  journey  of  nearly  1,300  miles  on  foot,  and
descended  it  to  the  Arctic  ocean.  He  returned  to
the  Prince  of  Wales's  fort  on  30  June,  1772,  after
nearly  perishing  from  starvation.  He  established
Cumberland  factory  in  1774,  was  made  governor
of  the  Prince  of  Wales's  Fort  in  1775,  and  was
made  prisoner  by  La  Perouse  when  the  fort  was
captured  in  1782.  He  returned  to  England  in
1787.  He  published  "Journey  from  the  Prince  of
Wales's  Fort,  in  Hudson's  Bay,  to  the  Northern
Ocean  ;  undertaken  by  Order  of  the  Hudson's  Bay
Company  for  the  Discovery  of  Copper  Mines,  a
Northwest  Passage,  etc."  (London,  1795).

HEARST,  George,  senator,  b.  in  Franklin
county,  Mo.,  3  Sept.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
28  Feb.,  1891.  He  was  graduated  in  1838,  worked
on  his  father's  farm  in  his  youth,  and  in  1850  went
to  California  overland,  and  engaged  in  mining.  He
became  chief  partner  in  the  firm  of  Hearst,  Hag-
gin,  Tevis  and  Co.,  which  gained  large  profits  by
speculating  in  mining  claims,  and  grew  to  be  the
largest  private  firm  of  mine-owners  in  the  United
States.  He  acquired  the  reputation  of  being  the
most  expert  prospector  and  judge  of  mining
property  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  contributed
to  the  development  of  the  modern  processes  of
quartz  and  other  kinds  of  mining.  He  aiso  en-
gaged largely  in  stock-raising  and  farming,  and
became  the  proprietor  of  the  San  Francisco  "  Ex-
aminer." He  was  a  member  of  the  California
legislature  in  1865,  received  the  vote  of  the  Demo-
cratic minority  in  the  legislature  for  U.  S.  sena-
tor in  1885,  and  on  23  March,  1886,  was  appointed
by  Gov.  Stoneman  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by
the  death  of  John  F.  Miller,  took  his  seat  in  the
U.  S.  senate  on  9  April,  1886,  but  the  legislature,
on  4  Aug.,  elected  A.  P.  Williams,  a  Republican.
When  the  legislature  met  in  January,  1887,  Hearst
was  elected  senator  for  the  succeeding  term.


HEATH,  Lyman,  song-writer,  b.  in  Bow,
N.  H.,  24  Aug.,  1804;  d.  in  Nashua,  N.  II..  :!()
June,  1870.  He  lived  in  his  youth  at  Lyman,
Vt.,  and  subsequently  at  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  and
Littleton,  N.  H.,  and  for  the  last  thirty  years  of
his  life  at  Nashua.  He  became  a  teacher  of  mu-
sic at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  gave  concerts  for
many  years.  He  was  the  composer  of  "The
Grave  of  Bonaparte,"  "The  Burial  of  Mrs.  Jud-
son,"  and  many  other  popular  songs.

HEATH,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  7  March,  1737 ;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,  1814.  He
was  brought  up  on  the  same  farm  on  which  his
ancestor  settled  in  1636.  He  was  active  in  organ-
izing the  militia  before  the  Revolution,  was  a  cap-
tain in  the  Suffolk  regiment,  of  which  he  after-
ward became  colonel,  joined  the  artillery  company
of  Boston,  and  was  chosen  its  commander  in  1770,
in  which  year  he  wrote  a  series  of  essays  in  a  Bos-
ton newspaper  on  the  importance  of  military  dis-
cipline and  skill  in  the  use  of  arms  over  the
signature  "  A  Military  Countryman."  He  was  a
representative  in  the  general  assembly  in  1761,
and  again  in  1771-'4,  a  member  of  the  committees
of  correspondence  and  safety,  and  of  the  Provin-
cial congress  in  1774-'5.  He  was  appointed  a  pro-
vincial brigadier-general  on  8  Dec,  1774,  performed
valuable  services  in  the  pursuit  of  the  British
troops  from  Concord  on  19  April,  1775,  organized
and  trained  the  undisciplined  forces  at  Cambridge
before  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  was  made  a  ma-
jor-general of  provincial  troops  on  20  June,  1775,
and  upon  the  organization  of  the  Continental
army  was,  on  22  June,  commissioned  as  a  briga-
dier-general, and  stationed  with  his  command  at
Roxbury.  On  9  Aug.,  1776,  he  was  made  a  major-
general  in  the  Continental  army.  In  March,  1776,
he  was  ordered  to  New  York,  and  opposed  the
evacuation  of  the  city.  After  the  battle  of  White
Plains  he  took  command  of  the  posts  in  the  High-
lands. In  1777  he  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  eastern  department,  embracing  Boston  and
its  vicinity,  and  had  charge  of  the  prisoners  of
Burgoyne's  army  at  Cambridge.  In  June,  1779,
he  was  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  posts  on
the  Hudson,  with  four  regiments,  and  remained
in  that  vicinity  till  the  close  of  the  war,  going  to
Rhode  Island  for  a  short  period  on  the  arrival,
of  the  French  forces  in  July,  1780.  He  returned
to  his  farm  after  the  war,  was  a  member  of
the  convention  that  ratified  the  Federal  constitu-
tion, a  state  senator  in  1791-2,  probate  judge  of
Norfolk  county  in  1793,  and  was  elected  lieuten-
ant-governor in  1806,  but  declined  the  office.  He
was  the  last  surviving  major-general  of  the  Revolu-
tionary army,  and  published  "  Memoirs  of  Major-
General  William  Heath,  containing  Anecdotes,
Details  of  Skirmishes,  Battles,  etc.,  during  the
American  War"  (Boston,  1798).

HEATHCOTE,  Caleb,  merchant,  b.  in  Chester-
field, Derbyshire,  England,  6  March,  1665 :  d.  in  New
York  city,  28  Feb.,  1721.  He  came  to  New  York  in
1691  with  the  means  of  entering  on  a  mercantile
life,  in  which  he  was  successful.  He  was  appointed
by  King  William  a  councillor  of  the  province  in
1692,  and  remained  in  office,  with  the  exception  of
those  years,  1698-1701,  all  his  life.  He  was  the
organizer  of  the  borough  town  of  Westchester,  and
its  first  mayor,  and  the  first  judge  of  the  county
of  Westchester,  and  colonel  of  its  militia  also,  dur-
ing his  life.  He  originated  the  first  movement  for
the  erection  of  an  Anglican  church  in  the  city  of
New  York,  and  aided  in  obtaining  for  it  a  charter
of  incorporation  by  forming  in  1695  "  The  Mana-
gers of  the  Church  of  England,"  of  which  he  was


HEATON


HECK


155


the  chairman.  This  body,  in  May,  1697,  presented
their  petition  to  Gov.  Fletcher  and  the  council
for  a  charter,  in  which  they  say  that  they  had
then  almost  completed  a  church-edifice.  Fletcher
granted  them  the  charter  of  incorporation  of  Trin-
ity church,  New  York,  in  which  Heathcote  leads
the  list  of  its  first  vestry.  In  the  same  year,  and
again  in  1702.  he  was  appointed  receiver-general
of  the  province.  In  1701  his  large  estate  in  West-
chester county  was  erected  into  the  "  Lordship  and
Manor  of  Scarsdale."  From  1711  till  1714  he  was
mayor  of  New  York,  during  the  same  time  that
his  brother,  Sir  Gilbert  Heathcote,  bart.,  was  lord-
mayor  of  London.  In  1715  he  was  appointed
judge  of  admiralty  for  the  provinces  of  New  York,
New  Jersey,  and  Connecticut,  and  "  surveyor-gen-
eral of  the  customs  for  the  eastern  district  of
North  America,"  comprising  all  the  British  colo-
nies north  of  Virginia.  In  addition  to  the  ordi-
nary duties  of  a  collector  of  customs,  he  was  in
all  matters  the  chief
authority  to  decide
all  revenue  questions
between  the  differ-
ent provincial  cus-
toms officers  and  the
merchants  of  their
respective  districts.
Both  of  these  latter
offices,  as  well  as  all
his  earlier  ones  ex-
cept the  two  mayoral-
ties above  named,  he
held  until  his  death.
He  married  Martha,
daughter  of  Colonel
William  (Tangier)
Smith,  chief  justice
of  New  York ;  of  his
six  children  four
died  minors,  and  his  large  estates  descended  to
two  daughters,  Anne,  the  elder,  wife  of  Gov.
James  De  Lancey,  of  New  York,  and  Martha,  the
younger,  wife  of  Dr.  Lewis  Johnston,  of  New  Jer-
sey, both  of  whom  have  many  descendants.
Heathcote  was  a  man  of  great  force  of  character,
clear-headed,  and  courteous,  very  firm  but  concilia-
tory, and  won  and  held  the  confidence  of  all.  He
was  a  warm  and  sincere  member  of  the  Church  of
England,  the  first  American  member  of  the  So-
ciety for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  in  foreign
parts,  and,  in  addition  to  being  the  leader  in  the
organization  of  Trinity  church.  New  York,  was  the
leader  in  founding  the  Church  of  England  in
Westchester  county,  every  one  of  its  early  parishes
and  churches  having  been  organized  and  pecun-
iarily aided  by  him.  With  the  Rev.  George  Muir-
son,  rector  of  Rye,  he  introduced  episcopacy  into
Connecticut,  the  two  making  together  missionary
expeditions  from  Rye  into  that  colony  with  that
object  in  1707-'8.  So  great  was  the  opposition
they  met  that  on  these  occasions  Col.  Heathcote
always  went  fully  armed.  His  full  and  numerous
letters  and  despatches  to  the  government  in  Eng-
land, and  to  the  Propagation  society,  printed  in
the  archives  of  New  York  and  in  those  of  the
Episcopal  church,  afford  the  most  authentic  ac-
counts of  the  people  and  the  places,  and  public
matters,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  of  his  days,  and
historians  of  all  views  have  relied  upon  them.

HEATON,  David,  politician,  b.  in  Hamilton.
Ohio,  10  March,  1823;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
25  June,  1870.  He  received  an  academic  educa-
tion, read  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice.  In
1855  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  of  Ohio.


In  the  fall  of  1857  he  removed  to  Minnesota,  and
was  elected  to  the  state  senate  three  times.  He
was  appointed  in  1863  by  Sec.  Chase  as  special
agent  of  the  treasury  department,  and  U.  S.  de-
positary at  Newbern,  N.  C,  and  afterward  third
auditor  in  the  treasury  department,  but  declined.
He  became  president  of  the  National  bank  of  New-
bern in  the  fall  of  1865.  Mr.  Heaton  was  the  au-
thor of  the  Republican  platform  adopted  at  Raleigh,
27  March,  1867,  and  contributed  largely  to  Repub-
lican papers.  He  was  elected  to  the  Constitution-
al convention  of  North  Carolina  in  1867,  and  was
chairman  of  the  committee  on  the  bill  of  rights.
He  was  elected  a  representative  in  congress  from
North  Carolina  in  April,  1868,  and  was  re-elected
in  the  autumn  of  that  year,  serving  from  15  July,
1868,  till  the  time  of  his  death.

HEAVYSEGE,  Charles,  Canadian  poet,  b.  in
Yorkshire,  England,  in  1816;  d.  in  Montreal  in
1876.  He  received  a  limited  education,  was  a
wood-carver,  and  emigrated  to  Montreal,  Canada,
in  1853.  Here  he  worked  at  his  trade,  which  made
such  demands  on  his  time  that  he  found  no  leis-
ure for  the  study  of  any  books  but  the  Bible  and
Shakespeare.  He  wrote  frequently  for  the  daily
press,  and  acquired  reputation  as  a  poet.  His  first
published  poem  was  a  juvenile  effort.  "  The  Re-
volt of  Tartarus  " ;  his  second  appearance  was  as
the  author  of  fifty  sonnets,  published,  like  the  pre-
ceding, anonymously.  Then  followed  "  Saul :  A
Drama  in  three  Parts  "  (Montreal,  1857) ;  "  Count
Filippo,  or  the  Unequal  Marriage,"  a  drama  in
five  acts  (Montreal) ;  "  Ode  on  Shakespeare  "  and
"  Jephtha's  Daughter  "  (1855).

HEBERT,  Paul  Octave,  soldier,  b.  in  Bayou
Goula.  Herville  parish,  La.,  12  Nov.,  1818;  d.  in
New  Orleans,  29  Aug.,  1880.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1840.  in  the  class
with  William  T.  Sherman,  George  H.  Thomas,  and
other  officers  who  afterward  became  distinguished.
In  1841-'2  he  was  assistant  professor  of  engineer-
ing at  the  military  academy,  and  in  1843-'5  em-
ployed at  the  western  passes  of  the  mouth  of  the
Mississippi  river.  He  resigned  from  the  army  in
1841,  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  the  state  of
Louisiana,  and  in  an  official  report  opposed  the
"  Raccourci  cut-off."  He  held  this  office  until  the
Mexican  war,  when  he  was  reappointed  in  the
army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  14th  volunteer
infantry,  and  participated  in  the  battles  of  Con-
treras  and  Chapultepec,  and  the  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico,  receiving  the  brevet  of  colonel  for
bravery  at  the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rev.  When
the  army  disbanded,  in  1848,  he  returned  to  his
plantation  at  Bayou  Goula,  La.  In  1851  he  was  sent
as  U.  S.  commissioner  to  the  World's  fair  at  Paris.
He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed
a  new  state  constitution  in  1852,  and  in  1853-'6
was  governor  of  the  state.  One  of  the  notable  ap-
pointments of  his  term  was  that  of  Gen.  William
T.  Sherman  as  president  of  the  Louisiana  military
academy.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-
general  of  the  provisional  Confederate  army,  and
was  afterward  confirmed  in  that  rank  by  the  Con-
federate congress.  He  was  first  in  command  of
Louisiana,  then  of  the  trans-Mississippi  depart-
ment, afterward  of  Texas,  and  the  Galveston  de-
fences. In  1873  he  became  state  engineer  and
commissioner  on  the  Mississippi  levee.

HECK,  Barbara,  an  early  American  Method-
ist, b.  in  Ballingarry,  County  Limerick,  Ireland ;  d.
in  Augusta,  Canada,  in  1804.  She  was  a  member
of  a  colony  of  Germans  who  came  from  the  Rhine
Palatinate  and  settled  in  Ballingarry  and  other
parts  of  the west  of Ireland about 1708. She


156


HECKER


HECKER


married  Paul  Heck,  a  member  of  the  same  com-
munity. By  the  preaching  of  Wesley  many  of
these  Germans,  whose  descendants  were  long  after-
ward known  as  Palatines  in  Ireland,  became  con-
verts to  Methodism.  The  Hecks  emigrated  from
Ireland  about  1760,  and  settled  in  New  York,  where
other  Methodists  from  Ireland  became  domiciled
about  the  same  time.  They  had  no  pastor  and
grew  careless  of  religious  observances.  In  1765
they  were  joined  by  Philip  Embury,  who  had  been
a  local  preacher  in  Ireland.  Soon  after  his  arrival
Mrs.  Heck  entered  a  room  in  which,  according  to
some  accounts,  Embury  was  present,  and  found  the
emigrants  playing  cards.  She  seized  the  cards  and
threw  them  into  the  fire,  expostulated  with  the

g layers  in  pathetic  language,  and  then  went  to
Imbury  and  charged  him  that  he  should  preach
to  them,  or  God  would  require  their  blood  at  his
hands.  In  consequence  meetings  were  shortly
afterward  begun.  (See  Embury,  Philip.)  When
the  Revolutionary  war  began  the  Hecks  retired  to
Salem,  in  northern  New  York,  in  order  to  be
among  loyalists,  and  founded  the  first  Methodist
society  in  that  district.  Paul  joined  the  army  of
Burgoyne,  and,  while  at  home  on  a  furlough  at  the
time  of  the  surrender  at  Saratoga,  was  arrested  by
patriot  soldiers,  but  escaped  at  night  while  they
slept,  and  made  his  way  through  the  woods  into
Canada,  where  he  was  joined  by  his  wife.  ThSy
settled  in  Augusta,  and  with  others  from  New  York
formed  the  earliest  Methodist  society  in  Canada.
Paul  died  several  years  before  his  wife,  toward  the
close  of  the  last  century.  Barbara  Heck  is  known
as  the  "  mother  of  American  Methodism."

HECKER,  Friedrich  Karl  Franz,  German
revolutionist,  b.  in  Eichtersheim,  Baden,  28  Sept.,
1811 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  24  March,  1881.  He
went  to  school  in  Mannheim,  and  studied  law  at
Heidelberg.  He  began  practice  as  an  advocate  at
Mannheim  in  1838,  entered  politics,  and  was
elected  to  the  Baden  assembly  in  1842.  His  expul-
sion from  the  Prussian  dominions,  while  upon  a
visit  to  Berlin  with  Itzstein  in  1845,  made  his  name
known  in  all  German  lands.  In  1846-7  he  was
the  leader  of  the  extreme  left  in  the  Baden  diet.
His  energy  and  eloquence  made  him  popular,  and
he  was  carried  by  the  drift  of  the  age  toward  Re-
publicanism, until  he  took  ground  with  Struve  as
a  Republican  and  Socialist-Democrat  when  the  ar-
rangements for  a  German  parliament  were  under
discussion.  His  political  plans  having  been  re-
jected by  the  majority  of  the  constituent  assem-
bly, he  appealed  to  the  masses.  Appearing  at  the
head  of  columns  of  working-men,  he  unfolded  the
banner  of  the  social  republic,  and  advanced  into
the  highlands  of  Baden  from  Constance.  He  was
beaten  by  the  Baden  soldiery  at  Kaudern,  20  May,
1848,  and  retreated  into  Switzerland.  There  he
learned  that  the  national  assembly,  which  had  met
meanwhile  at  Frankfort,  had  denounced  him  as  a
traitor.  His  hopes  of  a  revolution  having  been
dashed,  with  the  prospect  of  a  felon's  death  before
him  if  he  remained,  he  fled  to  the  United  States  in
September.  The  following  year,  at  the  news  of  the
May  revolution,  he  returned  to  Germany,  but  ar-
rived after  the  rising  had  been  suppressed.  Hecker
recrossed  the  Atlantic,  became  a  citizen  of  the
United  States,  and  settled  as  a  farmer  in  Belleville,
HL  Like  others  of  the  German  revolutionists,  he
took  part  in  American  politics,  but  did  not  make
a  new  career  for  himself.  He  refused  brilliant
diplomatic  positions,  feeling  an  honorable  reluc-
tance to  accept  a  personal  gain  in  requital  for  the
services  he  performed  for  the  party  to  which  he
attached  himself. The  anti-slavery  cause  awakened


the  enthusiasm  of  his  nature,  and  to  the  end  of  his
life  he  was  a  powerful  speaker  on  the  Republican
side.  He  joined  the  Republican  party  on  its  forma-
tion, and  in  the  civil  war  led  a  regiment  of  volun-
teers in  Fremont's  division  of  the  National  army.
He  resigned  his  colonelcy  in  1864,  and  devoted
himself  thenceforth  to  agricultural  occupations.
During  the  Franco-German  war  he  uttered  words
of  hope  and  sympathy  for  the  German  cause,  but,
after  visiting  Germany  in  1873,  he  expressed  dis-
appointment at  the  actual  political  condition.

HECKER,  Isaac  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  18  Dec,  1819 ;  d.  there,  22  Dec,
1888.  His  boyhood  was  passed  in  straitened  cir-
cumstances, and  he  was  obliged  to  support  him-
self by  manual  labor,  at  the  same  time  spending
all  the  time  he  could  spare  in  study.  He  after-
ward engaged  in  the  flour  business  with  his  two
brothers,  but  just  as  it  was  becoming  a  success
entered  on  the  study  of  Kant,  and  applied  him-
self to  metaphysics  and  theology.  He  finally
withdrew  entirely  from  mercantile  pursuits,  and
became  one  of  the  Brook  Farm  community.  Here
he  remained  for  nine  months,  occupied  in  baking
the  bread  that  was  eaten  by  the  community.  He
then  became  dissatisfied,  and  left  Brook  Farm  in
company  with  Henry  D.  Thoreau.  The  two
friends  were  desirous
of  discovering  on
how  little  human  life
can  be  sustained,  and
they  succeeded  in  liv-
ing on  nine  cents  a
day.  Meanwhile  his
brothers  were  anx-
ious that  he  should
resume  his  place  in
the  business,  and  on
his  coming  of  age  he
consented  to  do  so
on  condition  that  the
three  brothers  should
possess  all  in  com-
mon and  keep  no
separate  purse,  and
that  he  should  have
entire  charge  of  the
men  that  were  em-
ployed. He  then  provided  a  library  for  the  work-
men, fitted  up  a  hall  for  their  amusement,  and  fre-
quently gave  them  lectures.  This  continued  for  a
year,  at  the  end  of  which  he  resumed  his  studies
and  investigations,  and  was  at  one  time  attracted  by
the  theories  of  Fourier,  but  felt  that  they  could  not
be  successfully  applied  to  society.  At  the  age  of
twenty-two  his  attention  was  drawn  to  the  Roman
Catholic  system  by  lectures  delivered  in  New  York
by  Dr.  C.  Brownlow,  and  in  the  following  year,
while  staying  with  Thoreau  in  Massachusetts,  he
became  a  convert.  He  soon  afterward  went  to
Germany  to  study  for  the  priesthood,  was  ordained
by  Cardinal  Wiseman  in  London  in  1849,  and  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  1851,  having  pre-
viouslv  entered  the  Redemptorist  order.  He  con-
ducted several  missions  throughout  the  country,
but,  believing  that  a  new  order  was  necessary
which  should  be  thoroughly  American  in  charac-
ter, spent  the  autumn  and  winter  of  1857-'8  in
Rome,  and  laid  his  plans  before  the  pope,  who  ap-
proved. On  his  return  to  the  United  States  lie
went  on  a  preaching  and  a  lecturing  tour  through-
out the  United  States  and  Canada,  and  soon  had
enough  money  collected  for  his  purpose.  He  at
once  bought  the  ground  that  is  at  present  occupied
by  the  church,  residence,  and  schools  of  the  Paulist


WA


'■#


Q  )-f{j2^t^7


HECKEWELDER


HEDDING


157


community,  and  proceeded  to  build  a  church  and  a
home  for  himself  and  his  followers.  The  religious
community  founded  by  Father  Hecker  differs  in
one  respect  from  other  similar  Roman  Catholic  asso-
ciations. The  members  take  no  special  vows,  and
any  priest  can  leave  the  order  when  he  chooses.  It
is  known  as  the  congregation  of  St.  Paul,  and  the
members,  who  are  nearly  all  of  American  birth  and
converts  from  Protestantism,  are  called  the  Paul-
ist  fathers.  It  was  the  intention  of  its  founder
that  its  tendencies,  rule,  and  discipline  should  be
entirely  appropriated  to  the  usages  and  needs  of
American  life.  Father  Hecker  took  part  in  the
Catholic  congress  of  Malines  in  September,  1869,
and  his  views  of  the  relations  that  ought  to  exist
between  the  Roman  Catholic  church  and  democ-
racies, and  which  did  exist  in  the  United  States,
were  expressed  in  an  article  in  the  "  Revue  gene-
rale  "  oi  Brussels.  He  was  present  at  the  council
of  the  Vatican  as  theologian  to  Archbishop  Spal-
ding, and  on  his  return  to  the  United  States  fell
sick  and  was  obliged  to  visit  Europe  again,  this
time  travelling  also  through  Egypt  and  the  Holy
Land.  He  came  back  in  October,  1875,  and  on
29  Dec.  was  re-elected  superior  of  the  congrega-
tion of  St.  Paul  for  the  full  term  of  nine  years.
Father  Hecker  was  the  founder,  and  was  till  late-
ly the  director,  of  the  Catholic  publication  society
of  New  York.  He  also  founded  in  18G5  the  "  Catho-
lic World,"  the  chief  Roman  Catholic  magazine  on
the  American  continent,  and  he  continued  to  edit
it.  His  works  include  "  Questions  of  the  Soul "
(New  York,  1855);  "Aspirations  of  Nature  "  (1857);
"Catholicity  in  the  United  States"  (1879);  and
"  Catholics  and  Protestants  Agreeing  on  the
School  Question  "  (1881).  His  last  writings  are  a
series  of  papers  on  Orestes  A.  Brownson,  in  the
"  Catholic  World."

HECKEWELDER,  John  Gottlieb  Ernestns,
missionary,  b.  in  Bedford,  England,  12  March,
1743;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  21  Jan.,  1823.  He
came  to  Pennsylvania  in  1754,  and,  after  finishing
his  education,  was  apprenticed  to  a  cooper.  After
a  visit  to  Ohio  with  Christian  F.  Post,  a  colo-
nial agent,  in  1762,  and  temporary  employment
in  the  Moravian  missions  at  Friedenshuetten  and
Sheshequin,  Pa.,  in  1765-'71,  he  entered,  in  the
latter  year,  upon  his  actual  career  as  an  evangelist
to  the  Indians,  being  appointed  assistant  to  David
Zeisberger,  in  Ohio,  where  he  remained  fifteen
years.  In  1792,  at  the  request  of  the  secretary  of
war,  he  accompanied  Gen.  Rufus  Putnam  to  Post
Vincennes  to  treat  with  the  Indians.  In  1793  he
was  a  second  time  commissioned  to  assist  at  a
treaty  with  the  Indians  of  the  lakes.  Between
1797  and  1800  he  remained  mainly  in  Ohio,  and
was  for  a  time  in  the  civil  service,  being  a  post-
master, a  justice  of  the  peace,  and  an  associate
justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  He  settled
at  Gnadenhiitten,  Ohio,  in  1801,  and  devoted  him-
self to  the  duties  of  his  agency,  but  resigned  in
1810  and  engaged  in  literary  pursuits  in  Bethle-
hem, Pa.,  till  his  death.  He  studied  carefully  the
languages,  manners,  and  customs  of  the  Indians,
particularly  the  Delawares,  and  after  he  had  be-
come a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society,  at  Philadelphia,  several  of  his  contributions
of  Indian  archaeology  were  published  in  their
transactions.  He  also  published  "  Account  of  the
History,  Manners,  and  Customs  of  the  Indian  Na-
tions who  once  inhabited  Pennsylvania  and  the
Neighboring  States  "  (Philadelphia,  1818 ;  German
translation,  Gottingen,  1821 ;  French  translation,
Paris,  1822) ;  "  Narrative  of  the  Mission  of  the
United  Brethren  among  the  Delawares  and  Mo-


hegan  Indians  "  (Philadelphia,  1820) ;  and  a  collec-
tion of  "  Names  which  the  Lenni  Lenape  or  Dela-
ware Indians  gave  to  Rivers,  Streams,  and  Locali-
ties within  the  States  of  Pennsylvania.  New  Jersey,
Maryland,  and  Virginia,  with  their  Signification  "
(1822).  Many  of  his  manuscripts  are  in  the  col-
lections of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society.  See
"  Life  of  Heckewelder,"  by  the  Rev.  Edward  Rond-
thaler  (Philadelphia,  1847).

HECKMAN,  Charles  Adam,  soldier,  b.  in
Easton,  Pa.,  3  Dec,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
Minerva  seminary,  in  his  native  town,  in  1837.  In
the  war  with  Mexico  he  served  as  sergeant  in  the
1st  U.  S.  voltigeurs.  He  was  commissioned  cap-
tain in  the  1st  Pennsylvania  regiment,  20  April,
1861,  became  major  of  the  9th  New  Jersey  on  3
Oct.,  lieutenant-colonel  on  3  Dec,  and  colonel  on
10  Feb.,  1862.  On  29  Nov.,  1862,  he  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  served  in
Burnside's  expedition  to  North  Carolina,  and  after-
ward in  the  Army  of  the  James,  being  wounded  at
Newbern  and  Young's  Cross  Roads,  N.  C,  and
Port  Walthall,  Va.  He  commanded  the  defences
of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,  Va.,  in  the  winter  of
1863-4,  and  at  Drewry's  Bluff,  Va.,  on  16  May,  1864,
he  was  captured,  after  his  brigade  had  five  times
repelled  a  superior  force  of  Confederates.  He  was
taken  to  Libby  prison,  and  afterward  to  Macon,
Ga.,  and  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he  was  one  of  the
fifty-one  officers  that  were  placed  under  fire  of  the
National  guns.  He  was  exchanged  on  25  Aug.,
commanded  the  18th  corps  at  the  capture  of  Fort
Harrison,  Chapin's  Bluff,  and  the  25th  corps  in
January  and  February,  1865.  He  resigned  when
the  war  was  over,  25  May,  1865,  and  now  (1887)
resides  in  Phillipsburg,  N.  J.,  where  he  has  served
as  a  member  of  the  board  of  education.

HEDDING,  Elijah,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Pine
Plains,  Dutchess  county,  N.  Y.,  7  June,  1780 ;  d.  in
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  9  April,  1852.  In  1789  Rev.
Benjamin  Abbott,  a
pioneer  of  Method-
ism, preached  in  his
neighborhood,  and  the
mother  and  grand-
mother of  young  Hed-
ding  united  with  the
Methodist  church.
With  these  the  lad
also  soon  became  asso-
ciated. A  few  years
later  the  family  re-
moved and  settled  on
a  farm  at  Starksbor-
ough,  Vt.,  a  region
where  schools  were  as
yet  almost  wholly  un-
known. Young  Red-
ding became  skeptical
somewhat  and  irreligious,  but  was  sometimes  called
on  to  read  one  of  Wesley's  sermons  in  the  absence  of
a  regular  preacher.  He  was  impressed  with  them,
studied  various  doctrinal  works,  adopted  Meth-
odist views,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  1799,  though
not  even  licensed  to  preach,  was  drafted  as  a  sup-
ply. He  was  admitted  to  the  New  York  confer-
ence in  1801,  and  in  1807  was  appointed  presid-
ing elder  of  New  Hampshire  district.  In  1811
he  was  sent  to  Boston,  and  in  1817  to  Maine,  as
presiding  elder  of  Portland  district.  Later  on  he
was  pastor  at  Lynn  common,  and  afterward  pre-
siding elder  of  Boston  district.  At  the  general
conference  held  in  Baltimore  in  May,  1824,  after
about  twenty-five  years  of  itinerant  labors,  he  was
elected  and  ordained  bishop,  and  for  nearly  twen-


158


HEDGE


HE1LPRIN


ty-eight  years  longer  served  the  church  in  that
office.  Bishop  Heading's  episcopal  life  covered  a
large  space  in  the  formative  period  of  American
Methodism,  and  probably  no  other  man  contribut-
ed more  largely  than  he  to  the  form  into  which  it
grew,  or  more  effectively  sustained  its  original
evangelistic  spirit  and  methods.  During  most  of
the  years  of  his  episcopate  he  lived  at  Lynn.  Mass.,
but  in  1851  he  removed  to  Poughkeepsie.  He  had
been  released  by  the  general  conference  of  1848
from  all  obligation  to  labor  any  longer,  and  from
that  time  onward  his  strength  rapidly  declined.
His  annual  salary  during  his  later  years  was  $700,
and  when  it  was  proposed  to  make  it  larger  he
earnestly  objected,  saying  he  should  not  know
what  to  do  with  more.  Bishop  Hedding  was  an
able  theologian  in  respect  to  the  great  and  funda-
mental elements  of  Christian  truth  and  doctrine,
a  preacher  of  great  force  and  convincing  eloquence,
dignified  yet  pleasant  in  his  manners,  and  in  private
life  happily  blending  seriousness  and  cheerfulness.
HEDGE,  Levi,  educator,  b.  in  Hardwick,  Mass.,
19  April,  1766;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,
1844.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1792,  ap-
pointed a  tutor  in  1795,  and  in  1810  became  pro-
fessor of  logic  and  metaphysics.  In  1827  he  ex-
changed that  post  for  the  Alford  professorship  of
natural  religion,  moral  philosophy,  and  civil  polity,
but  was  compelled  by  an  attack  of  paralysis  to  re-
sign in  1830.  He  published  a  "  System  of  Logic  "
(Boston,  1818),  which  went  through  many  editions,
and  was  translated  into  German.  He  also  pre-
pared an  abridgment  of  Brown's  "  Mental  Philoso-
phy" (1827).  —  His  son,  Frederic  Henry,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  12  Dec,  1805  ;  d.
there,  21  Aug.,  1890,  was  sent  to  school  in  Ger-
many at  the  age  of  twelve,  and  remained  five  years.
On  his  return  he  entered  the  junior  class  at  Har-
vard, and  was  graduated  in  1825.  He  then  stud-
ied theology  at  the  Cambridge  divinity-school,
was  ordained  in  1829,  and  settled  over  the  Unita-
rian church  in  West  Cambridge.  In  1835  he  took
charge  of  a  church  in  Bangor,  Me. ;  in  1850,  after
spending  a  year  in  Europe,  became  pastor  of  the
Westminster  church  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  in
1856  of  the  church  in  Brookline,  Mass.  In  1857
he  was  made  professor  of  eoclesiastical  history  in
the  divinity-school  at  Harvard,  still  retaining  his
pastoral  charge,  but  resigned  the  pastorship  in
1872  in  order  to  assume  the  professorship  of  the
German  language  in  the  college.  He  was  noted  as
a  public  lecturer  as  well  as  a  pulpit  orator.  In
1853-'4  he  lectured  on  mediaeval  history  before
the  Lowell  institute.  He  became  editor  of  the
"  Christian  Examiner  "  in  1858.  Besides  essays  on
the  different  schools  of  philosophy,  notably  maga-
zine articles  on  St.  Augustine,  Leibnitz,  Schopen-
hauer, and  Coleridge,  and  other  contributions  to
Periodicals  in  prose  and  poetry,  he  published  "  The
'rose  Writers  of  Germany,"  containing  extracts
and  biographical  sketches  (Philadelphia,  1848) ;
"A  Christian  Liturgy  for  the  Use  of  the  Church"
(Boston,  1856) ;  "  Reason  in  Religion  "  (Boston,
1865) ;  and  "  The  Primeval  World  of  Plebrew  Tra-
dition "  (1870).  He  also  wrote  hymns  for  the  Uni-
tarian church,  and  assisted  in  the  compilation  of  a
hymn-book  (1853),  and  published  numerous  trans-
lations from  the  German  poets.

HEFLIN,  Robert  Stell,  lawyer,  b.  in  Morgan
county,  Ga.,  15  April,  1815.  He  was  educated  at
Fayet'teville,  Ga.,  where  his  parents  settled  in  1832,
was  clerk  of  the  county  court  in  1836-'9,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1840,  and  practised  in  Fayetteville
and  Wedowee.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Georgia
senate  in  1840-'!.  of  the  house  of  representatives


in  1846  and  1849,  and  of  the  senate  in  1857  and
1860.  As  an  uncompromising  Union  man  he  was-
compelled  to  pass  through  the  lines  to  Sherman's
army  in  August,  1864.  He  was  appointed  judge
of  probate  in  1865,  and  elected  to  that  office  in
1866,  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1868,  and  was.
then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  7  Dec,  1869,  to  3  March,  1871.

HEG,  Hans  C,  soldier,  b.  in  Norway  in  1829;
killed  in  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  Ga.,  19  Sept.,
1863.  He  was  brought  by  his  father  to  the  United
States  when  eleven  years  of  age,  and  settled  in
Wisconsin.  He  went  to  California  during  the  gold
excitement  in  1849,  returned  in  1851,  established
himself  as  a  farmer  and  merchant  near  Milwaukee,
and  was  elected  commissioner  of  state-prisons  in
1859.  In  1861  he  entered  the  volunteer  army  as  a
major,  and  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  15th
Wisconsin  infantry,  a  Scandinavian  regiment,  on
30  Sept.,  1861.  His  regiment  took  part  in  the-
reduction  of  Island  No.  10,  and  afterward  in  the
surprise  and  capture  of  Union  City,  Tenn. ;  also-
in  the  battle  of  Chaplin  Hills,  in  the  pursuit
of  Gen.  Bragg's  forces,  and  the  contests  at  Stone-
River  and  Murfreesboro.  On  29  April  he  was-
placed  in  command  of  a  brigade,  and  took  part  in
the  movements  of  the  20  corps,  resulting  in  the-
evacuation  of  Shelbyville,  Tullahoma,  and  Chatta-
nooga, and  at  Chickamauga,  where  he  fell  at  the
head  of  his  forces  on  the  second  day  of  the  fight.

HEHL,  Matthew,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Ebers-
bach,  Wiirtemberg,  30  April,  1705;  d.  in  Lititz,
Pa.,  4  Dec,  1787.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Tubingen,  and  after  being  consecrated
to  the  episcopacy,  24  Sept.,  1751,  in  London,  came-
to  this  country  as  assistant  of  Bishop  Spangen-
berg  (q.  v.).  His  first  seat  was  at  Bethlehem,  Pa.,,
where  he  superintended  the  neighboring  country
churches  and  the  educational  institutions  of  the
Moravians.  In  1756  he  transferred  his  residence-
to  Lititz,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  and  for  twenty-eight
years  had  the  oversight  of  the  churches  of  that
vicinity,  as  also  of  those  in  Maryland,  retaining
his  seat  in  the  governing  board  at  Bethlehem.
Hehl  was  a  learned  divine,  an  eloquent  preacher,
and  wrote  numerous  hymns.

HEILPRIN,  Phineas  Mendel,  scholar,  b.  in
Lublin,  Russian  Poland,  in  November,  1801 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  O,  30  Jan.,  1863.  He  early  settled
in  Piotrkow  and  subsequently  in  Tomaszow,  where*
he  became  a  manufacturer  and  merchant,  but,  in
consequence  of  oppression  by  the  Russian  govern-
ment, he  removed  in  1842  to  Hungary.  His  sym-
pathy was  with  the  people  in  1848,  and  after  the-
failure  of  the  revolutionary  movement  he  deter-
mined to  leave  the  country.  In  1859  he  came  to  the
United  States,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.
He  was  a  close  student  of  the  Talmud,  and  also  of
the  Greek  and  later  German  philosophers,  acquir-
ing a  high  reputation  among  Jewish  scholars  as  a-
conservative  reformer.  His  works,  written  in  He-
brew, include  several  controversial  writings,  deal-
ing with  the  reform  movement  among  the  Jews. —
His  son,  Michael,  b.  in  Piotrkow,  Poland,  in  1823;;
d.  in  Summit,  N.  J.,  10  xVlay,  1888.  He  joined  the<
Hungarians  in  1848,  and  was  attached  in  1849  to
the  literary  bureau  of  the  department  of  the  inte-
rior during  Kossuth's  brief  sway.  In  1856  he  came
to  the  United  States,  and  soon  acquired  a  reputa-
tion for  scholarship,  both  in  the  oriental  and  mod-
ern languages.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to
literary  journals,  and  his  work  in  connection  with
the  "American  Cyclopaedia"  shows  his  industry,,
breadth  of  view,  and  exact  scholarly  attainments..
Mr.  Heilprin  felt  a  special  interest  in  the  Rus-


HEIN


HEINTZELMAN


15&


sian-Jewish  emigrants  to  the  United  States  since
1882,  and  his  intelligent  direction  and  ardent  per-
sonal sympathy  led  to  the  establishment  of  several
successful  agricultural  colonies  in  this  country.
He  published  "  The  Historical  Poetry  of  the  An-
cient Hebrews  "  (vols.  i.  and  ii..  New  York,  1879-'80).
— Michael's  son,  Louis,  writer,  b.  in  Miskolcz,
Hungary,  2  July,  1851,  came  with  his  father  to  the
United  States  in  1856.  His  education  was  received
from  private  sources,  and  he  has  been  associated
with  his  father  in  literary  work.  He  has  published
"  The  Historical  Reference- Book "  (New  York,
1885). — Another  son  of  Michael,  Angelo,  natural-
ist, b.  in  Satoralja-Ujhely,  Hungary,  31  March,
1853,  came  to  this  country  in  1856,  but  afterward
returned  to  Europe  for  his  education,  and  studied
natural  history  in  London,  Geneva,  Florence,  and
Vienna.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  professor  of
invertebrate  paleontology  at  the  Academy  of  natu-
ral sciences  in  Philadelphia,  in  1883  was  made  cu-
rator in  charge  of  the  museum,  and  in  1885  became
professor  of  geology  at  the  Wagner  free  institute
of  science  in  Philadelphia.  Prof.  Heilprin  is  also
an  artist  of  ability,  and  has  exhibited  "  Autumn's
First  Whisper "  (1880)  at  the  Pennsylvania  acade-
my of  fine  arts,  and  "  Forest  Exiles  "  (1883)  at  the
Boston  museum  of  fine  arts.  His  scientific  pub-
lications include  "Contributions  to  the  Tertiary
Geology  and  Paleontologv  of  the  United  States "
(Philadelphia,  1884);  "Town  Geologv:  The  Les-
son of  the  Philadelphia  Rocks"  (1885) ;  "The
Geographical  and  Geological  Distribution  of  Ani-
mals" (New  York,  1887);  and  "Explorations  on
the  West  Coast  of  Florida  and  in  the  Okeechobee
Wilderness  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).

HEIN,  Piet,  Dutch  naval  officer,  b.  in  Delfts-
haven  in  1570 ;  d.  at  sea,  20  Aug.,  1629.  His  father
was  a  sailor  on  a  man-of-war,  and  when  scarcely
fifteen  years  old  the  son  became  an  apprentice
under  him.  Both  were  captured  by  the  Spaniards,
and  remained  four  years  in  the  galleys,  suffering
so  much  that  young  Piet  swore  to  revenge  him-
self. He  rose,  by  gallantry,  to  be  vice-admiral  of
the  East  India  company  in  1616,  and  directed  the
armament  of  the  fleet  that  was  sent  in  1624  against
the  Spanish  colonies  of  South  America.  Jacob
Willekens  was  appointed  admiral,  and  Hein  his
chief-of-staff.  The  fleet  arrived  at  Morro  de  Sao
Paulo,  thirty-six  miles  from  Bahia,  on  9  May.  1625,
and  the  admirals  immediately  began  operations.
Diego  de  Mendoca,  governor-general  of  Brazil,  to-
gether with  Marcos  Texeira,  bishop  of  Bahia,  de-
fended the  place  valiantly,  but.  on  10  June,  Hein,
after  a  hot  engagement,  crossed  the  bar  of  the  har-  J
bor  of  San  Salvador,  and,  by  threatening  the  city
with  bombardment,  obliged  the  governor  to  capitu-  i
late.  Willekens  returned  to  Holland  on  2  Aug.,  ,
1625,  leaving  Hein  with  the  marines  and  twelve  i
men-of-war.  During  his  absence  on  an  expedition
against  Espiritu  Santo,  a  strong  Portuguese  and  j
Spanish  fleet  recaptured  Bahia,  and  Hein  sailed
for  Amsterdam,  where  he  arrived  in  October,  1625,
bringing  enormous  spoils.  In  the  following  year
the  East  India  company  appointed  him  admiral,
and  gave  him  the  command  of  a  fleet  of  thirteen
vessels,  with  orders  to  attack  the  coast  of  Brazil
again.  On  3  May,  1626,  he  attacked  Todos  os
Santos,  Bahia,  and  captured  twenty-one  merchant
vessels  that  were  anchored  in  the"  harbor,  losing
only  three  of  his  own  ships.  After  a  successful  ex-
pedition against  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he  also  cap-
tured many  prizes,  he  returned  to  the  Texel,  26
Oct.,  1626.  Two  years  later  the  company  sent
Hein  to  capture  the  treasure-fleet  that  every  year
brought  to  Spain  the  tribute  of  the  American


colonies.  With  a  fleet  of  twenty-four  vessels  he
sailed  from  the  Texel,  20  May,  1628,  and,  lying  in
wait  at  Havana,  he  met,  on  9  Sept.,  near  the  coast
of  Cuba,  the  Spanish  fleet  of  twenty  well-armed
vessels,  and  captured  it  after  a  desperate  battle.
The  value  of  the  booty  was  estimated  at  18,000,000
piastres,  and  Hein  was  rewarded  by  the  appoint-
ment of  grand  admiral  of  Holland.  In  the  spring
of  1629  he  set  out  with  a  powerful  fleet  against  the
corsairs  of  Dunkerque,  and,  meeting  a  Spanish
squadron  on  his  way,  defeated  it,  but  received  in
the  action  a  mortal  wound.  His  country  erected
for  him  a  mausoleum  at  Delft.

HEINTZELMAN,  Samuel  Peter,  soldier,  b.in
Manheim,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  30  Sept.,  1805  ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  1  May,  1880.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.
military  academy
in  1826,  and  en-
tered the  army  as
2d  lieutenant  of
infantry.  He  spent
several  years  in
border  service.and
had  his  first  expe-
rience of  war  in
Florida,  against
the  Indians.  He
served  during  the
Mexican  war  with
the  rank  of  cap-
tain. AtHuaman-
tla  he  won  distinc-
tion for  bravery,
and  on  9  Oct.,
1847,  he  was  brev-
etted  major.  He
organized  a  battalion  of  recruits  and  convalescent
soldiers  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  marched  them  to  the
city  of  Mexico.  From  1849  till  1855  he  served  in
California,  where  he  had  some  rough  experience
with  the  Coyote  and  Yuma  Indians,  and  established
Fort  Yuma  on  the  Colorado  river.  In  1859-'60  he
was  in  command  of  the  troops  on  the  Rio  Grande
against  Mexican  marauders.  In  May,  1861,  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious
services  against  the  Indians  in  California,  and  or-
dered to  Washington  to  take  the  office  of  inspect-
or-general of  the  forces.  In  May  of  the  same  year
he  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  17th  regular
infantry.  On  17  May  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  and  ordered  to  the  command
of  a  brigade  at  Alexandria.  He  commanded  a  di-
vision of  McDowell's  army  at  Bull  Run,  and  was
wounded.  During  the  organization  of  the  army
under  Gen.  McClellan,  in  the  winter  of  1861-2,  he
retained  command  of  his  division.  When  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  began  to  move,  in  March,  1862,
Heintzelman  was  in  command  of  the  3d  army
corps,  was  in  the  battle  of  Williamsburg  on  5
May,  was  made  major-general  of  volunteers  on  the
same  day,  took  an  active  part  in  the  battle  of  Fair
Oaks,  where  he  commanded  the  3d  and  4th  corps,
and  for  his  gallantry  in  both  the  first  and  second
day's  fighting  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in
the  regular  army.  At  the  head  of  his  command
he  took  part  in  the  seven  days'  fighting  around
Richmond,  afterward  joined  Pope  in  his  Virginia
campaign,  and  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run
his  corps  formed  the  right  wing  of  Pope's  army.
During  the  Maryland  campaign  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  defences  at  Washington,  and  later  he
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Department
of  Washington,  and  of  the  22d  army  corps,  which
appointment  he  held  during  the  battles  of  Chan-


160


HEISS


HELIAS  D'HUMONDE


cellorsville  and  Gettysburg.  He  was  relieved  in
October,  1863,  and  in  January  of  the  following
year  was  put  in  command  of  the  Northern  Depart-
ment, embracing  Ohio,  Michigan,  Indiana,  and  Il-
linois. For  some  time  before  August,  1865,  he  was
on  court-martial  duty.  In  March  of  that  year  he
was  brevetted  major-general  in  the  regular  army,
and  in  September  resumed  command  of  the  17th
infantry,  in  New  York  harbor  and  in  Texas.  On
22  Feb.,  1869,  he  was  retired  with  the  rank  of
colonel,  and  on  29  April,  by  special  act  of  con-
gress, was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  with  the  rank
of  major-general,  to  date  from  22  Feb.  His  public
career  ended  with  his  retirement  from  the  army.

HEISS,  Michael,  archbishop,  b.  in  Pfahldorf,
Bavaria,  12  April,  1818 ;  d.  in  La  Crosse,  Wis.,  26
March,  1890.  He  was  a  student  in  the  University
of  Munich  from  1835  till  1839,  in  the  law  and  after-
ward in  theology.  He  then  entered  the  theological
seminary  in  Eichstadt  and  was  ordained  priest  by
Cardinal  Reisach,  18  Oct.,  1840,  although  he  had  not
yet  attained  the  canonical  age.  A  visit  of  Archbish-
op Purcell,  of  Cincinnati,  first  suggested  to  him  the
idea  of  laboring  in  the  United  States.  He  arrived
in  New  York,  17  Dec,  1842,  and  in  1843  became
pastor  of  the  Church  of  the  Mother  of  God,  in
Covington,  Ky.  In  1844  his  friend,  Dr.  Henni,  was
appointed  bishop  of  Milwaukee,  and  on  the  invita-
tion of  this  prelate  he  went  to  Wisconsin,  where,
besides  acting  as  secretary  to  the  bishop,  he  en-
gaged in  missionary  work.  In  1846  he  founded
the  Church  of  St.  Mary  in  Milwaukee,  the  first  Ro-
man Catholic  parochial  church  and  the  first  church
built  of  brick  in  that  city.  He  was  in  Europe  for
his  health  in  1850-'2,  and  on  his  return  opened  an
ecclesiastical  school  in  his  own  house.  Afterward
the  Seminary  of  St.  Francis  de  Sales  was  founded
on  the  shores  of  Lake  Michigan,  and  Father  Heiss
was  appointed  its  first  rector.  About  this  time  he
became  noted  as  a  theological  writer.  When  the
diocese  of  La  Crosse,  on  the  Mississippi,  was  found-
ed, he  was  named  for  the  new  see,  and  was  conse-
crated bishop,  6  Sept.,  1868.  The  diocese  of  Bishop
Heiss  extended  over  that  part  of  Wisconsin  north
and  west  of  Wisconsin  river  as  far  as  the  Missis-
sippi. Under  his  administration  several  Roman
Catholic  churches  were  erected,  the  new  cathedral
was  built,  the  Sisters  of  St.  Francis  were  established
in  La  Crosse,  and  an  episcopal  residence  was  built
at  his  own  expense.  Twenty-five  parochial  schools
and  two  asylums  were  opened.  St.  John's  college
was  founded  at  Prairie  du  Chien,  and  other  schools
were  built.  During  the  twelve  years  when  he  had
charge  of  the  diocese,  the  number  of  churches  had
increased  from  forty  to  eighty-six.  In  1880  he  was
nominated  coadjutor  to  Archbishop  Henni,  of  Mil-
waukee, with  right  of  succession,  and  he  was  created
Archbishop  of  Adrianople  in  partibus  infidelium,
14  March  of  that  year.  He  became  metropolitan
of  Milwaukee  in  September,  1881.  Archbishop
Heiss  took  an  active  part  as  theologian  in  the  Bal-
timore council  of  1849,  in  that  of  St.  Louis  in  1855,
and  in  the  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  of  1866.
He  was  one  of  the  chief  members  of  the  Vatican
council  of  1869-'70,  and  also  a  member  of  one  of
the  four  great  commissions,  each  of  which  consist-
ed of  twelve  bishops,  who  represented  all  parts  of
the  world.  His  theological  works,  which  include
"  Ueber  die  vier  Evangelien,"  and  "  Ueber  die
Ehe,"  were  published  in  Milwaukee.

HEISTER,  Leopold  Philip  de,  soldier,  b.  in
1707 ;  d.  in  Hesse-Cassel,  19  Nov.,  1777.  He  was  a
crippled  veteran  of  many  campaigns  when  he  was
selected  to  command  the  Hessian  troops  that  were
hired  by  the  British  government  for  service  against


the  American  colonies.  He  landed  on  Long  Island
near  New  Utrecht  with  two  full  Hessian  brigades
on  25  Aug.,  1776,  three  days  after  the  arrival  of
Gen.  William  Howe  with  the  British  troops.  The
tedious  passage  of  thirteen  weeks  from  Spithead
had  tried  him  sorely ;  "  his  patience  and  tobacco
had  become  exhausted.  He  called  for  hock,  and
swallowed  large  potations  to  the  health  of  his
friends."  Soon  after  debarking,  the  invading
army  prepared  for  marching,  the  Hessians  under
De  Heister  forming  the  centre,  or  main  body.
They  cannonaded  the  works  at  Flatbush  pass,  and
De  Heister  ordered  Count  Donop  to  storm  the  re-
doubt, while  he  pressed  forward  with  his  troops.
"  Our  Hessians  and  our  brave  Highlanders  gave  no
quarter,"  wrote  a  British  officer,  "  and  it  was  a  fine
sight  to  see  with  what  alacrity- they  despatched  the
rebels  with  their  bayonets,  after  we  surrounded
them  so  they  could  not  resist."  Heister  also  com-
manded the  Hessians  at  White  Plains,  28  Oct.,  1776.

HEITZMAN,  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  Vin-
kovcze,  Hungary,  2  Oct.,  1836.  His  father,  Martin
Heitzman,  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Austrian  army.
The  son  was  educated  in  the  University  of  Pesth
and  in  that  of  Vienna,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1859.  He  then  lectured  on  morbid  anatomy  in  the
Vienna  university,  and  in  1874  came  to  New
York,  where  he  established  a  laboratory  for  micro-
scopical research.  His  specialty  is  dermatology,
and  he  was  vice-president  of  the  A  merican  derma-
tological  society,  besides  being  a  member  of  oth-
er medical  associations.  His  publications  include
"  Chirurgische,  Pathologie  und  Therapie  "  (2  vols.,
1864-'8) ;  "  Descriptive  and  Topographical  Anato-
my of  Man  in  600  Illustrations "  (2  vols.,  3d  ed.,
1886) ;  and  papers  on  "  Kenntniss  der  Di'mndarm-
zotten "  and  "  Untersuchungen  iiber  das  Proto-
plasma,"  in  the  "Transactions  of  the  Imperial
Academy  of  Sciences"  (Vienna,  1867-73).  His
chief  work  is  "  Microscopic  Morphology  of  the
Animal  Body"  (1873).

HELFENSTEIN,  John  Conrad  Alhert,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Moszbach,  Germany,  16  Feb.,  1748 ;
d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  17  May,  1790.  He  studied
theology  at  Heidelberg,  and  was  appointed  by  the
synod  of  Holland  missionary  to  America,  with
Rev.  John  H.  Helffrich  and  Rev.  John  G.  Geb-
hard.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  New  York,  14  Jan.,
1772,  he  took  charge  of  a  congregation  in  German-  '
town,  and  was  one  of  the  fathers  of  the  German
Reformed  church  in  this  country.  In  1775  he
accepted  a  call  to  Lancaster,  Pa.,  where  he  fre-
quently preached  to  the  Hessian  prisoners.  He
returned  to  Germantown  in  1779,  and  remained
there  till  his  death.  Several  small  volumes  of  his
sermons  have  been  published.

HELIAS  D'HUMONDE,  Ferdinand  Mary,
clergyman,  b.  in  Ghent,  Belgium,  3  Aug.,  1796 ;  d.
in  Toas,  Cole  co.,  Mo.,  11  Aug.,  1874.  He  belonged
to  a  noble  Belgian  family,  and  his  brother  was
prime-minister  of  that  kingdom  for  several  years.
Ferdinand  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1817,
and  at  the  close  of  his  novitiate  was  appointed  pro-
fessor and  prefect  of  studies  in  the  high-school  of
Brieg,  Switzerland.  After  several  years  he  was
summoned  to  Rome  to  act  as  assistant  secretary
to  the  father-general  of  the  order,  and  subsequently
was  assigned  to  the  American  mission.  He  arrived
in  the  United  States,  19  May,  1833,  and  was  im-
mediately appointed  master  of  novices  in  the  Jes-
uit college,  Frederick,  Md.  Shortly  afterward  he
organized  at  St.  Louis  a  German  congregation,
which,  through  his  labors,  became  one  of  the
largest  in  the  country.  He  also  built  St.  Joseph's
church  for  the  use  of  the  German  Catholics. In


HELLMUTH


HELPER


161


1838  he  organized  the  first  German  congregation
outside  of  St.  Louis  at  Washington,  Franklin  eo.,
Mo.,  and  founded  a  church.  From  Washington
he  made  his  way  through  the  wilderness,  with  com-
pass in  hand,  to  Westphalia,  Osage  co.,  where  he
organized  a  church  and  founded  a  mission.  In
course  of  time  he  organized  congregations  and
built  churches  in  Rich  Fountain  in  the  same
county,  in  Saint  Thomas  and  Jefferson  City,  in
Toas,  Cole  co.,  in  Booneville,  Cooper  co.,  and  in
several  other  places.  His  missionary  labors  ex-
tended to  Westport  and  Independence,  the  extreme
western  settlements  of  the  state.  For  the  last
twenty-four  years  of  his  life  he  was  principally
stationed  at  Toas,  near  Jefferson  City.  Notwith-
standing his  advanced  age,  he  continued  to  per-
form his  functions  until  the  day  before  his  death.

HELLMUTH,  Isaac,  Canadian  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  Warsaw,  Poland,  14  Dec,  1819.  He
is  of  Jewish  descent,  was  educated  at  Breslau,  and,
having  been  converted  to  Christianity  and  ordained
in  the  Anglican  church,  settled  in  Canada  about
1856.  He  was  appointed  successively  archdeacon
and  dean  of  the  diocese  of  Huron,  and  on  24  Aug.,
1870,  was  consecrated  coadjutor-bishop,  with  the
title  of  bishop  of  Norfolk.  In  1871,  on  the  death  of
Bishop  Cronyn,  Dr.  Hellmuth  succeeded  him  as
bishop  of  Huron,  but  resigned  this  office  in  1883  on
being  appointed  assistant  bishop  in  the  diocese  of
Ripon.  Since  1885  he  has  been  rector  of  Bridling-
ton, Yorkshire.  While  in  Canada  he  established
Huron  college  for  the  education  of  the  future
clergy  of  the  diocese,  and  was  principal  and  divin-
. ity  professor  in  it  in  1863.  A  few  months  afterward
the  London  collegiate  school,  since  named  Hell-
muth college,  was  erected,  and  he  also  established  a
ladies'  college,  which  was  opened  in  1869.

HELM,  Israel,  colonist,  b.  in  Sweden  ;  d.  after
1693.  He  was  one  of  the  early  emigrants  from
Sweden  to  the  Delaware.  In  1659  he  resided  at
Passyunk,  now  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  employed
there  as  collector  of  customs.  In  1668  he.  with
others,  obtained  from  Gov.  Nicolls  a  grant  of  land
embracing  nearly  the  whole  of  Calken  Hook,  and
in  the  same  year  was  appointed  a  member  of  Capt.
Carr's  council.  In  1674  he  was  commissioned  as
one  of  the  justices  "  for  the  river,"  and  doubtless
assisted  in  holding  a  court  at  Upland  some  years
before  the  "  Upland  court,"  of  which  the  records
have  been  preserved,  and  of  which  he  was  also  one
of  the  justices.  Having  learned  the  language  of
the  Indians,  he  was  frequently  employed  as  an  in-
terpreter, and  acted  as  such  in  1675  at  the  confer-
ence between  Gov.  Andros,  the  magistrates  of  New
Castle,  Del.,  and  the  Indian  sachem  of  New  Jersey,
when  the  treaty  of  peace  was  renewed.  He  had
acquired  the  title  of  captain,  and,  as  the  Swedish
government  sent  a  considerable  number  of  Swedish
soldiers  to  the  colony,  it  may  reasonably  be  sup-

K)sed  that  he  first  came  in  a  military  capacity,
uring  his  residence  on  the  Delaware  he  made  a
visit  to  his  native  country.

HELM,  John  Larue,  governor  of  Kentucky,  b.
in  Hardin  county,  Ky.,  4  July,  1802 ;  d.  in  Elizabeth-
town,  Ky.,  8  Sept.,  1867.  He  was  descended  from
Maj.  Benjamin  and  Capt.  Leonard  Helm,  of  Fau-
quier county,  Va.,  early  pioneers  of  Kentucky,  who
were  distinguished  in  Indian  warfare.  At  an
early  age  he  was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  cir-
cuit clerk,  afterward  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  appointed  county  attorney.  He  was
in  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1826-'37,
and  state  senator  from  1844  till  1848  and  again
from  1865  till  1867.  when  he  resigned.  He  pre-
sided in  the  legislature  seven  years,  was  elected
vol.  in. — 11


lieutenant-governor  in  1848,  and  in  1850  became
governor,  which  office  he  held  till  1852.  In  1854
he  was  made  president  of  the  Louisville  and  Nash-
ville railroad.  He  was  again  chosen  governor  of
Kentucky  after  the  civil  war,  and  was  inaugurated
at  his  residence  in  Elizabethtown  on  3  Sept.,  1867,
five  days  before  his  death. — His  son,  Ben  Hardin,
soldier,  b.  in  Elizabethtown,  Ky.,  in  1830;  d.  in
Georgia,  21  Sept.,  1863,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1851,  assigned  to  the  2d  dra-
goons, and  served  in  the  cavalry-school  for  practice
at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  and  on  frontier  duty  at  Fort  Lin-
coln, Texas.  He  resigned  his  commission  on  9
Oct..  1852.  From  1854  till  1858  he  practised  law
in  Elizabethtown.  and  from  1858  till  1861  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Kentucky
legislature  in  1855-'6,  and  commonwealth  attorney
for  the  3d  district  of  Kentucky  from  1856  till
1858.  In  1861  he  joined  the  Confederate  army  as
colonel  of  the  1st  Kentucky  cavalry,  served  at
Shiloh,  and  was  made  brigadier-general  in  March,
1862.  He  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Perryville
and  Stone  River,  where  he  commanded  a  division,
led  a  Kentucky  brigade  at  Vicksburg  in  the  sum-
mer of  1862,  and  commanded  a  division  at  Chicka-
mauga,  where  he  was  fatallv  wounded.

HELMUTH,  Justus  Christian  Henry,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Helmstadt.  Brunswick,  Germanv,  16
May,  1745;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  Feb.,  1825.
His  father  died  when  the  son  was  a  mere  boy,  but
a  nobleman  sent  him  to  the  orphan  house  in  Halle,
and  afterward  to  the  university  there,  where  he
received  a  thorough  education  in  the  classics  and
theology.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  at  Wer-
nigerode  in  1769,  and  in  the  same  year  came  to  this
country  in  response  to  an  urgent  call  from  Luther-
an congregations  in  Pennsylvania.  On  his  arrival,
he  was  at  once  elected  pastor  of  the  congregation
at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  for  ten  years,  and  in  1779  he  re-
moved to  Philadelphia  in  answer  to  a  unanimous
call  from  St.  Michael's,  the  first  Lutheran  congre-
gation in  the  city.  Here  he  spent  the  remainder  of
his  life,  serving  as  pastor  until  1820.  The  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  conferred  upon  him  the
honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1780,  and  that  of  D.  D.
in  1785.  In  the  same  institution  he  held  for  eigh-
teen years  the  chair  of  German  and  Oriental  lan-
guages, and  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  lin-
guistic scholars  of  his  time.  In  1785,  with  his  col-
league and  intimate  friend,  Dr.  Schmidt,  he  estab-
lished a  private  seminary  at  Philadelphia,  for  the
education  of  young  men  for  the  ministry,  which
continued  for  twenty  years,  until  age  and  pressure
of  other  labors  prevented  them  from  attending
properly  to  the  work.  In  this  private  institution
many  of  the  early  Lutheran  pastors  received  their
theological  training.  Dr.  Helmuth  was  frequently
elected  to  ecclesiastical  offices  of  honor  and  trust,
and  was  identified  with  many  of  the  public  institu-
tions of  Philadelphia.  Though  he  was  partial  to
the  German  language,  it  did  not  prevent  him  from
taking  an  interest  in  the  various  activities,  educa-
tionaland  religious,  of  his  adopted  country.  His
published  works  include  "Taufe  und  heilige
Schrift"  (1793):  "  Unterhaltungen  mit  Gott "  :
books  for  children,  and  a  volume  of  German  hymns.
For  several  years  he  edited  the  "  Evangelical  Maga-
zine." a  German  periodical  of  Philadelphia.

HELPER,  Hmton  Rowan,  author,  b.  near
Mocskville,  Davie  co.,  N.  C,  27  Dec,  1829.  He
was  graduated  at  Mocksville  academy  in  1848.  In
1851  he  went  to  California  by  way  of  Cape  Horn,
and  spent  nearly  three  years  on  the  Pacific  coast.
He  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Buenos  Ayres,
Argentine  Republic,  in  1861,  and  held  this  office


162


HELPS


I1ENCK


until  1867.  In  18(57  he  returned  to  Asheville,  N.  C,
where  he  resided  until  he  settled  in  New  York.
He  has  travelled  extensively  through  North,  South,
and  Central  America,  in  Europe,  and  also  in
Africa.  He  is  the  projector  of  the  "  Three  Amer-
icas Railway,"  which  he  proposes  shall  eventually
form  one  connected  line  from  Bering  strait  to  the
Strait  of  Magellan.  He  was  the  originator  and
efficient  promoter  of  the  commercial  commission
from  the  United  States  to  Central  and  South  Amer-
ica. Mr.  Helper  was  brought  into  notice  just  be-
fore the  civil  war  by  his  "  Impending  Crisis  of  the
South"  (New  York,  1857).  In  this  book  he  ear-
nestly opposed  slavery  on  economical  grounds,  al-
though he  was  not  friendly  to  the  colored  race.
The  work  was  used  by  the  Republican  party  as  a
campaign  document  in  1860,  and  140,000  copies
were  sold  between  1857  and  1861.  His  other  works
are  "The  Land  of  Gold"  (Baltimore,  1855);  "No-
joque,  a  Question  for  a  Continent "  (New  York  and
London,  1867) ;  "  The  Negroes  in  Negroland,  the
Negroes  in  America,  and  the  Negroes  Generally  "
(New  York,  1868) ;  and  "  The  Three  Americas  Rail-
way "  (St.  Louis,  1881).

HELPS,  Sir  Arthur,  English  author,  b.  in
England  in  1817 ;  d.  in  London,  7  March,  1875.
He  was  educated  at  Trinity  college,  Cambridge,
became  private  secretary  to  the  chancellor  of  the
exchequer,  and  was  appointed  commissioner  of
French,  Spanish,  and  Danish  claims.  He  was  after-
ward secretary  to  the  chief  secretary  for  Ireland,
in  1859  became  clerk  of  the  privy  council,  and  was
knighted  in  1872.  Those  of  his  books  that  refer
specially  to  America  are  "Conquerors  of  the  New
World  and  their  Bondsmen  "  (London,  1848) ;  "  The
Spanish  Conquest  in  America,  and  its  Relation  to
the  History  of  Slavery  "  (1855);  "  The  Life  of  Co-
lumbus "  (1869) :  "  The  Life  of  Pizarro  "  (1869) ;  and
"  Iiife  of  Cortez  "  (1871).  Most  of  his  works  have
been  re-published  in  Boston,  Mass.

HEM  BEL,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  24  Sept.,  1764;  d.  there,  12  June,  1851.
He  studied  medicine,  and  was  qualified  to  receive
a  diploma,  but  refused  to  apply  for  it  on  account
of  deafness,  which  he  thought  would  incapacitate
him  for  practice.  He  served  as  a  volunteer  in  the
medical  department  of  the  Revolutionary  army  in
Virginia,  practised  gratuitously  for  many  years
among  the  poor  of  Philadelphia,  and  was  noted
for  benevolence.  He  was  president  of  the  Acad-
emy of  natural  sciences  from  1840  till  1849,  when
he  resigned,  owing  to  his  infirmity.

HEMMEN WAY,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fram-
ingham,  Mass.,  in  1735 ;  d.  in  Wells,  Mass.,  5  Aug.,
1811.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1755,  and
was  a  classmate  of  John  Adams,  with  whom  he
corresponded  for  many  years.  After  studying
theology,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Wells  on  8  Aug.,  1759,  which
charge  he  held  until  his  death.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1785,  and  from
Dartmouth  in  1792.  His  publications  are  "  Seven
Sermons  on  the  Obligation  and  Encouragement
of  the  Unregenerate  to  labor  for  the  Meat  which
endureth  to  Everlasting  Life"  (1767);  "  Vindication
of  the  Power,  Obligation,  etc.,  of  the  Unregenerate
to  attend  the  Means  of  Grace,  against  the  Excep-
tions of  Samuel  Hopkins  in  his  Reply  to  Mills "
(1772) ;  "  Remarks  on  Rev.  Mr.  Hopkins's  Answer
to  a  Tract  entitled  '  A  Vindication,'  etc."  (1774) ;
and  numerous  other  sermons.

HEMPEL,  Charles  Julius,  physician,  b.  in
Solingen,  Prussia,  5  Sept.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Grand  Rap-
ids, Mich.,  25  Sept.,  1879.  After  completing  his  col-
legiate course  at  Solingen,  he  attended  lectures  at


the  "  Universite  de  France,"  in  Paris,  and  assisted
Michelet,  who  succeeded  Guizot  in  the  chair  of  his-
tory, in  the  publication  of  his  "  History  of  France."
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1835,  and  for  ten
years  resided  in  the  family  of  Signor  Maroncelli,
the  intimate  friend  of  the  revolutionist  Silvio  1'cl-
lico,  where  he  imbibed  an  ardent  love  for  rnusitr
and  Italian  literature.  While  attending  medical
lectures  at  the  University  of  New  York,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1845,  he  became  associated
with  several  eminent  homoeopathic  practition-
ers, and  soon  after  his  graduation  he  began  to
translate  some  of  the  more  important  works  re-
lating to  homoeopathy.  He  was  appointed  to  the
chair  of  materia  medica  and  therapeutics  in  the
Hahnemann  medical  college  of  Philadelphia  in
1857,  and  afterward  removed  to  Grand  Rapids,
Mich.,  where  he  engaged  in  a  large  practice.  His
health  failing,  he  went  abroad ;  but  the  change  was
not  beneficial,  and  he  returned  to  Grand  Rapids,
where  he  died.  Dr.  Hempel  was  one  of  the  earliest
honorary  members  of  the  British  homoeopathic  so-
ciety, and  was  the  recipient  of  diplomas  and  certi-
ficates of  membership  from  many  medical  colleges
and  associations.  He  wrote  a  work  on  the  "  Life
of  Christ "  in  the  German  language,  another  on
"  The  True  Organization  of  the  New  Church,"  also
a  "  New  Grammar  of  the  German  Language."  lie
published  numerous  translations,  including  Hahne-
mann's  "Chronic  Diseases"  (5  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1846) ;  Hartmann's  "  Acute  and  Chronic  Diseases  B
(4  vols.,  1849) ;  Jahr's  "  Mental  Diseases  and  their
Homoeopathic  Treatment "  (1853) ;  and  "  Diseases
of  Women  and  Children"  (1853);  and  was  the  au-,
thor  of  "Christendom  and  Civilization"  (1840);
a  "  System  of  Materia  Medica  and  Therapeutics,"
his  chief  work  (1859) ;  "  Homoeopathic  Theory  and
Practice  in  Surgical  Disease,"  with  Mr.  J.  Beakly
(1865) ;  and  "  The  Science  of  Homoeopathy  "  (1874).

HEMPHILL,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Chester  dis-
trict, S.  C,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  4  Jan.,
1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in
1825,  settled  at  Sumter,  and  edited  a  nullification
paper  in  1832-'3.  He  then  removed  to  Texas,  and
for  many  years  was  chief  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  that  state.  In  1858  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator,  serving  from  1859  till  his  resignation  and
subsequent  expulsion  on  6  July,  1861.  Judge
Hemphill  was  one  of  the  fourteen  senators  who  on
6  Jan.,  1861,  met  in  caucus  and  adopted  the  reso-
lutions recommending  to  their  states  immediate
secession,  "  a  general  convention  to  be  holden  in
Montgomery,  Ala."  In  February,  1861,  he  was
deputy  to  the  Confederate  provisional  congress.

HEMPHILL,  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  Delaware
county,  Pa.,  in  1770;  died  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2!)
May,  1842.  He  received  an  academic  education,
studied  law,  and  began  to  practise  in  Chester  coun-
ty. He  was  an  active  Federalist,  and  in  1800  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  one  term,  and  distin-
guishing himself  by  a  speech  on  the  judiciary  bill
in  1801.  In  1803  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  was
appointed  the  first  president  judge  of  that  city  and
county,  and  served  again  in  congress  from  H  Deoj
1819,  till  1826,  when  he  resigned.  In  1829  he  was
again  elected  as  a  Jackson  Democrat,  and  served
one  term.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of
representatives  in  1831-'2.

HENCK,  John  Benjamin,  civil  engineer.  1>.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  October,  1816.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1840,  and  became  professor  <>f
Latin  and  Greek  in  Baltimore  college.  In  1842  he
was  called  to  a  similar  chair  in  the  Germantown
academy,  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  until
1847. lie  then  turned  his  attention  to  civil  en-


HEXDEE


HENDERSON


163


gineering,  studying  in  the  office  of  Felton  and
Parker,  Charlestown,  Mass.,  and  in  1848-'9  had
charge  of  the  building  of  a  railroad  from  Charles-
town,  N.  H.,  to  Windsor,  Vt.  In  1849  he  was  in
charge  of  the  construction  of  the  Harvard  branch
railroad  near  Boston,  after  which  he  established
an  office  in  Boston,  and  was  frequently  called
upon  as  an  expert  to  decide  on  the  work  of
others.  Later  he  had  charge  of  the  laying  out
and  filling  up  of  new  lands  of  the  state  of  Mas-
sachusetts and  Boston  water-power  company,  now
known  as  the  Back-bay  district  in  Boston.  In
1805  he  became  professor  of  civil  engineering
in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology,  where
he  remained  until  1881.  But  meanwhile  he  con-
tinued his  oversight  of  the  laying  out  of  streets
and  lots  in  the  back  bay.  He  wrote  numerous  po-
ems, mathematical  papers,  and  a  "  Field-Book  for
Railwav  Engineers  "  (New  York,  1860).

HENDEE,  Mrs.,  heroine,  b.  in  1754.  When  the
Indians  burned  Royal  ton,  Vt.,  in  1776,  her  husband,
Joshua  Hendee,  was  absent  in  a  Vermont  regiment,
and  she  was  at  work  in  an  adjacent  field.  The
Indians  entered  her  house,  seized  her  children,
and  carried  them  across  White  river,  where  it
was  a  hundred  yards  wide  and  too  deep  for  ford-
ing. Mrs.  Hendee  dashed  into  the  river,  swam
and  waded  through,  and,  entering  the  camp,  regard-
less of  the  tomahawks  that  were  flourished  about
her  head,  demanded  her  children's  release,  and  per-
severed until  her  request  was  granted.  She  carried
them  across  the  stream,  landed  them  in  safety  on
the  other  bank,  and,  returning  three  times  in  suc-
cession, procured  the  release  of  fifteen  children  be-
longing to  her  neighbors.  On  her  final  return  to
the  camp  the  Indians  were  so  struck  with  her
courage  that  one  of  them  declared  that  so  brave  a
squaw  deserved  to  be  carried  across  the  stream,
and  taking  her  on  his  back  swam  with  her  to  the
place  where  the  rescued  children  were  awaiting  her
return. She  was  twenty-two  years  old  when  she

Serformed  this  feat,  and  in  1818  she  was  living  in
haron,  Vt.,  with  her  third  husband,  whose  name
was  Mosher.  It  is  thought  that  she  removed  to
one  of  the  western  states  about  1820.

HENDEL,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  the  Pa-
latinate, Germany,  about  1730;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  29  Sept.,  1798.  After  completing  his  theologi-
cal studies,  he  removed  to  the  United  States  in
1764  and  became  one  of  the  pioneers  of  the  Ger-
man Reformed  church  in  this  country.  Between
1769  and  1782  he  was  pastor  of  nine  congregations
at  one  time  in  the  neighborhood  of  Lancaster,  Pa.,
besides  making  several  missionary  tours.  In  1794
he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  and  during  the  vellow-
fever  epidemic  of  1798  died  of  that  disease.  Prince-
ton gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1788.
HENDERSON,  Archibald,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-

5inia  in  1785 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  6  Jan.,
859.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant  of  marines,  4
June,  1806;  captain  in  April,  1811  ;  brevet  major
in  1814;  lieutenant-colonel,  17  Oct.,  1820;  and
colonel,  1  July,  1834.  During  the  Florida  war  he
commanded  a  battery  of  marines,  was  engaged  in
the  skirmish  on  the  Hatcheluskee,  27  Jan.,  1837,
and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  gallant
and  meritorious  service  while  in  command  of  the
marines  in  Florida,  Alabama,  and  in  Tennessee,
against  the  hostile  Indians.  27  Jan.,  1837.

HENDERSON,  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1681 ;  d.  in  Queen  Anne  parish,  Md.,  27
Aug.,  1751.  Having  been  admitted  to  holy  orders
by  the  Bishop  of  London  in  1710,  he  was  appointed
to  a  mission  at  Dover,  Kent  co.,  Delaware,  came  to
the  United  States,  and  was  involved  in  an  ecclesi-


astical dispute  with  Gov.  Robert  Hunter,  of  Dela-
ware. He  returned  to  England  in  1711,  and  in
1712  was  appointed  to  the  first  Episcopal  mission
on  the  western  shore  of  Maryland,  in  Queen  Anne
parish,  Prince  George  co.,  and  marrying  the
widow  of  a  wealthy  jurist  and  planter,  Gabriel
Duval,  built  a  chapel  near  their  residence.  In  1716
he  was  appointed  by  the  Bishop  of  London  com-
missary of  the  Church  of  England  on  the  western
shore  of  Maryland.  In  1717  he  became  rector  of
the  parish  of  St.  Anne,  and  in  1729  was  commissary
of  the  entire  colony.  He  visited  England  in  1737,
was  elected  the  first  colonial  member  of  the  Society
for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel,  and  obtained
liberal  donations  in  its  interests.  He  bequeathed
all  his  property  to  this  society.

HENDERSON,  James  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.
in  Stoke,  Devonshire,  England,  in  February,  1821.
He  came  to  Canada  in  1835,  and  completed  his
educational  course  at  Upper  Canada  college.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ontario  in  1843,  and
has  practised  at  Kingston  ever  since.  He  first
entered  into  a  partnership  with  the  late  Sir  Henry
Smith,  which  continued  until  the  death  of  the  lat-
ter in  1868,  and  has  been  a  master  in  chancery
since  1851.  He  was  appointed  chancellor  of  the
diocese  of  Ontario  in  1862,  and  is  a  member  of  the
council  of  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  which,  in  1863,
conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.

HENDERSON,  John,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in  a
northern  state  in  1795  ;  d.  in  Pass  Christian,  Miss.,
in  1857.  He  removed  to  Mississippi  in  early  man-
hood, and  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Woodville,  •
Wilkinson  co.,  about  1820.  In  1835  he  served  in
the  state  legislature,  and  was  the  author  of  the
resolutions  impeaching  the  validity  of  the  laws,  that
admitted  members  to  the  legislature  from  the
counties  that  had  been  newly  formed  out  of  Indian
cessions.  In  1849  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  W'hig.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term
he  allied  himself  with  the  politicians  of  the  extreme
southern  school,  favored  the  annexation  of  Texas,
the  conquest  of  Cuba  and  Mexico,  and  was  con-
nected wirh  Gen.  John  A.  Quitman  in  his  schemes
regarding  those  enterprises.  In  1851  he  was  ar-
rested with  Gen.  Quitman,  and  tried  before  the
U.  S.  district  court  at  New  Orleans  for  violating
the  neutrality  laws  of  1818  by  his  complicity  with
the  Lopez  expedition  against  Cuba.  He  was  ac-
quitted, but  afterward  retired  from  public  life.

HENDERSON,  John  Brooks,  senator,  b.  near
Danville,  Va.,  16  Nov.,  1826.  He  removed  with  his
parents  to  Missouri  in  1836.  spent  his  early  years
on  a  farm,  and  taught  while  receiving  his  educa-
tion. He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1848,  and  in  that  year  and  1856  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  originating  the  state  railroad  and
banking  laws  in  1857.  He  was  a  presidential  elector
in  1856  and  1860,  and  opposed  Pierce's  administra-
tion after  the  president's  message  on  the  Kansas
question.  Mr.  Henderson  was  a  delegate  to  the
Charleston  Democratic  convention  of  1860,  and  to
the  State  convention  of  1861  to  determine  whether
Missouri  should  secede.  In  June.  1861,  he  equipped
a  regiment  of  state  militia,  which  he  commanded  for
a  time.  On  the  expulsion  of  Trusten  Polk  from  the
U.  S.  Senate,  in  1862,  he  was  appointed  to  fill  the
vacancy,  and  in  1863  was  elected  for  the  full  term
ending  in  1869,  serving  as  chairman  on  the  commit-
tee on  Indian  affairs.  He  was  one  of  the  seven  Re-
publican senators  whose  votes  defeated  the  impeach-
ment of  Andrew  Johnson.  He  was  a  commissioner
to  treat  with  hostile  tribes  of  Indians  in  1867,  and
in  1875  was  appointed  assistant  U.  S.  district  at-
torney to  prosecute  men  that  were  accused  of  evad-


164


HENDERSON


HENDERSON


ing  the  revenue  laws,  but  reflected  on  President
Grant  in  one  of  his  arguments  and  was  removed
from  this  office.— His  wife,  Mary  Foote,  author,
b.  in  New  York  about  1835,  is  a  daughter  of  Judge
Elisha  Foote  (g.  v.).  She  was  married  to  Mr.  Hen-
derson in  Washington,  D.  C,  removed  with  him
to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  has  taken  a  wide  interest  in
woman's  suffrage,  serving  as  president  of  the  State
suffrage  association  in  1876.  In  that  year  she  or-
ganized in  St.  Louis  the  School  of  design,  or  In-
dustrial art-school,  and  in  1879  the  Woman's  ex-
change. From  1881  till  1885  she  studied  art  in
the  Washington  university,  St.  Louis.  She  has
published  "  Practical  Cooking  and  Dinner-Giving  "
(New  York,  1876),  and  "  Diet  for  the  Sick  "  (1885).

HENDERSON,  Matthew, missionary,  b.  in  Fife-
shire,  Scotland,  in  1736;  d.  in  Washington  county,
Pa.,  2  Oct.,  1795.  He  was  educated  at  Glasgow
university,  studied  theology  under  Rev.  Alexander
Moncrieff,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1756,  and  or-
dained in  1758.  Immediately  afterward  he  came
to  Pennsylvania  as  missionary  to  the  British  colo-
nies, and  settled  in  Oxford,  Lancaster  co.,  where  he
labored  for  twenty  years.  In  1782  he  removed  to
Washington  county,  and  became  pastor  of  the  As-
sociate Reformed  church  of  Chartiers  and  Buffalo,
being  the  only  clergyman  of  his  denomination  in
that  portion  of  Pennsylvania.  He  lived  in  a  rude
cabin,  and  preached  in  a  tent  in  winter  and  in  the
open  fields  in  summer,  but  his  ministry  was  attended
with  success  and  he  had  a  great  influence  over  his
parishioners.  Henderson  was  large  and  powerful.
On  one  occasion  while  travelling  to  a  distant  con-
gregation he  lodged  at  a  tavern  where  he  was
treated  with  much  rudeness  by  two  men.  He  en-
dured their  insults  with  so  much  patience  that  they
were  encouraged  finally  to  assault  him,  mistaking
his  mildness  for  timidity,  when  he  threw  off  his
black  coat,  and  with  the  exclamation,  "  Lie  there,
Rev.  Mr.  Henderson  !  and  now,  Matthew,  defend
yourself,"  he  seized  one  of  the  men,  dashed  him
through  the  open  window,  and  was  preparing  to
send  the  other  after  him,  when  the  second  ruffian
escaped.  Mr.  Henderson  was  killed  by  the  fall  of
a  tree,  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  of  his  ministry.

HENDERSON,  Peter,  gardener,  b.  in  Pathhead,
near  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  25  June,  1823 ;  d.  in  Jer-
sey City  Heights,  N.  J.,  17  Jan.,  1890.  He  studied
botany  while  serving  an  apprenticeship  as  a  gar-
dener, and  in  1840  obtained  the  medal  given  by  the
experimental  gardeners  of  Edinburgh  for  the  best
collection  of  dried  specimens  of  plants.  He  after-
ward came  to  the  United  States,  engaged  in  green-
house horticulture  in  Jersey  City,  also  as  seedsman
in  New  York,  and  his  business  in  both  departments
is  now  the  largest  in  the  United  States.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Gardening  for  Profit,"  which  has
attained  a  sale  of  over  100,000  copies  (New  York,
1866) ;  "  Practical  Floriculture  "  (1868) ;  "  Garden-
ing for  Pleasure  "  (1875) ;  "  Henderson's  Handbook
of  Plants  "  (1881) ;  "  Garden  and  Farm  Topics  "
$1884) ;  and  "  How  the  Farm  Pays  "  (1884).

HENDERSON,  Richard,  pioneer,  b.  in  Han-
over county,  Va.,  in  1734;  d.  in  Hillsborough,
Granville  co.,  N.  C,  30  Jan.,  1785.  His  parents
were  poor,  and  he  had  grown  to  manhood  before
he  learned  to  read  or  write.  While  yet  a  young
man  he  was  appointed  to  be  constable,  and  was  sub-
sequently made  under-sheriff.  He  removed  to
North  Carolina  in  1762,  and,  having  devoted  his
leisure  time  to  the  perusal  of  such  law-books  as
fell  in  his  way,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1769
he  was  appointed  associate  judge  of  the  superior
court.  In  September,  1770,  the  populace,  which
had  been  aroused  by  the  unjust  system  of  taxation,


enforced  by  the  loyal  governor,  Tryon,  arose,  and,
armed  with  cudgels  and  cow-skin  whips,  broke  into
the  court  over  which  Judge  Henderson  was  presid-
ing, attempted  to  strike  him,  and  forced  him  to
leave  the  bench.  When  independence  was  declared,
in  1775,  and  the  state  government  organized  in
North  Carolina,  he  was  re-elected  judge,  but  de-
clined to  accept,  as  he  had  become  interested  in  an
extensive  scheme  for  the  acquirement  of  land.  He
had  previously  been  involved  in  unsuccessful  specu-
lations, and,  in  the  hope  of  retrieving  his  fortunes,
formed  the  "  Transylvania  land  company,"  and  suc-
ceeded in  1775  in  negotiating  with  the  chiefs  of
the  Cherokee  nation  a  treaty  known  as  the  "  Treaty
of  Watoga,"  by  which  all  that  tract  of  land  lying
between  the  Cumberland  river,  the  Cumberland
mountains,  and  the  Kentucky  river,  and  situated
south  of  the  Ohio,  was  transferred  for  a  reasonable
consideration  to  the  company.  By  this  treaty
Henderson  and  his  associates  became  the  propria
tors  of  an  extent  of  territory  comprising  more  than
half  the  present  state  of  Kentucky.  A  government
was  at  once  organized,  of  which  Henderson  was
made  president,  with  its  capital  at  Boonesborough.
The  new  country  was  named  Transylvania.  The
first  legislature  held  its  session  under  a  large  elm-
tree,  near  the  walls  of  a  fort.  Among  the  eighteen
members  were  Daniel  Boone,  Richard  Calloway,
Thomas  Slaughter,  John  Floyd,  and  James  Harrod.
By  a  compact  between  the  proprietors  and  the
colonists,  a  liberal  administration  was  established
features  of  which  were  an  annual  election  of  dele-
gates, and  entire  freedom  of  opinion  in  matters  of
religion.  The  appointment  of  the  judges  was  to
be  in  the  hands  of  the  proprietors,  but  the  former
were  to  be  answerable  to  the  people  for  malfeasance
in  office.  The  sole  power  to  raise  and  appropriate
moneys  was  given  to  a  popular  convention.  Hen-
derson's purchase  from  the  Indians  was  subse-
quently annulled  by  the  state  of  Virginia,  as  an
infringement  of  its  chartered  rights.  But  to  com-
pensate the  proprietors  for  settling  the  wilderness,
the  legislature  granted  them  a  tract  of  land  twelve
miles  square  on  the  Ohio,  below  the  mouth  of
Greene  river.  In  1779  Judge  Henderson  was  ap-
pointed with  five  other  commissioners  to  run  t  ho
line  between  Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  into
Powell's  valley.  The  same  year  he  removed  to.
Tennessee,  practised  law  at  Nashville,  and  return-
ing to  North  Carolina,  in  1780,  settled  on  his  large
plantation  and  engaged  in  farming.  A  town,  a
village,  and  a  county  are  named  in  his  honor. — His
brother,  Pleasant,  soldier,  b.  in  Hanover  county,
Va.,  9  Jan.,  1756:  d.  in  Huntington,  Tenn.,  10
Dec,  1842,  studied  law  with  his  brother  Richard,
entered  the  Revolutionary  army  in  1775,  and  at
the  close  of  the  war  was  major  of  Col.  Malmedy's
mounted  corps.  In  1789  he  succeeded  John  Hay-
wood as  clerk  of  the  house  of  commons  of  North
Carolina,  holding  office  continuously  for  forty  years.
In  1831  he  removed  to  Tennessee. — Richard's  sou,
Archibald,  lawyer,  b.  in  Granville  countv.  N.  (''.,
in  1768 :  d.  in  Salisbury,  N.  C,  1  Oct.,  1822.  was
educated  at  Granville  county  academy,  and  settled
in  the  practice  of  law  at  Salisbury.  From  1 709
till  1803  he  was  a  member  of  congress,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Federalist,  but  supported  Thomas  Jef-
ferson for  the  presidency  in  1800.  In  1807-20  he
served  in  the  North  Carolina  house  of  commons.
He  was  the  acknowledged  head  of  the  bar  in
northwestern  North  Carolina,  and  distinguished
throughout  the  state  as  an  advocate.  —  Another
son,  Leonard,  jurist,  b.  in  Granville  county,  N.  C,
6  Oct.,  1772 ;  d.  near  Williamsborough,  N*.  C,  13
Aug.,  1833,  was  educated  in  the  county  schools,


HENDERSON


HENDRICKEN


165


studied  law  in  Hillsborough,  and  after  his  admis-
sion to  the  bar  was  for  several  years  clerk  of  the
district  court  of  Hillsborough.  He  became  judge
of  the  appellate  court  in  1808,  was  elevated  to  the
supreme  bench  in  1818,  and  appointed  chief  justice
in  1829.  His  law-school,  which  he  conducted
throughout  his  judicial  career,  was  the  most  popu-
lar in  the  state. — Leonard's  nephew,  James  Pinck-
ney,  statesman,  b.  in  Lincoln  county,  N.  C,  31
March,  1808;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  4  June,
1858,  was  educated  in  Lincolnton,  N.  C,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829.  He  re-
moved to  Mississippi  in  1835,  remained  there  till
the  Texas  difficulties  began,  and,  volunteering  in
the  Texan  army,  was  appointed  brigadier-general
in  1836.  On  the  disbanding  of  the  troops  he  was
appointed  by  President  Samuel  Houston  attorney-
general,  was  subsequently  secretary  of  state  in
1837-9,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  this  year  visited
England  and  France  to  procure  the  recognition  of
Texan  independence.  Resuming  his  practice  in
1840,  he  entered  into  partnership  with  Gen.  Thomas
J.  Rusk,  at  San  Antonio.  He  was  special  minister
to  the  United  States  in  1844,  to  negotiate  the  an-
nexation of  the  republic,  and  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1845.  He  was
elected  governor  of  Texas  in  1846,  and,  in  response
to  the  call  for  volunteers,  took  command  of  the
Texas  corps,  was  distinguished  at  Monterey,  and
received  the  thanks  of  congress  and  a  sword  for
bravery  in  action.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
senator  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,  to  fill  the  un-
expired term  of  his  partner,  Thomas  J.  Rusk,  who
had  just  died.  Henderson  took  his  seat  in  March,
1858,  but  died  before  the  conclusion  of  the  session.

HENDERSON,  Robert  Miller,  lawyer,  b.  near
Carlisle,  Pa.,  11  March,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college,  Pa.,  in  1845.  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Carlisle  in  1847,  and  served  in  the  legis-
lature in  1851-3.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  Union  army  as  captain  in  the
86th  Pennsylvania  reserves,  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  volunteers  in  1862,  was  provost-
marshal  of  Cumberland  county,  Pa.,  in  1863,  and
in  1865  was  brevetted  colonel  and  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  for  services  during  the  war.  In  1872
he  became  law  judge  of  the  12th  judicial  district
of  Pennsylvania,  served  ten  years,  and  was  elected
president  judge  of  the  same  district  in  1882.  He
has  since  resigned,  and  returned  to  practice.

HENDERSON,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Free-
hold, N.  J.,  in  1743  ;  d.  there,  15  Dec,  1824.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1761,  studied  medi-
cine under  Dr.  Nathaniel  Scudder,  and  in  1766  be-
came a  member  of  the  New  Jersey  medical  society.
He  was  appointed  2d  major  in  Col.  Stewart's  bat-
talion of  minute-men,  15  Feb.,  1776 ;  on  14  June,
1776,  major  of  Col.  Heard's  battalion  ;  and  subse-
quently became  lieutenant-colonel  of  Col.  Forman's
battalion  in  Heard's  brigade.  At  the  battle  of
Monmouth  he  was  a  brigade-major,  and  was  a
very  valuable  man  on  the  field.  He  was  the  "  soli-
tary horseman  "  that  rode  up  to  Gen.  Washington,
while  the  latter  was  standing  beside  his  horse  at
Freehold  Court-House,  and  informed  him  of  the
retreat  of  Gen.  Charles  Lee.  In  1777  Dr.  Hender-
son was  appointed  a  member  of  the  provincial
council.  In  1794  he  was  vice-president  of  the
council  of  New  Jersey,  and  acting  governor  of  that
state  at  the  time  of  Shays's  insurrection,  while  Gov.
Howell  was  absent  in  Pennsylvania  with  some  New
Jersey  troops.  After  the  adoption  of  the  Federal
constitution  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  served
under  Washington's  administration.  Although  Dr.
Henderson  never  relinquished  the  duties  of  his  pro-


fession, he  was  kept  continually  in  the  public  ser-
vice, and  after  his  retirement  from  congress  was  by
turns  surrogate,  member  of  the  legislature,  judge
of  common  pleas,  and  commissioner  to  settle  bound-
aries between  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania.

HENDERSON,  Thomas  Jefferson,  congress-
man, b.  in  Brownsville,  Tenn.,  29  Nov.,  1824.  He
was  educated  in  the  common  schools  of  his  native
town,  removed  to  Illinois,  and  spent  one  term  at
the  University  of  Iowa.  He  was  clerk  of  the  Starr
county,  111.,  commissioner's  court  in  1847-'9,  and
from  1849  till  1853  clerk  of  the  Starr  county  court.
In  1855-'60  he  was  in  the  legislature,  and,  joining
the  National  army  in  1862,  as  colonel  of  the  112th
regiment  of  Illinois  volunteers,  served  till  the  close
of  the  war.  In  1865  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  for  services  during  the  rebel-
lion. In  1871  he  became  collector  of  internal  reve-
nue for  the  5th  district  of  Illinois.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican  in  1874,  and  has  since
served  by  successive  re-elections.

HENDRICK,  Mohawk  chief,  b.  about  1680 ;  d.
near  Fort  George,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1755.  'His  home
was  at  the  Upper  Castle,  on  the  Mohawk  river.  At
an  early  age  he  cast
his  lot,  with  most  of
the  Six  Nations,  on
the  side  of  the  Brit-
ish, whom  he  ever
served  with  courage
and  fidelity.  In  1751
he  was  consulted  by
the  commissioners  of
Massachusetts  on  the
project  of  removing
the  Mohawks  to  Stock-
bridge,  to  be  instruct-
ed and  domesticated,
and  in  June,  1754,  at-
tended the  congress,
at  Albany,  that  was

called  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  treaty  with
the  Six  Nations.  At  this  meeting  Lieut.-Gov.
James  De  Lancey  made  an  address  to  the  sachems
on  pending  military  affairs,  to  which  Hendrick  re-
plied with  earnestness  and  eloquence.  He  accused
the  British  generals  altogether  of  over-cautious
tardiness  and  a  lack  of  military  spirit.  In  1755  he
joined  the  army  of  Sir  William  Johnson,  with  a
body  of  several  hundred  Indian  warriors,  and
marched  against  the  French  forces  under  Baron
Dieskau.  At  Rocky  Point  a  detachment  of  1,200
British  and  Indians,  led  by  Col.  Williams  and  him-
self, fell  into  an  ambuscade,  and  in  the  action  both
leaders  were  slain.  Several  years  before  his  death
Hendrick  induced  the  tribes  to  transfer  to  Sir
William  Johnson  about  100,000  acres  of  choice
land  for  a  nominal  consideration.  When  he  was
in  battle  this  chief  usually  wore  the  uniform  of  a
British  officer,  and  sometimes  a  veil  also,  as  seen
in  the  accompanying  portrait.

HENDRICKEN,  Thomas  Francis,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  5  May,  1827 ;  d.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  11  June,  1886.  He  was  educated  at
St.  Kyran's  college,  Kilkenny,  and  in  the  Royal
college  of  Maynooth,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1853,  and  ordained  by  Bishop  O'Reilly,  of  Hartford,
Conn.,  who  was  then  visiting  Ireland,  and  who  sub-
sequently invited  the  young  priest  to  come  to  the
United  States.  He  sailed  for  America  in  1853,  and
on  the  voyage  some  of  the  steerage  passengers  were
attacked  with  a  fatal  sickness.  To  prevent  con-
tagion, all  were  forbidden  to  approach  the  pesti-
lential part  of  the  ship ;  but  Father  Hendricken
disregarded  the  order,  and  offered  his  services  to


166


HENDRICKS


HENKEL


the  dying.  The  captain,  in  a  fury,  directed  him  to
be  pinioned  and  thrown  overboard ;  but,  through
the  interference  of  the  passengers,  his  life  was
spared.  In  1854  he  was  settled  as  pastor  at  Win-
sted,  Conn.,  and  in  1855  he  was  removed  to  Water-
bury,  where  he  ministered  seventeen  years,  build-
ing the  costly  Gothic  church  of  the  Immaculate
Conception,  a  school-house  and  pastoral  residence,
purchasing  and  laying  out  a  beautiful  cemetery,
and  founding  a  convent.  On  his  arrival  in  Water-
bury  he  opened  a  free  school  for  children  of  every
denomination,  and  afterward  was  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  education,  and  took  an  interest
in  all  its  movements.  In  1868  he  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Pius  IX.  In  1872  the  diocese
of  Hartford  was  divided,  and  part  of  it  was  erected
into  the  see  of  Providence.  Dr.  Hendricken  was
appointed  first  bishop  of  the  new  diocese,  and  con-
secrated on  28  April  by  Cardinal  McCloskey.  Al-
though he  was  a  constant  sufferer  from  asthma  and
catarrh,  he  devoted  himself  with  energy  to  his  new
duties,  and  in  a  few  months  had  removed  the  heavy
debt  resting  on  the  cathedral  church,  and  built  an
episcopal  residence.  In  1878  he  laid  the  founda-
tion of  a  new  cathedral,  which  he  completed  be-
fore his  death,  and  which  is  considered  by  many
the  finest  ecclesiastical  structure  on  the  western
continent.  During  the  twenty-four  years  of  his
ministry  he  purchased  and  paid  for  estates  valued
at  over  a  million  dollars,  and  since  his  consecration
as  bishop  the  number  of  priests  and  parishes  of  the
diocese  has  been  doubled.

HENDRICKS,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  West-
moreland county,  Pa.,  in  1783  ;  d.  in  Madison,  Ind.,
16  May,  1850.  His  father  was  a  pioneer  settler  of
Westmoreland  county,  Pa.,  and  a  member  of  the
legislature  of  that  state.  The  son  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  and  removed  to  Indiana  in
1814,  being  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  the  town  of
Madison.  He  was  chosen  secretary  of  the  first
State  constitutional  convention,  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat  on  the  admission  of  the  state,
and  was  three  times  re-elected,  sitting  as  the  sole
representative  from  Wisconsin  from  12  Dec,  1816,
till  1822,  when  he  resigned,  having  been  elected
governor  of  Indiana.  He  was  elected  a  senator  in
congress  for  the  term  beginning  5  Dec,  1825,  and
was  re-elected  for  the  succeeding  term,  serving  till
3  March,  1837.  In  the  senate  he  served  as  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  roads  and  canals. — His
nephew,  Thomas  Andrews,  vice-president  of  the
United  States,  b.  near  Zanesville,  Ohio,  7  Sept.,  1819 ;

d.  in  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  25  Nov.,  1885,
was  the  son  of  John
Hendricks,  who,  six
months  after  the
birth  of  his  son,  re-
moved to  Madison,
Ind.,  then  the  resi-
dence of  his  broth-
er William.  John
Hendricks  was  ap-

Sointed  by  Presi-
ent  Jackson  a  dep-
uty surveyor  of  pub-
lic lands,  and  long
served  in  that  capa-
city. In  1832  he  lo-
cated a  homestead
on  the  site  of  the

S resent  town  of  Shelbyville.  Here  Thomas  A.
lendricks  passed  his  boyhood  till  he  entered  South
Hanover  college,  Ind.,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1841. He  then  went  to  Chambersburg,  Pa.,  stud-


«/*  t/v.  A^^.c^i <s£\-s)


ied  law  in  the  office  of  his  uncle,  Judge  Thom-
son, was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843,  and  re-
turned to  Shelbyville  to  practise.  He  attained
an  immediate  success  in  his  profession.  In  1845
he  married  Eliza  C.  Morgan.  In  the  same  year
he  was  sent  to  the  legislature,  where  he  served
one  term,  but  would  not  accept  a  re-election.  In
1851  he  was  elected,  without  opposition,  a  member
of  the  convention  to  revise  and  amend  the  consti-
tution of  Indiana.  In  1850,  and  again  in  1852,  he
was  elected  a  member  of  congress  as  a  Democrat.
At  the  close  of  his  second  term  he  intended  to  re-
turn to  his  law  practice,  but  President  Pierce  ap-
pointed him  commissioner  of  the  general  land-
office,  and  he  served  in  that  capacity  for  four
years.  In  1860  he  was  nominated  as  Democratic
candidate  for  the  governorship  of  Indiana,  but  was
defeated  by  Henry  S.  Lane.  In  the  same  year  Mr.
Hendricks  removed  from  Shelbyville  to  Indian-
apolis. From  1863  till  1869  Mr.  Hendricks  wu  a
member  of  the  U.  S.  senate  from  Indiana,  and  was
one  of  the  leaders  on  the  Democratic  side,  serving
on  the  committees  on  claims,  the  judiciary,  public
lands,  and  naval  affairs.  He  strongly  combated
the  Republican  plan  of  reconstruction,  and  opposed
the  amendments  to  the  constitution  as  being  hasty.
In  1864  he  advocated  and  voted  for  large  appropri-
ations to  bring  the  war  to  a  close,  and  spoke  elo-
quently in  favor  of  increasing  the  pay  of  the  sol-
diers fifty  per  cent.,  because  of  the  depreciation  of
the  currency.  In  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tion of  1868,  in  New  York,  on  the  twenty-first  bal-
lot, he  received  132  votes  as  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency, standing  next  to  Gen.  Hancock,  who  re-
ceived 135^ ;  but  on  the  final  ballot  Horatio  Sey-
mour was  nominated.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year
he  was  again  a  candidate  for  the  governorship  of
Indiana,  but  was  defeated  by  the  Republican  can-
didate, Conrad  Baker,  who  afterward  became  his
law  partner.  At  the  close  of  his  senatorial  term  he
returned  to  Indianapolis,  and  resumed  the  practice
of  his  profession.  In  1872  he  was  elected  governor
of  Indiana,  defeating  Thomas  M.  Brown.  In  July,
1874,  he  was  permanent  chairman  of  the  State
Democratic  convention  at  Indianapolis.  In  the
National  Democratic  convention  at  St.  Louis  in
June,  1876,  he  received  133£  votes  for  the  presiden-
tial nomination,  and,  when  Samuel  J.  Tilden  was
nominated,  he  received  730  out  of  738  votes  as  can-
didate for  the  vice-presidency.  He  was  a  member
of  the  National  Democratic  convention  at  Chicago
in  July,  1884,  and  in  behalf  of  the  Indiana  delega-
tion nominated  Joseph  E.  McDonald,  of  that  state,
for  the  presidency.  After  the  nomination  of  Grover
Cleveland,  William  A.  Wallace,  of  Pennsylvania,
nominated  Thomas  A.  Hendricks  for  the  vice-presi-
dency, and  his  nomination  was  unanimously  ap-
proved by  the  convention.

HENING,  William  Waller,  legal  writer,  d.  in
Virginia  in  1828.  He  was  clerk  of  the  court  of
chancery  for  the  Richmond  district.  He  compiled
a  valuable  legislative  history  entitled  "The  Stat-
utes of  Virginia,  1619-1792  "  (Richmond,  1809-'23),
and  published  also  "The  American  Pleader  and
Lawyer's  Guide"  (New  York,  1811);  a  collection
of  the  legal  maxims  of  Noy,  Branch,  and  Francis
(1824;  new  ed.,  Philadelphia.  1844);  "The  New
Virginia  Justice"  (4th  ed.,  1825);  and,  in  conjunc-
tion with  William  Munford,  "  Reports  of  Cases  in
the  Courts  of  Appeals  and  Chancery "  (Flatbush
and  New  York,  1809-'ll).

HENKEL,  Paul,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rowan
county,  N.  C,  15  Dec,  1754;  d.  in  New  Market,
Va.,  17  Nov.,  1825.  His  ancestor,  Gerhardt,  a
court-preacher  in  Germany,  and  one  of  the  earliest


HENKLE


HENNEPIN


167


Lutheran  ministers  who  came  to  America,  settled
in  German  town,  Pa.,  about  1740.  Nearly'  all  the
male  descendants  have  been  Lutheran  clergymen.
Paul's  father  settled  in  North  Carolina,  but  in  1760
the  family  were  driven  by  the  Catawba  Indians  to
take  refuge  in  western  Virginia.  The  son  grew
up  an  expert  hunter,  and  familiar  with  Indian
warfare.  About  1776  he  listened  to  the  preaching
of  Whitefield,  and  determined  to  enter  the  minis-
try. After  receiving  a  brief  classical  and  theo-
logical training  from  the  Lutheran  clergyman  in
Fredericktown,  Md.,  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by
the  synod,  settled  at  New  Market,  Va.,  and  was
ordained  in  Philadelphia  on  6  June,  1792.  He  es-
tablished several  churches  in  the  vicinity  of  New
Market  and  in  Augusta  county,  Va.,  and  Rowan
county.  N.  C,  where  he  labored  subsequently.
While  in  North  Carolina  he  helped  to  form  the
synod  there.  In  1805  he  returned  to  New  Market,
and  made  missionary  tours  through  western  Vir-
ginia, Tennessee,  Kentucky,  Indiana,  and  Ohio.
He  was  a  fervent  speaker  and  writer,  both  in  Eng-
lish and  German,  and  a  man  of  earnest  convictions,
who  roused  much  opposition  by  his  insistence  on
the  conservation  of  the  original  confessions  and
rites  of  the  church.  He  published  a  work  in  Ger-
man on  "  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  "  (1809 ;
afterward  translated  into  English) ;  a  German
hymn-book  (1810),  and  one  in  the  English  lan-
guage (1816).  in  each  of  which  were  included  many
hymns  composed  by  himself.  He  also  issued  a
German  catechism  (1814),  followed  by  one  in  Eng-
lish, and  was  the  author  of  a  German  satirical
Seem  entitled  "  Zeitvertreib." — His  nephew.  Moses
[ontgomery,  clergvman,  b.  in  Pendleton  countv,
Va.,  23  March,  1798;'  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  in  1864,
became  an  itinerant  minister  of  the  M.  E.  church
in  Ohio  in  1819,  was  for  some  time  a  missionary  to
the  Wyandotte  Indians,  and  preached  in  that  state
and  in  Pennsylvania,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  and
Alabama.  He  established  a  religious  magazine,
and  associated  himself  in  1845  with  Dr.  McFerrin
in  the  editorship  of  the  "  Christian  Advocate  "  at
Nashville.  In  1847  he  established  the  "  Southern
Ladies'  Companion,"  which  he  conducted  for  eight
years.  He  taught  in  Philadelphia  and  other  places,
and  was  thus  engaged  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  during
"the  civil  war,  but  was  sent  within  the  Confederate
lines.  He  published,  among  other  books,  a  volume
of  "  Masonic  Addresses "  (1848) ;  "  The  Primary
Platform  of  Methodism"  (1851);  "Analysis  of
Church  Government "  (1852) ;  "  Life  of  Bishop  Bas-
com  "  (1853) ;  and  "  Primitive  Episcopacy  "  (1856).
HENKLE,  Eli  Jones,  physician,  b.  in  Balti-
more county,  Md.,  24  Nov.,  1828.  He  received  an
academic  education,  taught  three  years,  studied
medicine,  and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Maryland  in  1850.  He  practised  medicine  and
pursued  horticulture,  and  in  1863  was  elected  to
the  house  of  delegates.  The  following  year  he  was
a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention.
He  sat  in  the  state  senate  in  1867,  1868,  and  1870,
and  in  the  house  of  delegates  in  1871  and  1873.
In  1872  he  was  a  member  of  the  National  Demo-
cratic convention.  In  1873-'4  he  was  professor  of
anatomy,  physiology,  and  natural  history  in  the
Maryland  agricultural  college.  In  1874*  he  was
elected  to  the  National  house  of  representatives,
and  was  returned  in  the  two  succeeding  elections,
serving  from  1  Dec,  1875,  to  3  March,  1881.

HENLEY,  David,  Revolutionary  soldier,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1748 ;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  1  Jan.,  1823.  He  was  appointed  brigade-
major  to  Gen.  Heath  on  15  Aug.,  1775,  and  on  8
•Jan.,  1776,  crossed  from  Cobble  hill  and  set  fire  to


houses  in  Charlestown  that  were  occupied  by  Brit-
ish soldiers.  He  was  made  deputy  adjutant-gen-
eral on  6  Sept.,  1776,  and  commissioned  colonel  of
a  Massachusetts  regiment  on  1  Jan..  1777.  He  was
in  command  at  Cambridge  when  the  troops  that
had  been  captured  at  Saratoga  were  brought
thither.  Gen.  Burgoyne  brought  charges  of  cru-
elty against  him  for  his  treatment  of  the  British
prisoners,  but  he  was  exonerated  by  a  court-mar-
tial. After  the  war  he  held  various  posts  under
the  government,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
a  clerk  in  the  war  department. — His  brother,
Thomas,  b.  in  Charlestown,  Mass. ;  d.  on  Ran-
dall's island,  N.  Y.,  24  Sept.,  1776,  also  held  the
rank  of  major,  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Heath,  and  was  accounted  one  of  the  best  officers
in  the  army.  He  lost  his  life  in  an  attempt  to  re-
capture from  the  British  Randall's,  then  called
Montressor's,  island,  on  which,  with  Col.  Jackson,
he  made  a  descent  in  flat-boats.  He  led  the  as-
sault, fell  at  the  head  of  his  men,  and  was  buried
in  Trinity  church-yard.

HENLEY,  John  Dandridge,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  25  Feb.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Havana,
Cuba,  23  May,  1835.  He  was  appointed  a  mid-
shipman by  President  Washington,  who  was  his
maternal  uncle  by  marriage,  on  14  Oct.,  1799,  and
was  made  a  lieutenant  on  3  Jan.,  1807,  and  a  com-
mander on  24  July,  1813.  At  the  battle  of  New
Orleans  he  commanded  the  schooner  "  Carolina,"
and  won  the  approbation  of  Gen.  Jackson  for  the
part  that  he  contributed  toward  the  victory  of  8
Jan.,  1815.  He  was  promoted  to  a  captaincy  on  5
March,  1817.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
commanding  the  West  India  squadron. — His  broth-
er, Robert,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,
5  Jan.,  1783 :  d.  on  Sullivan's  island,  S.  C,  7  Oct.,
1828.  entered  the  service  as  midshipman  on  8  April,
1799,  served  under  Truxton  in  the  engagement
with  the  French  vessel  "  La  Vengeance "  on  1
Feb.,  1800,  became  a  lieutenant  on  29  June,  1807,
and  a  commander  on  12  Aug.,  1814,  took  part  in
Macdonough's  victory  on  Lake  Champlain  in  Sep-
tember. 1814,  when  he  commanded  the  brig
"  Eagle."  and  was  promoted  captain  in  1825.

HENNEN,  Alfred,  lawver,  b.  at  Elk  Ridge,
Md.,  17  Oct..  1786;  d.  in  "New  Orleans,  La.,  19
Jan.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806,  set-
tled in  New  Orleans  in  1808,  and  attained  note  at
the  Louisiana  bar.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  Prot-
estants in  New  Orleans,  and  a  founder  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  that  community.  He  accumu-
lated the  largest  private  library  in  the  southwest,
in  the  departments  of  both  in  law  and  literature.
Several  times  he  was  offered  a  seat  on  the  bench,
but  declined.  For  many  years  previous  to  his
death  he  was  professor  of  common  and  constitu-
tional law  in  the  University  of  Louisiana.

HENNEPIN,  Louis,  explorer,  b.  in  Ath,  Bel-
gium, about  1640;  d.  in  Holland  after  1701.  He
entered  the  order  of  Recollets  of  St.  Francis,  and
his  fondness  for  travelling  led  him  to  Italy,  where
he  remained  several  years.  He  was  then  sent  to
preach  at  Halles,  in  Hainault.  and  afterward  passed
into  a  convent  in  Artois.  He  was  employed  by
his  brethren  to  solicit  alms  at  different  places,
among  others  in  Dunkirk  and  Calais,  where  the
stories  related  by  old  sailors  stimulated  his  desire
to  visit  distant  countries.  At  the  battle  of  Senef,
between  the  Prince  of  Conde  and  William  of  Or-
ange, he  was  present  as  regimental  chaplain,  and
in  1673  he  was  ordered  to  Canada.  After  preach-
ing at  Quebec  for  a  time,  he  went  in  1676  to  Fort
Frontenac,  where  he  founded  a  convent.  When
La  Salle  undertook  his  expedition  to  the  west,  he


168


HENNEPIN


HENNI


solicited  Recollet  fathers  as  chaplains  of  the  posts
that  he  intended  to  establish.  Among  those  as-
signed to  him  was  Father  Hennepin.  The  latter
accompanied  the  Sieur  de  la  Motte  in  a  brigantine,
reached  the  outlet  of  Niagara  river,  6  Dec,  1678,
and  chanted  a  Te  Deum  in  thanksgiving.  Leaving
the  vessel,  he  went  in  a  canoe  to  the  mountain-
ridge,  where  a  rock  still  bears  his  name,  and  after
ascending  the  heights  of  Lewiston  came  in  sight
of  the  cataract.  He  then  went  with  his  compan-
ions to  Chippewa  creek  in  search  of  land  suitable
for  a  colony,  and,  returning  the  next  morning,  was
the  first  to  offer  mass  on  the  Niagara.  He  then
began  the  erection  of  a  bark  house  and  chapel  at
the  Great  Rock  on  the  east  side,  where  La  Motte
was  building  Port  de  Conty.  He  then  travelled
through  the  great  lakes  as  far  as  Mackinaw,  where
he  arrived,  26  Aug.,  1679.  After  reaching  Peo-
ria, on  the  Illinois  river,  where  La  Salle  built
Fort  Crevecoeur,  Hennepin,  bv  his  orders,  set  out
with  two  men  in  a  canoe,  29  Feb.,  1680,  to  ascend
the  Mississippi  river.  He  descended  the  Illinois  to
its  mouth,  and,  after  sailing  up  the  Mississippi  till
11  April,  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  large  party  of
Sioux,  who  carried  him  and  his  companions  to
their  country.  Here  he  discovered  and  named  the
falls  of  St.  Anthony.  He  spent  eight  months
among  the  savages,  when  he  was  rescued  by  Dan-
iel Greysolon  du  Lhut  (q.  v.),  who  enabled  him  to
reach  Green  Bay  by  way  of  Wisconsin  river.  He
passed  the  winter  at  Mackinaw  and  returned
to  Quebec  5  April,  1682.  There  is  reason  to  sup-
pose that  before  this  time  he  was  invited  by  some
Roman  Catholics  in  Albany  to  become  their  pas-
tor. On  his  return  to  Europe  he  was  named  guar-
dian of  the  convent  of  Renty  in  Artois.  He  re-
fused to  return  to  this  country,  and,  having  had
several  quarrels  with  his  superiors,  withdrew  to
Holland  in  1697  with  their  permission.  Here  he
gained  protectors  at  the  court  of  William  III.  Al-
though he  abandoned  the  religious  dress  in  order
to  travel  in  Holland  without  exciting  attention,  he
did  not  renounce  his  vows,  and  always  signed  him-
self Recollet  missionary  and  notary  apostolic.  His
first  work  was  "  Description  de  la  Louisiane  nou-
vellement  decouverte  au  sud-ouest  de  la  Nouvelle
France,  avec  la  carte  du  pays,  les  moeurs  et  la  ma-
niere  de  vivre  des  sauvages  "  (Paris,  1685 :  Italian
translation,  Bologna,  1686 ;  German  translation,
Nuremberg,  1689 ;  English  translation,  by  John  G.
Shea,  New  York,  1880).  It  was  dedicated  to  Louis
XIV.,  and  contains  a  narrative  of  La  Salle's  first
expedition,  and  Hennepin's  own  exploration.  In  his
"Nouvelle  decouverte  d'un  tres-grand  pays  situe
dans  l'Amerique,  entre  le  Nouveau-Mexique  et  la
mer  Glaciale"  (Utrecht,  1697;  Amsterdam,  1698),
Hennepin  asserts  that  he  descended  to  the  mouth
of  the  Mississippi,  and  explains  that  he  did  not
treat  his  travels  with  sufficient  detail  in  the  first
volume,  because  he  did  not  wish  to  annoy  La  Salle
or  take  from  him  during  his  life  the  glory  of  dis-
covering the  Mississippi.  His  last  work  is  "  Nou-
veau  voyage  dans  un  pays  plus  grand  que  l'Europe,
entre  la  mer  Glaciale  et  le  Nouveau-Mexique,  de-
puis  1679  jusqu'en  1682,  avec  les  reflexions  sur  les
entreprises  du  sieur  La  Salle"'  (Utrecht,  1698).
Both  this  work  and  the  preceding  are  dedicated  to
William  III.  In  his  preface  he  replies  to  those
who  doubted  the  possibility  of  his  having  sailed
down  and  up  the  Mississippi  in  the  time  he  men-
tions. The  most  interesting  thing  in  the  books
of  this  missionary  is  his  picture  of  savage  life.
He  knew  the  Indians  well  and  paints  their  man-
ners vividly.  Hennepin's  story  of  his  voyage  down
the  Mississippi  obtained  general  credence,  notwith-


standing the  difficulty  of  reconciling  its  dates,  un-
til the  publication  of  Jared  Sparks's  "  Life  of  La
Salle,"  since  which  it  has  been  much  doubted.  A
"  Bibliographv  of  Hennepin's  Works "  has  been
published  bv  John  G.  Shea  (New  York,  1880).

HENNESSY,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1825.  He  began  his  labors  in  this  country
as  a  missionary  priest  in  the  diocese  of  St.  Louis,
and  was  pastor  of  churches  in  New  Madrid  and
Gravois  from  1850  till  1855,  when  he  became  pro-
fessor of  dogmatic  theology  and  holy  scripture  in
the  Roman  Catholic  theological  seminary  at  Caron-
delet,  Mo.,  and  two  years  afterward  was  appointed
superior  of  that  institution.  He  was  subsequently
attached  to  the  cathedral  in  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  and
in  1864  officiated  at  St.  Joseph's  church  there.  In
April,  1866,  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Dubuque,
Iowa.  Early  in  his  ministry  he  founded  the  Hos-
pital of  mercy  at  Davenport,  Iowa,  established  St.
Joseph's  college  there  in  1873,  and  the  same  year
was  instrumental  in  founding  St.  Malchy's  priory
at  Creston,  Union  co.,  the  first  English-speaking
community  of  Benedictines  in  the  United  States.
Bishop  Hennessy  was  one  of  the  fathers  of  the
third  plenary  council  of  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1884.

HENNESSY,  William  J.,  painter,  b.  in  Thom-
astown,  County  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  in  1839.  He
came  to  New  York  with  his  family  when  he  was
ten  years  old,  entered  the  National  academy  in
1856,  and  became  an  artist..  Since  1870  he  has  re-
sided in  London,  England,  but  has  spent  most  of
the  time  in  Normandy.  He  was  made  an  associate
of  the  National  academy  in  1862,  academician  in
1863,  and  has  been  a  member  of  the  New  York
artists'  fund  society  since  its  organization.  He
has  been  successful  as  an  illustrator,  and  his  paint-
ings in  oil  and  water-colors  include  "  On  the  Sands,"
"  Autumn :  the  New  England  Hills,"  "  An  Even-
ing on  the  Thames,"  "New  England  Barberry
Pickers,"  "  The  Votive  Offering,"  "  Normandy
Cider  Orchard "  (1880);  "Jocund  Spring"  (1881)";
"With  the  Birds"  (1883);  "'Twixt  Dav  and
Night "  (1884) ;  and  "  Flowers  of  May  "  (1885).

HENNI,  John  Martin,  archbishop,  b.  in  Ober-
sanzen,  Switzerland,  13  June,  1805 ;  d.  in  Milwau-
kee, Wis.,  7  Sept.,  1881.  After  studying  in  the
gymnasia  of  St.  Gall  and  Zurich,  he  went  to  Rome
in  1824,  where  in  1827  he  met  Bishop  Fen  wick,  of
Cincinnati.  At  the  request  of  that  prelate  he  volun-
teered for  the  United  States  mission,  and  immediate-
ly after  his  arrival  entered  the  seminary  at  Bards-
town,  Ky.,  to  complete  his  studies  for  the  priest-
hood. He  was  ordained,  2  Feb.,  1829,  and  ap-
pointed pastor  of  the  German  Catholics  of  Cincin-
nati, and  professor  in  the  Athenaeum  of  that  city.
He  was  soon  transferred  to  Canton,  Ohio,  but  in
1834  was  recalled  to  Cincinnati  and  made  pastor
of  Holy  Trinity  church  and  vicar-general  of  the
diocese.  In  1835  he  visited  Europe,  where  he  pub-
lished a  pamphlet  in  German,  describing  the  re-
ligious condition  of  southern  Ohio.  After  his  re-
turn in  1836  he  founded,  and  edited  for  some  time)
the  "  Wahrheits-Freund,"  the  first  German  Roman
Catholic  paper  published  in  the  United  States.
He  also  organized  the  St.  Aloysius's  orphans'  aid
society.  During  the  ten  years  when  he  resided  in
Cincinnati  he  was  a  leader  in  everything  that
tended  to  the  welfare  of  the  German  immigrants
who  were  beginning  to  come  in  large  numbers
into  the  west.  He  was  present  as  theologian  to
Bishop  Purcell  at  the  fifth  provincial  council  of
Baltimore  in  1843,  and  laid  before  that  body  a
plan  for  a  seminary  for  the  education  of  priests  to
minister  among  the  Germans.  The  council  peti-
tioned the  pope  to  create  a  new  diocese  at Mil-


HENNINGSEN


HENRIQUEZ


169


waukee,  and  recommended  Father  Henni  as  bishop,
on  account  of  the  large  German  immigration  to
Wisconsin.  He  was  accordingly  nominated  and
consecrated  bishop  by  Archbishop  Purcell,  19
March,  1844.  There  was  only  one  frame  church
in  Milwaukee  when  he  arrived  there.  For  the
8,000  Roman  Catholics  in  the  diocese  there  were
but  four  priests.  The  bishop  devoted  himself
energetically  to  remedy  this  state  of  things ;  in  less
than  three  years  he  had  increased  the  number  of
priests  to  thirty-four.  St.  Mary's  church  was
opened  in  1847,  and  in  the  same  year  he  began  the
erection  of  a  cathedral,  and  founded  a  hospital
which  he  placed  under  the  charge  of  the  Sisters  of
Charity. In  1848  he  went  to  Europe  to  visit  the

Eope,  and  also  travelled  through  Germany.  On
is  return  he  founded  an  orphan  asylum  and  built
the  churches  of  Holy  Trinity  and  St.  Gall.  In  the
mean  while  institutions  were  springing  up  in  every
direction  under  his  initiative.  He  collected  money
in  Cuba  and  Mexico  for  the  completion  of  his  ca-
thedral, and  was  enabled  to  consecrate  it  on  31
July.  1853.  In  1854  he  began  to  build  the  semi-
nary of  St.  Francis  de  Sales,  or  the  "  Salerianum."
It  was  opened  the  following  year  under  the  direc-
tion of  Father  Heiss  (q.  v.),  the  present  archbishop
of  Milwaukee.  Meanwhile  the  territory  of  Wis-
consin had  become  a  state,  containing  a  Roman
Catholic  population  of  over  300,000,  and  in  1868
the  dioceses  of  La  Crosse  and  Green  Bay  were
created  out  of  the  northern  part  of  Wisconsin.
Finally  Milwaukee  was  created  an  archbishopric,
and  Bishop  Henni  was  nominated  archbishop.  He
received  the  pallium  in  July,  1875,  but  soon  after-
ward he  began  to  decline  in  health.  A  visitation
in  1879,  in  which  he  exerted  himself  beyond  his
strength,  prostrated  him,  and  he  obtained  a  coad-
jutor, 14  March,  1880,  but  he  soon  became  too
weak  to  perform  any  official  dutv.

HENNINGSEN,  Charles  Frederick,  soldier,
b.  in  England  in  1815;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
14  June,  1877.  His  parents  were  Swedes.  He
joined  the  Carlist  army  in  Spain  in  1834,  and  rose
to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  After  the  peace
convention  he  returned  to  England,  but  on  the  re-
newal of  the  war  resumed  his  post,  and  after  the
battle  of  Vielas  de  los  Navarros  was  promoted
colonel  and  given  the  command  of  the  cavalry.  He
was  afterward  taken  prisoner  and  released  on  pa-
role. After  serving  in  the  Russian  army  in  Cir-
cassia,  he  joined  Kossuth  in  the  Hungarian  revolu-
tion, becoming  military  and  civil  commander  of
the  fortress  of  Comorn.  Afterward  he  came  to  the
United  States  as  a  representative  of  Hungarian
interests,  and  in  October,  1856,  joined  William
Walker  in  Nicaragua.  He  was  immediately  made
a  brigadier-general,  given  command  of  the  artil-
lery, and  rendered  efficient  service,  distinguishing
himself  by  his  defence  of  Granada,  and  in  the  vic-
tory at  Queresma.  He  took  part  in  Walker's
negotiations  with  Com.  Davis  in  1857,  and  after
the  surrender  to  that  officer  returned  to  the  United
States.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  en-
tered the  Confederate  army  as  colonel  of  the  3d
regiment  of  Wise's  brigade,  and  was  afterward
made  brigadier-general,  and  served  in  Virginia.
Gen.  Henningsen  was  an  able  artillerist,  and  also
gave  much  attention  to  improvements  in  small
arms,  superintending  the  construction  of  the  first
Minie  rifles  ever  made  in  the  United  States.  He
published  "  Revelations  of  Russia  "  (Paris,  1845) ;
"Twelve  Months'  Campaign  with  Zumalacarregui " ;
"The  White  Slave,"  a  novel ;  "  Eastern  Europe  " ;
"Sixty  Years  Hence,"  a  novel  of  Russian  life;
" Past  and  Future  of  Hungary";  "Analogies  and


Contrasts";  "Personal  Recollections  of  Nicaragua";
and  various  other  works,  most  of  which  were  pub-
lished in  London.

HENRION,  Nicolas,  French  scientist,  b.  in
Montpellier  in  1733 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  October,  1793.
He  studied  botany  in  Paris  under  Jussieu,  and  by
his  recommendation  was  sent  in  1780  to  South
America  to  study  the  medicinal  plants  of  Chili
and  Peru,  and  to  bring  to  France  some  of  the  best
specimens  for  acclimation  in  the  Paris  botanical
gardens.  He  landed  in  Concepcion  in  October,
1780,  and  in  two  years  he  had  collected  over  1,500
of  the  plants  of  Chili.  He  crossed  to  Peru  in
1783,  but  had  scarcely  arrived  at  Callao  when  the
Asiatic  cholera  broke  out  there.  He  was  at  once
appointed  chief  physician  of  the  city,  and,  by
thoroughly  disinfecting  every  building  and  pull-
ing down  unhealthy  houses,  succeeded  in  abating
the  disease.  He  refused  all  rewards  except  letters
of  nobility  that  were  granted  to  himself  and  his
descendants.  Having  made  a  complete  collec-
tion of  the  plants  of  Peru,  Henrion  was  about
to  sail  for  France  in  1785  with  an  herbarium  num-
bering over  2,300  specimens,  when  the  governor-
general  opposed  his  leaving,  and  offered  him  every
inducement  to  make  Peru  his  home,  but  without
success.  Henrion  was  then  required  to  present
to  the  Spanish  government  a  complete  memoir
about  the  Peruvian  mines  of  silver  and  sulphur,
and  was  occupied  in  his  investigation  till  1787,
when  he  was  allowed  to  sail.  In  1791  Henrion
went  to  the  United  States  by  order  of  the  French
government  to  study  the  medicinal  plants  of  the
country.  He  had  scarcely  landed  in  Bordeaux,  on
his  return  in  1793,  when  he  was  arrested  on  sus-
picion of  being  a  royalist,  transported  to  Paris,
and  put  to  death.  Henrion  published  "  Memoire
sur  le  cholera  du  Callao  "  (Paris,  1788) ;  "  Herbier
explique  des  plantes  du  Chile"  (3  vols.,  1788);
"  Memoire  sur  les  mines  d'argent  et  de  sulphure  du
Perou  "  (1789) ;  "  Herbier  explique  des  plantes  du
Perou  "  (2  vols.,  4to,  1790) ;  and  "  Plan  de  minera-
logie  du  Perou  "  (1790).

HENRIQUEZ,  Camilo  (en-ree'-kayth).  Chilian
journalist,  b.  in  Valdivia,  20  July,  1769 ;  d.  in  San-
tiago, 17  March,  1825.  He  entered  the  monastic
order  of  San  Camilo  de  Lelis  at  Lima,  and  was
prosecuted  by  the  Inquisition  for  reading  prohib-
ited French  works  on  philosophy,  but  was  acquit-
ted after  a  long  trial.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Chilian  revolution  in  1810  Henriquez  hurried  to
his  country  to  offer  his  services,  arriving  in  the
beginning  of  1811,  and  after  the  royalist  mutiny
of  Figueroa  on  1  April  of  that  year,  Father  Hen-
riquez patrolled  the  city  to  avoid  further  dis-
orders. He  was  the  first  to  sustain  popular  rights,
both  in  the  revolutionary  paper  "  La  Aurora  and
in  the  pulpit  on  4  July,  1811.  when  the  members
of  the  1st.  congress  attended  divine  service.  After
the  defeat  of  Rancaguas  in  1814,  he  emigrated  to
the  Argentine  Republic,  and  there  continued  his
work  for  independence.  He  was  graduated  in  the
medical  faculty  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  at  the  same
time  taught  mathematics.  In  1822  he  returned  to
Chili  by  special  invitation  of  the  director,  O'Hig-
gins,  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  deputy
to  the  National  convention,  and  chosen  its  secre-
tary. He  founded  in  Santiago  the  paper  "  El  Mer-
curio  de  Chile."  In  May,  1875,  Santiago  erected  to
his  memory  a  monument  of  white  marble,  sur-
mounted by  his  bust.  He  published  "  Ensayo  acerca
de  las  causas  de  los  succesos  desastrosos  de  Chile  "
(Buenos  Ayres,  1818) :  a  translation  of  "  Bosquejo
de  la  Democracia,"  and  the  dramas  '•  Camila  "  and
"  Inocencia  en  el  asilo  de  las  virtudes."


170


IIKXKV


HENRY


HENRYT,  Alexander,  merchant,  b.  in  the  north
of  Ireland  in  June,  1766;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
13  Aug.,  1847.  His  father  died  when  Alexander
was  two  years  old,  and  in  1783  the  boy  came  to
Philadelphia,  where  he  was  a  clerk  in  a  dry-goods
house,  and  subsequently  began  business  for  him-
self, accumulating  a  fortune.  He  was  the  first  to
introduce  religious  tracts  into  the  United  States.
and  actively  contributed  to  the  promotion  of  re-
ligion and  education,  the  relief  of  poverty,  and  the
reformation  of  criminals.  He  was  president  of  the
Presbyterian  board  of  education,  a  founder  and  first
president  of  the  American  Sunday-scnool  union,
and  was  associated  in  the  management  of  many
other  religious  or  benevolent  institutions. — His  son,
Thomas  Charlton,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
22  Sept.,  1790 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  4  Oct.,  1827,
was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1814,  studied  two
years  in  Princeton  theological  seminary,  and  after
two  more  years  of  mission  work  was  ordained  as  a
Presbyterian  clergyman  on  7  Nov.,  1818.  He  was
pastor  of  the  first  church  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  from
that  time  till  1824,  and  of  the  second  church  in
Charleston  from  then  till  his  death.  He  spent  six
months  in  Europe  for  his  health  in  1826.  Yale
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1824.  He  pub-
lished "  Inquiry  into  the  Consistency  of  Popular
Amusements  with  a  Profession  of  Christianity"
(Charleston,  1825) ;  "  Moral  Etchings  from  the  Re-
ligious World  "  (1828) ;  "  Letters  to  an  Anxious
Inquirer"  (1828;  London,  1829,  with  a  memoir  by
Rev.  Thomas  Lewis);  and  occasional  sermons. —
Alexander's  grandson,  Alexander,  mayor  of  Phila-
delphia, b.  in  Philadelphia,  14  April,  1823;  d.
there,  6  Dec,  1883,  was  the  son  of  John  Henry.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1840,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844.  In
1856-'7  he  served  in  the  councils,  and  in  1858  was
elected  to  the  mayoralty  on  the  ticket  of  the  Peo-
ple's party,  composed  of  Whigs  and  Republicans.
By  successive  elections  he  served  in  the  office  until
1866,  when  he  declined  a  renomination.  He  man-
aged the  affairs  of  Philadelphia  during  the  civil
war  with  great  ability.  On  the  arrival  of  Mr.
Lincoln  in  Philadelphia,  21  Feb.,  1861,  on  his  way
to  Washington  to  be  inaugurated,  Mayor  Henry
gave  him  welcome,  and  tendered  him  the  hospi-
tality of  the  city.  On  16  April  he  issued  a  procla-
mation declaring  that  treason  against  the  state  or
against  the  United  States  would  not  be  suffered
within  the  city.  First  as  a  member,  and  afterward
as  president,  of  the  state  board  of  centennial  super-
visors, Mr.  Henry  labored  with  great  efficiency  for
the  success  of  the  International  exhibition  of  1876.
In  addition  to  many  other  important  offices,  he
was  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  a  member  of  the  park  commission,
and  an  inspector  of  the  Eastern  penitentiary,  which
post  he  had  held  at  the  time  of  his  decease  twenty-
eight  consecutive  years.

HENRY,  Alexander,  traveller,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1739 :  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,
4  April,  1824.  He  accompanied  the  expedition  of
Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst  in  1760,  and  was  present  at
the  capture  of  Fort  de  Levi,  on  the  St.  Lawrence
river,  and  the  surrender  of  Montreal.  A  new  mar-
ket having  been  thus  thrown  open  to  English  mer-
chants, Henry  embarked  in  the  fur-trade,  and  in
1761  went  to  Fort  Mackinaw.  On  4  June,  1763,
the  majority  of  the  garrison  were  massacred  by
the  Indians,  and  Henry,  with  others,  was  carried
into  captivity,  but  finally  escaped  death  by  the
intervention  of  Wawatam,  a  Chippewa,  who  had
previously  adopted  him  as  a  brother.  Henry  now
.assumed  the  Indian  garb,  and  lived  among  the  sav-


ages till  June,  1764,  when  he  went  to  Fort  Niagara,
and  was  given  the  command  of  an  Indian  battalion
of  ninety-six  men,  with  which  he  accompanied  the
army  of  Gen.  John  Bradstreet  to  Detroit.  After
the  relief  of  that  city  and  the  flight  of  Pontine,
Henry  resumed  the  fur-trade,  and  until  1776
travelled  in  that  employment  in  the  northwest,  be-
tween Montreal  and  the  Rocky  mountains.  In
1770,  with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  others  in
England,  and  Sir  William  Johnson,  Henry  l'.o-i-
wick,  and  a  Mr.  Baxter,  in  the  colonies,  he  formed
a  company  for  working  the  mines  on  Lake  Supe-
rior, but  after  various  unsuccessful  attempts  the
company  was  dissolved  in  1774.  Masses  of  copper
weighing  as  much  as  three  pounds  were  found,  but
Henry  concluded  that  the  "  copper  ores  of  Lake
Superior  can  never  be  profitably  sought  for  but  for
local  consumption.  The  country  must  be  culti-
vated and  peopled  before  they  can  deserve  notice."
Henry  published  "  Travels  and  Adventures  in
Canada  and  the  Indian  Territories  between  the
Years  1760  and  1776"  (New  York,  1809).

HENRY,  Caleb  Spragne,  author,  b.  in  Rutland,
Mass.,  2  Aug.,  1804;  d.  in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  9  March
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1825,
studied  theology  at  Andover  and  New  Haven,  and
was  ordained  as  a  Congregational  minister  on  21
Jan.,  1829.  After  holding  pastorates  at  Greenfield,
Mass.,  in  1829-'31,  and  in  West  Hartford,  Conn.,
in  1833-'5,  he  took  deacon's  orders  in  the  Protest-
ant Episcopal  church  in  the  latter  year,  was  or-
dained priest  in  1836,  and  in  1835-'8  was  pro  few  >r
of  intellectual  and  moral  philosophy  in  Bristol
college,  Pa.  Previously,  in  1834,  he  had  published
a  pamphlet  on  "  Principles  and  Prospects  of  the
Friends  of  Peace,"  and  had  established  the  "  Amer-
ican Advocate  of  Peace,"  which,  after  the  first  year,
became  the  organ  of  the  American  peace  society.
In  1837,  with  Dr.  Francis  L.  Hawks,  he  founded  the
'•  New  York  Review,"  and  conducted  it  till  1840,
when  Dr.  Josiah  G.  Cogswell,  who  had  been  co-
editor  for  a  year,  became  its  editor-in-chief.  Dr.
Henry  was  professor  of  philosophy  and  history  in
the  New  York  university  in  1839-'52,  and  for  some
time  performed  the  duties  of  chancellor.  He  was
also  rector  of  St.  Clement's  church,  New  York,  in
1847-'50.  During  that  period  he  edited  the
"  Churchman,"  and  was  also  for  a  year  or  two
political  editor  of  the  New  York  "Times."  He
engaged  in  literary  work  in  Poughkeepsie  and
Newburg,  N.  Y.,  in  1850-'68,  and  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  in  1868-'70,  was  rector  of  St.  Michael's
church,  Litchfield,  Conn.,  in  1870-'3,  and  then
resided  in  Stamford,  Conn.,  till  1880.  when  he
returned  to  Newburg.  Hobart  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1838,  and  the  College  of  the  city
of  New  York  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1879.  Besides  nu-
merous lectures  and  addresses,  Dr.  Henry  published
"Cousin's  Psychology,"  translated  from  the  French,
with  an  introduction  and  notes  (Hartford,  1834;
4th  ed.,  revised,  New  York,  1856) ;  "  Compendium
of  Christian  Antiquities "  (1837) ;  "  Moral  and
Philosophical  Essays"  (1839);  Guizot's  "History
of  Civilization,"  with  notes ;  "  Household  Litur-
gy"; Taylor's  "Ancient  and  Modern  History."
revised,  with  a  chapter  on  the  history  of  the  United
States  (1845) ;  Bautain's  "Epitome  of  the  History
of  Philosophy,"  with  a  continuation  to  the  date  of
publication  (2  vols.,  1845) ;  "  Dr.  Oldham  at  Grey-
stones,  and  his  Talk  There,"  published  anony-
mously (1860;  3d  ed.,  1872);  "Social  Welfare
and  Human  Progress"  (1860);  "About  Men  and
Things"  (1873);  and  "  Satan  as  a  Moral  Philoso-
pher "  (1877).  The  last  four  are  collections  of
essays  on  various  subjects.


HENRY


HENRY


171


HENRY,  Edward  Lamson,  artist,  b.  in  Charles-
ton. S.  C,  12  Jan.,  1841.  He  studied  art  in  New
York,  at  the  Philadelphia  academy,  and  in  Paris
under  various  masters.  He  sketched  on  the  James
river  in  1864.  during  the  civil  war.  and  revisited
Europe  in  1871,  1875,  and  1882.  Mr.  Henry  was
■elected  a  national  academician  in  1869,  and  has
spent  most  of  his  professional  life  in  New  York
«ity.  He  has  painted  chiefly  genre  pictures,  inte-
riors, representing  American  colonial  life,  and  his-
torical pieces.  The  first  picture  by  his  hand  that
attracted  attention  was  "  Railway  Station  of  a  New
England  Road,"  and  his  other  works  include  "  Old
Corner  Cupboard,"  "  Grant's  Headquarters  at  City
Point,"  in  the  Union  League  club's  collection.  New
York  ;  "  Battle  of  German  town,  1777  "  ;  "  Meeting
of  Washington  and  Rochambeau  " :  "  The  Little
Chicks  " ;  "A  Paris  Diligence  " ;  "  Waiting  for  the
Bathers  "  (1879) ;  "  In  Sight  of  Home  "  (1882) ;  "  In
the  Roaring  Forties"  (1884);  "The  Home  of  the
Squire"  (1885):  "The  Latest  Village  Scandal"
<1886);  and  "Who  dat  For"  (1886).  His  "Old
Clock  on  the  Stairs"  and  "Morning  Call  in  1800"
were  shown  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  in  1876.

HENRY,  Henry  A.,  clergvman,  b.  in  London
in  1801 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,"  Cal.,  28  Aug.,  1879.
He  became  principal  of  the  Jew  free  school  in
London,  serving  until  1842,  when  he  was  appointed
minister  of  a  synagogue.  In  1849  he  emigrated  to
the  United  States,  and  was  elected  minister  of  a
synagogue  at  Cincinnati,  and  subsequently  at  Syra-
cuse, New  York,  and  San  Francisco.  He  published
a  text-book  for  Sabbath-schools.

HENRY,  James,  historian,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  13  Oct.,  1809.  He  is  president  of  the  Mora-
vian historical  society,  has  contributed  to  musical
journals  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  is
author  of  "  Sketches  of  Moravian  Life  and  Char-
acter "  (Philadelphia,  1859),  and  historical  writings.

HENRY,  John,  actor,  b.  in  Ireland  about
1738;  d.  at  sea  in  1795.  He  was  educated  at  Trin-
ity college,  Dublin,  appeared  at  Drury  Lane  thea-
tre in  London  in  1762,  and  later  went  to  the
island  of  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  where  he  joined  the
"American  company"  of  actors.  He  then  mar-
ried Miss  Storer,  one  of  the  members  of  that  com-
pany, who  was  burned  to  death  on  the  voyage  from
Kingston  to New York  city. Henry  first  ap-

J eared  on  the  opening  night  of  the  newly  built
ohn  street  theatre  in  New  York,  on  7  Dec,  1767,
as  Aimwell  in  the  "  Beaux's  Stratagem,"  and  short-
ly afterward,  in  connection  with  Lewis  Hallam,
the  second,  became  joint  manager  of  the  theatre.
It  was  a  large  wooden  structure,  painted  red,  situ-
ated on  the  site  of  Nos.  15  and  17  John  street,
about  sixty  feet  in  the  rear  of  the  present  line
of  buildings,  and  approached  by  a  wide  passage-
way. In  1773  Henry  married  his  wife's  sister,  and
after  her  death  married  the  third  Miss  Storer  in
1786.  During  his  management  in  1773,  the  Rev.
Dr.  Myles  Cooper,  president  of  King's  college,
wrote  the  prologue  for  the  opening  of  the  thea-
tre. At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  the  com-
pany of  actors  went  to  the  British  West  Indies,
where  they  remained  several  years.  Their  enter-
tainments for  a  long  time  were  replaced  by  the
amateur  performances  of  British  officers,  among
whom  were  Maj.  James  Moncrieff,  Maj.  John  An-
dre. Lord  Cathcart,  and  Gen.  Burgoyne.  On  the
return  of  peace,  Hallam  and  Henry  resumed  their
management  of  the  John  street  theatre.  In  1793
the  latter  sold  his  interest  to  John  Hodgkinson.
His  last  appearance  was  in  New  York  city  in  1794.
Henry  was  a  good  general  actor,  and  an  indus-
trious manager. He  played  in  a  wide  range  of


characters,  from  old  men's  parts  to  Shakespeare's
heroes  of  tragedy.  One  of  his  favorite  parts  was
Othello,  in  which  he  was  blacked  like  a  negro,  and
dressed  in  the  uniform  of  a  British  officer.  On
"  off  nights  "  it  was  his  habit  to  appear  as  one  of
the  players  in  the  orchestra. — The  third  Mrs.  Henry
had  some  talent,  both  for  speaking  and  singing.
Dunlap  says :  "  She  usually  came  full  dressed  to
the  theatre,  in  the  old  family  coach  ;  and  the  fash-
ion of  monstrous  hoops  worn  at  that  day  made  it
necessary  for  Mr.  Henry  to  slide  her  out  sideways,
take  her  in  his  arms,  and  carry  her."  Her  last
performance  was  in  New  York  in  1794.  On  the
announcement  of  the  death  of  her  husband  she
was  so  overcome  as  to  lose  her  reason,  and  died  a
maniac  on  25  April,  1795.

HENRY,  John,  British  naval  officer,  b.  28  Sept.,
1731 ;  d.  in  Rolvenden,  Kent,  6  Aug.,  1829.  He
entered  the  navy  about  1744.  was  a  1st  lieutenant
at  the  capture  of  Havana,  and  in  November,  1777,
was  promoted  to  captain  for  gallantry  at  Mud
island,  in  the  Delaware  river.  In  May,  1778,  he
aided  in  destroying  American  vessels  in  the  Chesa-
peake, among  them  the  frigates  "  Washington "
and  "  Effingham,"  nine  large  merchantmen,  and
twenty-three  brigs.  He  distinguished  himself  in
the  "  Towey"  in  1779,  as  commander  of  the  naval
force  at  Savannah,  when  it  was  attacked  by  D'Es-
taing.  and  in  1804  became  an  admiral.

HENRY,  John,  adventurer,  b.  in  Ireland.  He
came  to  Philadelphia  about  1793,  edited  "Brown's
Philadelphia  Gazette,"  and  afterward  entered  the
army  at  the  time  of  the  troubles  with  France,  com-
manded an  artillery  corps  under  Gen.  Ebenezer
Stevens,  and  was  for  over  a  year  superior  officer  at
Fort  Jay,  on  Governor's  island.  He  quitted  the
army  while  he  was  in  command  at  Newport,  R.  I.,
settled  on  a  farm  in  northern  Vermont,  and  also
studied  law.  Here  he  remained  five  years,  occa-
sionally writing  articles  for  the  press  against  the
republican  form  of  government.  These  attracted
the  attention  of  Sir  James  Craig,  then  governor-
general  of  Canada,  who  employed  him  in  1809  to
find  out  the  extent  of  the  reported  disaffection  to
the  National  government  in  New  England.  Henry
spent  three  months  in  Boston  in  this  employment,
reporting  constantly  to  Craig  by  letter,  and  at  one
time  thought  that  in  the  event  of  war  between
England  and  the  United  States,  Massachusetts
would  take  the  lead  in  establishing  a  northern
confederacy,  which  might,  in  the  end,  ally  itself
with  Great  Britain.  Craig  promised  Henry  office
in  Canada,  but  died  soon  afterward,  and  the  spy's
efforts  to  obtain  his  reward  in  London  meeting
with  no  success,  he  returned  to  this  country  and
divulged  the  whole  matter,, on  2  Feb..  1812,  to  Presi-
dent Madison,  who  paid  him  $50,000  for  his  in-
formation. His  disclosures  were  made  the  subject
of  a  special  message  to  congress,  and  created  much
excitement  throughout  the  country,  especially
among  the  opponents  of  the  administration,  some
of  whom  alleged  that  it  was  all  a  political  trick  that
had  been  devised  by  the  president  to  cause  war.
Henry  used  all  of  his  reward  but  $1,000  to  pur-
chase an  estate  in  Languedoc  from  Count  de  Crillon,
and  sailed  from  New  York  for  France  on  9  March,
1812.  De  Crillon  proved  to  be  an  impostor,  and
it  is  probable  that  Henry  lost  his  money.

HENRY,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Easton,  Md.,  about
1750 ;  d.  there,  16  Dec,  1798.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1769,  studied  law,  and  practised  at
Easton.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Maryland  to  the
Continental  congress  in  1778-'81  and  again  in
1784-'7,  and  was  then  elected  to  the  United  States
senate,  serving  from  1789  till  10  Dec,  1797,  when  he


172


HENRY


HENRY


(-S<HU^i/^  /H^^y


resigned,  having  been  elected  governor  of  his  state.
He  held  this  office  until  the  time  of  his  death.

HENRY,  Joseph,  physicist,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
17  Dec,  1797  or  1799 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  13
May,  1878.  The  date  of  his  birth  is  given  in  du-
plicate on  account  of  its  illegibility  in  the  fam-
ily Bible.  He  was  de-
scended from  Scot-
tish ancestry,  and  his
grandparents  emi-
grated to  this  coun-
try about  the  begin-
ning of  the  Revolu-
tionary war.  His  fa-
ther died  when  the
boy  was  very  young,
but  his  mother  was
a  woman  of  great
refinement,  intelli-
gence, and  strength
of  character.  She  was
a  staunch  Presby-
terian, and  exacted
from  her  children
the  strictest  per-
formance of  religious  duties.  Joseph's  educa-
tion began  in  Galway,  near  Albany,  where  for  sev-
eral years  he  attended  the  district-school,  while
residing  with  his  grandmother.  At  about  the  age
of  ten  he  was  placed  in  a  store,  and  for  the  five
ensuing  years  his  time  was  divided  between  his
duties  as  a  clerk  and  his  studies.  He  then  returned
to  Albany,  and  was  apprenticed  to  a  watch-maker
and  silversmith,  and  also  joined  a  private  dramatic
company  called  "  The  Rostrum,"  of  which  he  soon
became  the  leading  spirit.  There  seemed  every
prospect  of  his  studying  for  the  stage,  when,  dur-
ing a  brief  illness,  he  read  Dr.  Gregory's  "Lec-
tures on  Experimental  Philosophy,  Astronomy,
and  Chemistry."  Thenceforth  he  determined  to  de-
vote his  life  to  the  study  of  science,  and  secured
private  lessons  during  the  evening  from  the  teach-
ers of  the  Albany  academy.  Later  he  taught,
and  so  acquired  sufficient  money  to  enable  him
to  follow  a  regular  course  of  instruction  at  the
academy.  On  the  completion  of  his  studies  he
obtained,  through  the  influence  of  Dr.  Theodoric
R.  Beck,  the  appointment  of  private  tutor  to  the
family  of  Gen.  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  the  pa-
troon,  and  devoted  three  hours  daily  to  teaching.
Meanwhile  he  assisted  Dr.  Beck  in  his  chemical
experiments,  and  pursued  studies  in  anatomy  and
physiology  with  a  view  to  becoming  a  physician.
In  1825  he  received  the  appointment  of  engineer
on  the  survey  of  a  road  to  run  through  the  state
of  New  York,  from  the  Hudson  river  to  Lake
Erie,  and  a  year  later  he  was  made  professor  of
mathematics  in  the  Albany  academy,  and  almost
at  once  began  the  series  of  brilliant  experiments  in
electricity  which  have  linked  his  name  with  that
of  Franklin  as  one  of  the  two  most  original  inves-
tigators in  that  branch  of  science  that  this  country
has  ever  produced.  His  first  work  was  the  im-
proving of  existing  forms  of  apparatus,  and  in
1827  he  read  a  paper  before  the  Albany  institute,
in  which  he  described  how  electro-dynamic  actions
can  be  shown  by  simpler  means  than  those  em-
ployed at  that  time.  Soon  afterward  he  made  his
first  important  discovery — that  of  producing  the
electro-magnet,  properly  so  called,  by  showing  that
in  a  piece  of  soft  iron  the  magnetism  produced
may  be  greatly  increased  by  multiplying  the  num-
ber of  coils  around  the  polar  limbs.  He  continued
his  investigations,  and  in  1829  he  exhibited  electro-
magnets possessing  greater  power  than  any  before


known,  and  later  he  built  several  larger  magnets,
among  which  was  the  one  now  in  the  physical  cabi-
net of  Princeton,  capable  of  sustaining  3,600
pounds  with  a  battery,  occupying  a  single  cubic
foot  of  space.  His  experiments  further  showed
that  in  the  transmission  of  electricity  over  great
distances  the  electro-motive  force  of  the  battery
must  be  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  conduc-
tor. This  led  in  1830  to  the  development  of  the
"  intensity  "  magnet,  which  made  the  electric  tele-
graph a  possibility,  and  in  1831,  in  a  paper  pub-
lished in  Silliman's  "American  Journal  of  Sci-
ence," he  suggested  its  use  for  that  purpose.  In-
deed, during  the  same  year  he  constructed  the  first
electro-magnetic  telegraph,  transmitting  signals
through  a  wire  more  than  a  mile  in  length,  causing
a  bell  to  ring  at  the  farther  end  of  the  wire.
"  This,"  said  President  Garfield,  "  was  the  last  step
in  the  series  of  great  discoveries  which  preceded  the
invention  of  the  telegraph."  And  another  author-
ity says :  "  The  thing  was  perfect  as  it  came  from
its  author,  and  has  never  been  improved  from  that
day  to  this  as  a  sounding  telegraph."  Prof.  Hen-
ry's own  words,  brought  forth  by  Morse's  attempt
to  expose  "  the  utter  non-reliability  of  Henry's  tes-
timony," were :  "  The  principles  I  had  developed
were  applied  by  Dr.  Gale  to  render  Morse's  instru-
ment effective  at  a  distance."  This  statement,
sustained  by  Dr.  Leonard  D.  Gale  himself,  has
never  been  confuted.  In  1831  he  devised  the  first
electro-magnetic  engine  for  maintaining  continuous
motion  by  means  of  an  automatic  pole-changer.
During  the  same  year  he  discovered  the  secondary
currents  produced  in  a  long  conductor  by  the  self-
induction  of  the  primary  current,  and  also  obtained
an  electric  spark  by  a  purely  magnetic  induction.
In  November,  1832,  he  removed  to  Princeton,
where  he  had  been  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  natu-
ral philosophy.  For  some  years  afterward  his  ex-
clusive attention  was  occupied  with  the  duties  per-
taining to  his  professorship,  especially  as  he  deliv-
ered the  lectures  on  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  during  the  absence  of  Dr.  John  Torrey  in
Europe  in  1833,  and  afterward  also  lectured  on
astronomy  and  architecture.  In  resuming  his  elec-
trical researches,  he  first  devoted  special  attention
to  the  subject  of  electrical  self-induction.  In  1835
he  renewed  his  investigation  of  combined  circuits, .
and  extended  a  series  of  wires  across  the  college-
yard,  through  which  signals  were  sent,  and  the  local
circuit  with  strong  "  receiving  magnet "  used  at  that
time  has  since  become  a  most  important  adjunct  in
the  manipulation  of  the  electric  telegraph.  Papers
giving  the  results  of  his  researches  in  electricity
appear  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Philo-
sophical Society,"  under  the  title  of  "Contribu-
tions to  Electricity  and  Magnetism,"  during  the
years  1835-42.  The  study  of  meteorology  was  one
to  which  he  devoted  considerable  thought,  having

greviously,  from  1827  till  1832,  been  associated  with
»r.  Beck  in  the  development  of  his  system  of
meteorological  observations  established  in  the  state
of  New  York,  and  in  1839  he  was  active  in  en-
deavoring to  persuade  the  U.  S.  government  to
designate  stations  for  magnetic  and  meteorological
observations.  The  results  of  special  phenomena
that  were  examined  by  him  at  this  time  were  pub-
lished, but  a  large  collection  of  original  notes  of
determinations  of  magnetic  variations  in  aim  >ras.
with  attempts  at  ascertaining  their  extreme  height,
on  violent  whirlwinds,  on  hail-storms,  on  thunder-
storms, and  the  deportment  of  lightning-rods,  were
destroyed  by  fire.  Many  other  investigations  that
were  conducted  by  him  during  his  residence  in
Princeton,  in  various  branches  of  physics,  have


HENRY


HENRY


173


been  of  permanent  value  to  science.  In  1846  he
was  elected  first  secretary  and  director  of  the
Smithsonian  institution,  and  in  December  of  that
year  removed  with  his  family  to  Washington.  The
organization,  equipment,  and  development  of  this
great  scientific  establishment,  thenceforth  until  his
death,  occupied  his  principal  attention.  He  was
nominated  to  the  chair  of  natural  philosophy  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  with  a  salary  twice  as
large  as  that  which  he  was  receiving  in  Washing-
ton, and  efforts  were  made  to  induce  him  to  return
to  Princeton  as  its  president  in  1853,  and  also  in
1867,  but  these  offers  were  steadily  refused.  Like
Agassiz,  he  may  have  answered  when  tempted  by
larger  salaries,  "  I  can  not  afford  to  waste  my  time
in  making  money."  Prof.  Simon  Newcomb  says
of  him :  "  He  never  engaged  in  an  investigation  or
an  enterprise  which  was  to  put  a  dollar  into  his
own  pocket,  but  aimed  only  at  the  general  good  of
the  world."  On  the  organization  of  the  light-
house board  in  1852  he  was  made  one  of  its  mem-
bers, and  from  1871  till  his  death  was  its  chair-
man. The  establishment  of  the  National  light-
house system  is  very  largely  due  to  him,  although
his  services,  during  his  later  years  especially,  were
principally  advisory,  though  he  continued  his  in-
vestigations in  its  behalf  until  his  death,  being  oc-
cupied in  its  work  when  the  final  illness  came.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  constantly  called  on  to
consider  plans  and  devices  for  facilitating  military
and  naval  operations.  Throughout  his  career  in
Washington  he  acted  as  confidential  adviser  on
scientific  matters  to  the  government,  and  the  com-
position of  commissions  for  technical  purposes
was  generally  referred  to  him.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  in  1829.  and  from
Harvard  in  1851.  In  1849  he  was  elected  president
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  and  he  was  one  of  the  original  members
of  the  National  academy  of  science,  succeeding
Alexander  D.  Bache  in  1868  as  president.  Prof.
Henry  was  also  a  member  of  other  societies,  both
in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  His  published
papers  include  over  150  titles,  and  were  contribut-
ed principally  to  American  scientific  journals.
He  also  wrote  valuable  articles  for  the  "  Ameri-
can "  and  other  cyclopaedias,  and  was  the  author  of
a  series  of  papers  on  "  Meteorology  in  its  Connec-
tion with  Agriculture,"  contributed  to  the  "  Agri-
cultural Reports  "  (1855-'9).  His  single  book  was
"Syllabus  of  Lectures  on  Physics"  (Princeton,
1844),  although  he  edited  the  annual  volumes  of  the
"Smithsonian  Reports  "from  1846  till  1877.  In
1886  two  volumes  of  the  "Scientific  Writings  of
Joseph  Henry  "  were  published  by  the  Smithsonian
institution.  See  "  A  Memorial  of  Joseph  Henry,"
published  by  order  of  congress  (Washington,  1880).
HENRY,  Morris  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  26  July,  1835.  He  was  educated  in
London  and  in  Belgium,  came  to  the  United  States,
and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University
of  Vermont  in  1860.  He  was  assistant  surgeon  in
the  navy  during  the  civil  war,  and  then  settled  in
New  York  city,  and  was  surgeon-in-chief  of  the
Emigrant  hospital,  Ward's  island,  in  1872-'80.  He
is  a  member  of  many  medical  societies,  and  has  in-
vented various  surgical  methods  and  appliances,
including  the  application  of  plano-convex  lenses
in  examining  the  throat  and  upper  air-passages
(1864) ;  cutting-forceps  for  the  removal  of  plaster
dressings  (1868);  depilating-forceps  (1874);  and
cartilage-scissors  to  facilitate  the  removal  of  dense
tissues  (1881).  He  is  the  originator  and  editor  of
the  "  American  Journal  of  Dermatology,"  and  has
published  numerous  monographs,  including  "  Treat-


ment of  Venereal  Diseases  in  Vienna  Hospital"
(1872),  and  "Anomalous  Localities  of  Chancres"
(1874).  He  delivered  an  address  on  "Specialists
and  Specialties  in  Medicine  "  before  the  alumni  of
the  University  of  Vermont  in  1876.

HENRY,  Patrick,  statesman,  b.  at  Studlev,
Hanover  co.,  Va.,  29  May,  1736 ;  d.  in  Red  Hill,
Charlotte  co.,  Va.,  6  June,  1799.  His  father,  John
Henry,  was  a  Scotchman,  son  of  Alexander  Henry
and  Jean  Robertson,  a  cousin  of  the  historian
William  Robertson
and  of  the  mother  of
Lord  Brougham.  His
mother  was  Sarah
Winston,  of  the  Eng-
lish family  of  that
name.  The  father  of
Patrick  Henry  gave
his  son  a  classical
education,  but  he  en-
tered upon  business
at  an  early  age.  At
eighteen  he  married,
and,  having  tried
farming  and  mer-
chandise without  suc-
cess, became  a  lawver
in  1760.  His  fee-
books  show  a  large
practice  from  the  be-
ginning of  his  pro-
fessional life ;  but  his  surpassing  powers  as  an  orator
were  not  discovered  till,  in  December,  1763,  he  ar-
gued what  is  known  as  the  "  Parson's  cause."  This
was  a  suit  brought  by  a  minister  of  the  established
church  in  Virginia  to  recover  his  salary,  which  had
been  fixed  at  16,000  pounds  of  tobacco.  A  short
crop  had  caused  a  great  advance  in  its  market  price,
and  induced  the  colonial  legislature  to  pass  an  act
commuting  the  salaries  of  the  ministers  into  money
at  the  rate  of  two  pence  for  a  pound  of  tobacco,
which  was  its  former  price.  This  act  had  not  been
approved  by  the  king,  but  the  house  of  burgesses
determined  to  enforce  it.  In  his  speech  for  the  de-
fence Mr.  Henry  displayed  powers  of  oratory  of  the
first  order,  and  boldly  struck  the  key-note  of  the
American  Revolution  by  arguing  that  "a  king,  by
disallowing  acts  of  a  salutary  nature,  from  being
the  father  of  his  people,  degenerates  into  a  tyrant,
and  forfeits  all  right  to  his  subjects'  obedience."
The  passage  of  the  stamp-act  by  the  British  parlia-
ment in  1765  was  made  known  in  the  colonies  in
May,  1765.  They  had  remonstrated  against  its  pro-
posed passage ;  but  no  one  was  bold  enough  to  coun-
sel resistance  to  its  enforcement  until,  upon  the  res-
ignation of  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house  of  bur-
gesses from  Louisa  county,  Mr.  Henry  was  elected
to  fill  the  vacancy.  On  '29  May,  1765,  nine  days
after  taking  his  seat,  and  on  his  twenty-ninth  birth-
day, he  moved  a  series  of  resolutions  defining  the
rights  of  the  colony,  and  pronouncing  the  stamp-
act  unconstitutional  and  subversive  of  British  and
American  liberty.  These  were  resisted  by  all  the
men  that  had  been  previously  leaders  in  that  body.
After  a  speech  of  great  eloquence,  which  was  de-
scribed by  Thomas  Jefferson  as  surpassing  any-
thing he  ever  heard,  Mr.  Henry  carried  five  of  his
resolutions,  the  last  by  a  majority  of  only  one.  The
whole  series  were  published,  and  the  public  mind
became  so  inflamed  that  everywhere  resistance  to
the  tax  was  openly  made,  and  its  enforcement  be-
came impracticable.  Mr.  Henry  at  once  became
the  leader  in  his  colony.  In  May,  1773,  he,  with
Thomas  Jefferson,  Richard  Henry  Lee,  and  Dabney
Carr,  carried  through  the  Virginia  house  of  bur-


174


HENRY


HENRY


gesses  a  resolution  establishing  committees  of
correspondence  between  the  colonies,  which  gave
unity  to  the  Revolutionary  agitation,  and  in  May,
1774,  he  was  foremost  in  the  movement  to  call  a
Continental  congress.  At  this  time  the  celebrated
George  Mason  first  met  Henry,  and  recorded  his
estimate  of  him  in  these  words :  ';  He  is  by  far  the
most  powerful  speaker  I  ever  heard.  Every  word
he  says  not  only  engages  but  commands  the  atten-
tion, and  your  passions  are  no  longer  your  own
when  he  addresses  them.  But  his  eloquence  is  the
smallest  part  of  his  merit.  He  is,  in  my  opinion,
the  first  man  upon  this  continent,  as  well  in  abili-
ties as  public  virtues,  and  had  he  lived  in  Rome
about  the  time  of  the  first  Punic  war,  when  the
Roman  people  had  arrived  at  their  meridian  glory,
and  their  virtues  not  tarnished,  Mr.  Henry's  talents
must  have  put  him  at  the  head  of  that  glorious
commonwealth."

He  was  a  delegate  to  the  1st  Continental  con-
gress, and  opened  its  deliberations  by  a  speech
that  won  him  the  reputation  of  being  the  fore-
most orator  on  the  continent.  In  this  speech  he
declared,  '*  I  am  not  a  Virginian,  but  an  American."
In  congress,  Henry  served  on  several  important
committees,  among  which  was  that  to  prepare  the
address  to  the  king.  The  first  draft  of  this  paper
is  said  to  have  been  from  his  pen ;  but  as  it  was  too
advanced  for  the  party  represented  by  John  Dick-
inson, the  latter  was  added  to  the  committee  and
modified  the  address,  if  he  did  not  recast  it.  At  a
most  critical  period  in  the  deliberations  of  that
congress,  Joseph  Galloway,  a  Tory,  introduced  a
plan  of  reconciliation  between  the  mother  country
and  the  colonies,  which  would  have  left  them  in
somewhat  the  same  relations  to  each  other  as  were
subsequently  established  between  England  and
Canada.  The  plan  was  advocated  by  some  of  the
foremost  members,  and  it  was  believed  that  it  had
the  approval  of  the  government.  Mr.  Henry  led
the  opposition  to  it,  and  was  the  only  one  noted  by
John  Adams  in  his  diary  as  opposing  it  in  debate.
It  was  defeated  by  the  vote  of  one  colony  only,  and
thus  the  destiny  of  the  continent  was  changed.
On  25  March,  1775,  Mr.  Henry  moved  in  the  Vir-
ginia convention  that  the  colony  be  put  into  a  state
of  defence  at  once,  preparatory  to  the  war,  which
was  imminent,  and  carried  his  motion  by  a  speech
that  for  true  eloquence  has  never  been  surpassed.
In  May  following  he  led  a  volunteer  force  against
Lord  Dunmore,  the  royal  governor  of  Virginia,  in
order  to  compel  him  to  restore  the  colony's  gun-
powder, which  had  been  removed  by  him  from  the
public  magazine  and  put  on  board  a  British  ship.
This  was  the  first  resistance  by  arms  to  the  British
authority  in  that  colony.  After  obtaining  from
the  governor  remuneration  for  the  gunpowder,  he
repaired  to  the  Continental  congress,  then  holding
its  second  session,  and  at  its  close  accepted  the
commission  of  colonel  of  the  1st  Virginia  regiment,
and  commander  of  all  the  Virginia  forces,  which
had  been  given  him  by  the  convention  of  his  state
in  his  absence.  His  want  of  military  experience
gave  occasion  to  some  jealousy  on  the  part  of  other
officers,  and  when  the  Virginia  troops  were  soon
afterward  taken  into  the  Continental  army,  con-
gress, in  commissioning  the  officers,  made  a  sub-
ordinate a  brigadier-general,  and  offered  Col.  Henry
the  command  of  a  single  regiment,  which  slight
was  followed  by  his  refusal  to  accept  the  commis-
sion. He  was  at  once  elected  to  the  Virginia  con-
vention, which  met  in  May,  1776.  Here  he  ar-
ranged the  introduction  of  the  resolutions  direct-
ing the  delegates  in  congress  to  move  for  independ-
ence, and  determining  that  the  colony  should  at


once  frame  a  bill  of  rights  and  a  constitution  as
an  independent  state.  By  his  powers  of  oratory  he
overcame  all  opposition,  and  obtained  a  unanimous
vote  for  the  resolutions.  He  was  active  in  the
formation  of  the  constitution  of  his  state,  which
served  as  a  model  for  the  other  states,  and  he  pro-
posed the  section  of  the  Virginia  bill  of  rights  that
guarantees  religious  liberty.  Through  his  exer-
tions, Virginia  afterward  asked  and  obtained  an
amendment  to  the  Federal  constitution,  embodying
in  it  a  similar  guarantee.  On  the  adoption  of  the
constitution  in  1776,  he  was  elected  the  first  gover-
nor of  the  state,  and  was  re-elected  in  1777  and  in
1778.  Not  being  eligible  under  the  constitution
for  four  years  afterward,  he  returned  to  the  legis-
lature, but  was  again  elected  governor  in  1784  and
1785,  and  in  1786  declined  a  re-election.  He  was
again  elected  in  1796,  but  again  declined.  During
his  first  service  as  governor  he  had  to  inaugurate
a  new  government  in  the  midst  of  the  Revolution-
ary war,  and  his  executive  talents  were  put  to  a
severe  test,  which  they  stood  in  such  a  manner  as
greatly  added  to  his  renown.  In  1777  he  planned
and  sent  out  the  expedition,  under  Gen.  George
Rogers  Clarke,  which  conquered  the  vast  territory
northwest  of  the  Ohio,  and  forced  England  to  yield
it  at  the  treaty  of  peace.  At  the  close  of  ,the  war
he  advocated  the  return  of  the  banished  Tories,
and  opening  our  ports  at  once  to  immigration  and
to  commerce.  He  resisted  the  performance  on  our
part  of  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  until  that
power  had  performed  her  treaty  obligation  to  sur-
render the  northwestern  posts.  He  was  a  firm  and
persistent  advocate  of  our  right  to  the  free  naviga-
tion of  the  Mississippi,  whose  mouth  was  held  by
Spain,  a  matter  of  such  importance  that  at  one
time  it  threatened  the  disruption  of  the  Union.

He  early  saw  the  defects  in  the  articles  of  confed-
eration, and  advocated  a  stronger  Federal  govern-
ment. He  declined  the  appointment  as  delegate
to  the  convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of
the  United  States,  because  of  private  reasons :  but
served  in  the  state  convention  of  1788,  which  rati-
fied it.  He  advocated  the  adoption  of  amendments
to  the  constitution  before  its  ratification  by  Vir-
ginia, and  offered  the  amendments  that  were  recom-
mended by  the  convention,  the  most  important  of
which  have  been  adopted.  Many  of  his  predictions
as  to  the  future  of  the  Federal  government  read
like  prophecy  in  the  light  of  subsequent  history
Among  other  things,  he  distinctly  foretold  the
abolition  of  slavery  by  congress,  in  a  speech  in
the  convention,  delivered  24  June,  1788  (see  Elli-
ott's "  Debates,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  589),  in  which  he  said :
"  Among  ten  thousand  implied  powers  which  they
may  assume,  they  may,  if  engaged  in  war,  liberate
every  one  of  your  slaves  if  they  please.  And  this
must  and  will  be  done  by  men,  a  majority  of  whom
have  not  a  common  interest  with  you.  .  . .  Another
thing  will  contribute  to  bring  this  event  about.
Slavery  is  detested.  We  feel  its  fatal  effects ;  we
deplore  it  with  all  the  pity  of  humanity.  Let  all
these  considerations,  at  some  future  period,  press
with  full  force  on  the  minds  of  congress.  Let  that
urbanity,  which  I  trust  will  distinguish  America,
and  the  necessity  of  national  defence — let  all  these
things  operate  on  their  minds;  they  will  search
that  paper  and  see  if  they  have  power  of  manu-
mission. And  have  they  not,  sir  %  Have  they  not
power  to  provide  for  the  general  defence  and  wel-
fare 1  May  they  not  think  that  these  call  for  the
abolition  of  slavery  ?  May  they  not  pronounce  all
slaves  free?  and  will  they  not  be  warranted  by
that  power?  This  is  no  ambiguous  implication  or
logical  deduction. The  paper  speaks  to  the  point.


HENRY


HENRY


175


They  have  the  power  in  clear,  unequivocal  terms,
and"  will  clearly  and  certainly  exercise  it."  The
adoption  of  the  first  eleven  amendments  having
quieted  in  a  great  measure  his  apprehensions  as
to  the  constitution,  he  sustained  the  administra-
tion of  Washington,  though  not  fully  approving
of  all  its  measures.  The  earliest  manifestations  of
the  French  revolution  caused  him  to  predict  the
result,  and  the  influence  of  French  infidelity  and
Jacobinism  upon  America  excited  his  alarm,  lest
they  should  produce  disunion  and  anarchy.  He
retired  from  public  life  in  1791,  after  a  continu-
ous service  of  twenty-six  years,  but  continued  the
practice  of  law,  which  he  had  resumed  at  the  close
of  the  Revolution  with  great  success.  He  was
appointed  by  Gov.  Henry  Lee  U.  S.  senator  in
1794.  Washington  offered  to  make  him  secretary
of  state  in  1795,  and  afterward  chief  justice  of  the
United  States,  and  President  John  Adams  nomi-
nated him  as  a  special  minister  to  France.  But
the  state  of  his  health,  and  the  care  of  a  large  fam-
ily, caused  him  to  decline  these  offices.  In  1799,
on  the  passage  of  the  Virginia  resolutions  claiming
the  right  of  a  state  to  resist  the  execution  of  an
obnoxious  act  of  congress,  he  was  induced  by  an
appeal  of  Washington  to  offer  himself  for  a  seat
in  the  legislature,  for  the  purpose  of  resisting  what
they  both  considered  a  doctrine  fraught  with  the
greatest  danger  to  the  Union.  He  did  not  ap-
prove of  the  alien  and  sedition  laws,  which  occa-
sioned the  resolutions,  and  in  his  speech  as  a  can-
didate he  urged  the  use  of  every  constitutional
means  to  effect  their  repeal.  He  was  elected,  but
died  before  taking  his  seat.

The  transcendent  powers  of  Mr.  Henry  as  an
orator  are  testified  to  by  so  many  men  of  the  great-
est culture  and  ability  that  he  justly  ranks  among
the  great  orators  of  the  world.  Among  the  dis-
tinguished men  that  heard  him.  and  have  left  on
record  their  impressions,  the  following  may  be
mentioned  :  Dr.  Archibald  Alexander  said  of  him  :
"From  my  earliest  childhood  1  had  been  accus-
tomed to  hear  of  the  eloquence  of  Patrick  Henry.
On  this  subject  there  existed  but  one  opinion  in
the  country.  The  power  of  his  eloquence  was  felt
equally  by  the  learned  and  the  unlearned.  No
man  who  ever  heard  him  speak  on  any  important
occasion  could  fail  to  admit  his  uncommon  power
over  the  minds  of  his  hearers.  .  .  .  The  power  of
Henry's  eloquence  was  due,  first,  to  the  greatness
of  his  emotion  and  passion,  accompanied  with  a
versatility  which  enabled  him  to  assume  at  once  any
emotion  or  passion  which  suited  his  ends.  Not
less  indispensable,  secondly,  was  a  matchless  per-
fection of  the  organs  of  expression,  including  the
apparatus  of  voice,  intonation,  pause,  gesture,  atti-
tude, and  indescribable  play  of  countenance.  In
no  instance  did  he  ever  indulge  in  an  expression
that  was  not  instantly  recognized  as  nature  itself;
yet  some  of  his  penetrating  and  subduing  tones
were  absolutely  peculiar,  and  as  inimitable  as  they
were  indescribable.  These  were  felt  by  every  hearer
in  all  their  force.  His  mightiest  feelings  were
sometimes  indicated  and  communicated  by  a  long
pause,  aided  by  an  eloquent  aspect,  and  some  sig-
nificant use  of  his  fingers."  Thomas  Jefferson  at-
tended the  debate  on  the  resolutions  against  the
stamp  act,  and  wrote  concerning  it :  "I  heard  the
splendid  display  of  Mr.  Henry's  talents  as  a  popu-
lar orator.  They  were  great  indeed,  such  as  I  have
never  heard  from  any  other  man.  He  appeared  to
me  to  speak  as  Homer  wrote."  And  in  describing
Edmund  Pendleton,  Mr.  Jefferson  said  of  him:
"He  had  not,  indeed,  the  poetical  fancy  of  Mr.
Henry,  his  sublime  imagination,  his  lofty  and  over-


whelming diction."  Mr.  Wirt,  in  his  "Life  of
Henry,"  says  that  Mr.  Jefferson  considered  him
"  the  greatest  orator  that  ever  lived."  John  Ran-
dolph, of  Roanoke,  pronounced  him  the  greatest
of  orators,  and  declared  that  he  was  "  Shakespeare
and  Garriek  combined."

Mr.  Henry  was  twice  married — first  to  Sarah
Shelton,  daughter  of  a  neighbor,  and  afterward  to
Dorothea  Spotswood  Dandridge,  a  granddaughter
of  Gov.  Alexander  Spotswood.  He  was  a  devoted
Christian,  and  left  a  spotless  character.  His  life
has  been  written  by  William  Wirt  (1817),  by  Alex-
ander H.  Everett  in  Sparks's  "American  Biog-
raphy," and  by  Moses  Coit  Tyler  in  the  series  of
"American  Statesmen  "  (Boston,  1887). — His  grand-
son, William  Wirt,  b.  at  Red  Hill,  Charlotte  co.,
Va.,  14  Feb.,  1831,  was  educated  at  the  University
of  Virginia,  where  he  took  the  degree  of  master  of
arts  in  1850.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1853,
and  served  as  state's  attorney  for  his  county  during
several  years.  He  afterward  removed  to  Rich-
mond, and  served  four  sessions  in  the  legislature,
declining  a  re-election.  He  is  vice-president  of
the  Virginia  historical  society,  has  contributed  to
current  literature,  and  has  delivered  several  his-
torical addresses,  including  a  "Defence  of  Capt.
John  Smith's  Narrative  "  before  the  Virginia  his-
torical society  on  24  Feb.,  1882,  and  one  in  Phila-
delphia on  the  centennial  of  the  motion  for  inde-
pendence. He  has  in  preparation  (1887)  a  "Life
of  Patrick  Henry."

HENRY,  Pierre  Francois,  French  author,  b.
in  Nancy,  28  May,  1759 ;  d.  in  Paris,  12  Aug*,  1833.
He  became  a  lawyer,  and  afterward  an  actor,  but
did  not  succeed,  and  after  the  revolution  held  sev-
eral municipal  offices.  He  wrote  a  "  History  of
the  Directory  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1801),  and  translated
from  the  English  many  volumes  of  history,  travels,
and  biography,  including  Marshall's  "  Life  of
Washington  "  (5  vols.,  Paris,  1807).  He  also  wrote
a  "Description  of  North  America"  for  Mentelli's
"  Geographie  universelle."

HENRY,  Robert,  educator,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  6  Dec,  1792 ;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  6  Feb.,
1856.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh in  1814,  and,  after  travelling  on  the  conti-
nent of  Europe,  returned  to  Charleston,  and  was
minister  to  the  French  Huguenot  congregation
there  for  two  years,  preaching  alternately  in
French  and  English.  He  became  professor  of  logic
and  moral  philosophy  in  South  Carolina  college  in
1818,  and  afterward  of  metaphysics  and  political
philosophy.  He  was  president  in  1834-'5,  accepted
the  chair  of  metaphysics  and  belles-lettres  in  1839,
and  was  again  president  in  1842-'5,  also  perform-
ing for  a  time  the  duties  of  professor  of  Greek.
He  wrote  articles  for  the  southern  reviews,  and
published,  besides  occasional  sermons,  eulogies  on
Jonathan  Maxcy,  and  John  C.  Calhoun.

HENRY,  W'illiam,  inventor,  b.  in  Chester
county,  Pa.,  19  May,  1729;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  15
Dec,  1786.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  ancestry,  and
his  grandparents  settled  in  Pennsylvania  in  1722.
While  yet  a  young  man,  he  began  the  manufacture
of  fire-arms  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  was  afterward
appointed  armorer  to  the  troops  that  were  col-
lected for  Braddock's  expedition,  and  ordered  to
Virginia.  In  1758  he  was  commissioned  justice  of
the  peace,  and  in  1760  visited  England.  In  1771
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  to
examine  whether  the  opening  of  communication
between  the  Delaware  and  Ohio  rivers  for  the  pur-
poses of  navigation  or  land-carriage  were  practica-
ble. He  was  chosen  to  the  assembly  in  1776,  and
the  following  year  was  elected  treasurer  of  Lan-


176


HENRY


HENRY


caster  county,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.
During  the  Revolution  he  held  the  rank  of  com-
missary. He  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  in  1784-'5,  and  during  the  former  year
was  commissioned  president  judge  of  the  courts  of
common  pleas  and  quarter  sessions  of  Lancaster
county.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  and  was  favorably  known  as  an
inventor.  In  i768  he  invented  the  "self-moving
or  sentinel  register,"  which  was  followed  in  1771  by
the  "  screw-auger."  He  was  among  those  antecedent
to  Fitch  and  Pulton  in  the  application  of  steam  as
a  motive  power  to  propel  boats.  His  original  draw-
ings, made  in  1779,  were  found  among  his  papers
after  his  death.  In  1785  he  exhibited  the  "  model
of  a  wheel-carriage,  which  rolls  close  in  against
the  wind  by  wind-force."  —  His  son,  William,
manufacturer,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  12  March,  1757;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  21  April,  1827,  removed  in  1778
to  Northampton  county,  where  he  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  fire-arms,  and  in  1808  erected  a
forge  on  the  Bushkill,  where  the  first  iron  that  was
manufactured  in  the  country  was  drawn,  9  March,
1809.  He  was  commissioned,  14  Jan.,  1788,  justice
of  the  peace  and  associate  judge  of  the  courts  for
Northampton  county,  but  resigned  in  1814.  In
1792  he  was  elected  one  of  the  presidential  electors
of  the  state,  and  voted  for  Washington. — Another
son,  John  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  4
Nov.,  1758;  d.  there,  15  April,  1811,  enlisted  in
Capt.  Matthew  Smith's  company  of  riflemen  at  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution,  and  took  part  in
Arnold's  expedition  to  Canada,  where  he  was  taken
prisoner  and  confined  for  nine  months.  He  sub-
sequently studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1785.  In  1793  he  was  commissioned  by
Gov.  Mifflin  president  judge  of  the  2d  judicial  dis-
trict of  Pennsylvania,  consisting  of  the  counties  of
Chester,  Lancaster.  York,  and  Dauphin,  but  he  re-
signed in  1810.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Accurate
and  Interesting  Account  of  Arnold's  Campaign
against  Quebec,  and  of  the  Hardships  and  Sufferings
of  that  Band  of  Heroes  who  traversed  the  Wilder-
ness of  Maine  from  Cambridge  to  the  St.  Lawrence
in  the  Autumn  of  1775  "  (Lancaster,  Pa.,  1812).

HENRY,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Charlotte
county,  Va.,  in  1761 ;  d.  in  Christian  county,  Ky.,
23  Nov.,  1824.  He  entered  the  army  when  a  lad,
and  fought  at  Guilford,  the  Cowpens,  and  York-
town.  After  the  Revolution  he  removed  to  Ken-
tucky, and  took  part  there  in  many  conflicts  with
the  Indians.  He  was  appointed  major-general  of
Kentucky  volunteers,  31  Aug.,  1813,  commanded
a  division  of  three  brigades  in  the  battle  of  the
Thames,  on  5  Oct.,  and  also  served  in  Scott's  and
Wilkinson's  campaigns.  Gen.  Henry  was  a  member
of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  his  state,  and  of
both  branches  of  the  legislature. — His  son,  Robert
Pryor,  b.  in  Henry's  Mills,  Scott  co.,  Ky.,  24  Nov.,
1788;  d.  in  Hopki'nsville,  Ky.,  25  Aug.*  1826,  was
graduated  at  Transylvania  college,  studied  law
with  Henry  Clay,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1809,  serving  in  that  year  as  prosecuting  attorney
for  his  district.  He  was  aide  to  his  father  in
the  war  of  1812,  and  afterward  settled  in  Chris-
tian county,  Ky.,  where  he  became  prosecuting
attorney  for  that  circuit.  He  was  then  elected  to
congress  as  a  Clay  Democrat,  and  served  from  1
Dec,  1823,  till  his  death.  As  a  member  of  the
committee  on  roads  and  canals  he  obtained  the
first  appropriation  that  was  ever  granted  for  im-
proving the  Mississippi. — Another  son,  John
Flournoy,  physician,  b.  in  Henry's  Mills,  Ky.,  17
Jan.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Burlington,  Iowa,  12  Nov.,  1873,
was  educated  at  Georgetown  academy,  Ky.,  at-


tended lectures  at  Jefferson  medical  college,  Phila-
delphia, and  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
Ehysicians  and  surgeons,  New  York,  in  1817.  He
ad  previously  served  at  Port  Meigs  in  1813,  as
surgeon's  mate  of  Kentucky  troops.  In  183n
while  a  resident  of  Hopkinsville,  Ky.,  he  organ-
ized the  first  temperance  society  there.  He  was
elected  to  congress  for  the  unexpired  term  of  his
brother  Robert,  served  in  1826-'7,  and  in  1831  be-
came professor  in  the  Medical  college  of  Ohio,
Cincinnati.  During  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1891
he  was  active  in  relieving  the  suffering  in  that
city.  He  removed  to  Bloomington,  111.,  in  1834,
and  in  1845  to  Burlington,  Iowa,  where  he  prac-
tised his  profession.  Dr.  Henry  contributed  ar-
ticles to  medical  journals,  and  published  a  treatise
on  the  "  Causes  and  Treatment  of  Cholera  "  (1833).
— Another  son,  G  nsl a  v  us  Adolphus,  orator,  b.  in
Cherry  Spring,  Scott  co.,  Ky.,  8  Oct.,  1804 ;  d.  in
Clarksville,  Tenn.,  10  Sept.,  1880,  was  graduated
at  Transylvania  university  in  1825,  and  became  a
lawyer.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Kentucky  legis-
lature in  1831-'3,  and  shortly  afterward  removed
to  Tennessee,  where  he  was  one  of  the  leaders  of
the  Whig  minority.  He  achieved  great  reputation
as  a  public  speaker,  and  was  known  throughout
the  south  as  the  "  eagle  orator  of  Tennessee."  He
was  in  the  Tennessee  legislature  in  1851,  was  four
times  on  the  Whig  electoral  ticket,  and  in  1860
was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  at  Baltimore  that
nominated  Bell  and  Everett,  afterward  speaking  in
their  behalf  in  the  northern  states.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Confederate  senate  from  1861  till
the  close  of  the  civil  war,  and  after  the  fall  of
Vicksburg,  at  the  request  of  Jefferson  Davis,  made
public  speeches  to  encourage  the  people.  He  was
twice  a  candidate  for  governor  of  Tennessee,  but
was  each  time  defeated  by  Andrew  Johnson.

HENRY,  William  Alexander,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  30  Dec,  1816.  He  was
educated  at  the  high-school,  Halifax,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  November,  1840.
In  1841  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Nova
Scotia  assembly,  in  which  he  sat  for  many  years.
He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Canadian
parliament  in  1867  and  1869.  He  has  been  ina\<>r
of  Halifax,  became  a  member  of  the  provincial  ex-
ecutive council  in  1849,  and  subsequently  held
office  three  times  as  solicitor-general,  and"  was  also
provincial  secretary  and  attorney-general.  He  took
a  prominent  part  in  the  question  of  the  union  of
the  British  American  provinces,  was  a  delegate
to  Great  Britain  on  public  business  in  1858  and
1865,  and  in  the  winter  of  1866  took  part  in  an  un-
successful negotiation  for  the  continuance  of  the
reciprocity  treaty  between  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Charlotte-
town  union  conference  and  to  that  of  Quebec,  and
in  July,  1866,  with  the  delegates  from  Canada,
Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick,  met  in  London
and  adopted  a  scheme  of  union  for  submission  to
the  home  government,  which  was  adopted.  He
was  a  judge  in  the  trial  of  election  cases  in  Nova
Scotia  in  1874,  and  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Canada  in  October,  1875.  He
was  instrumental  in  securing  measures  for  the  pro-
tection of  the  Canadian  fisheries,  in  establishing  a
complete  system  of  telegraphs  for  Nova  Scotia,  and
in  publishing  the  revised  statutes  of  that  province.
HENRY,  William  Seaton,  soldier,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  in  1816 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  March,
1851.  His  father  was  a  lawyer  in  Albany.  The
son  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1835,  assigned  to  the  3d  infantry,  and  served  OH
the  frontier  in  the  Florida  war  of  1841-2,  and  in


HENSHAW


HENSHAW


177


the  war  with  Mexico.  He  became  1st  lieutenant,
7  July,  1838,  captain,  18  May,  1846,  and  was  bre-
vet ted  major,  23  Sept.,  1846,  for  gallantry  at  Mon-
terey. He  was  afterward  on  garrison  and  recruit-
ing service  till  his  death.  Maj.  Henry  published
"Campaign  Sketches  of  the  War  with  Mexico"
(New  York,  1848). — His  son,  Guy  Vernor,  soldier,
b.  in  Fort  Smith,  Indian  territory,  9  March,  1839,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1861,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.  He  was
promoted  to  1st  lieutenant  on  14  May,  was  on  Gen.
McDowell's  staff  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and
was  brevetted  captain,  22  Oct.,  1862,  for  gallantry
in  an  action  near  Pocotaligo  river,  S.  C.  He  com-
manded a  battalion  in  Hunter's  advance  on  Charles-
ton in  1863,  was  acting  chief  of  artillery  of  the  De-
partment of  the  South  in  June  of  that  year,  and
was  made  colonel  of  the  40th  Massachusetts  regi-
ment on  9  Nov.  He  commanded  a  brigade  in  the
Army  of  the  James  in  1864-'5,  and  received  the
brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel,  29  Sept.,  1864,  and
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  30  June,  1864,  for
his  services  before  Petersburg.  After  the  war  he
became  captain  in  the  1st  artillery,  1  Dec,  1865,
and  has  since  served  chiefly  on  the  frontier  against
hostile  Indians.  He  suffered  severely  from  frost-
bites in  the  Black  Hills  expedition,  and  was
wounded  in  the  battle  of  Rose  Bud  Creek,  Mon-
tana, with  Sitting  Bull,  17  June,  1876.  losing  the
use  of  one  eye.  On  26  June,  1881,  he  was  promoted
to  major  in  the  9th  cavalry,  and  is  now  (1887)  sta-
tioned at  Omaha,  Neb.  He  has  published  "  Mili-
tary Record  of  Civilian  Appointments  in  the  U.  S.
Army "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1865-'71) ;  "  Army
Catechism  for  Non-commissioned  Officers  and  Sol-
diers" (Salt  Lake  City,  1881);  and  "Manual  on
Target  Practice  "  (Fort  Leavenworth,  Kan.,  1884).
HENSHAW,  John  Prentiss  Kewley,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  13  June,  1792  ;  d.
near  Frederick,  Md.,  19  July,  1852.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Middlebury  in  1808,  and  spent  a  year  at
Harvard  as  a  resident  graduate.  During  a  visit  to
his  native  place  during  this  period,  he  was  first
deeply  impressed  by  the  truths  of  religion,  and  he
subsequently  became  a  member  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  although  he  had  been  educated
as  a  Congregationalist.  Shortly  afterward  Bishop
Griswold  appointed  him  a  lay-reader,  and  by  his
zealous  labors  several  congregations  were  estab-
lished in  different  parts  of  Vermont.  After  study-
ing theology  and  taking  charge  of  a  church  at
Marblehead,  Mass.,  for  a  time,  he  was  ordered  dea-
con on  his  twenty-first  birthday.  Soon  afterward
he  was  called  to  St.  Ann's  church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
where  he  was  ordained  priest  on  his  twenty-fourth
birthday.  Twenty-six  years  of  his  life  were  passed
as  rector  of  St.  Peter's,  Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he
went  in  1817.  On  his  accession  to  the  rectorship
there  were  only  45  communicants,  but  at  the  close
of  his  ministry  the  number  had  increased  to  474,
the  whole  number  added  during  his  incumbency
being  900. He  also  baptized 1,018  persons,  and

S resented  506  for  confirmation.  During  his  resi-
ence  in  Maryland,  Dr.  Henshaw  (he  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  his  alma  mater  in  1830)  ex-
erted an  important  influence  beyond  the  confines
of  his  own  parish  and  city,  taking  an  active  part  in
the  erection  of  many  churches,  and  the  organiza-
tion of  several  congregations.  He  was  a  devoted
friend  to  the  cause  of  missions,  and  performed
valuable  services  in  the  conventions,  both  diocesan
and  general.  He  was  repeatedly  nominated  as
bishop  of  Maryland,  but  failed  to  receive  a  suffi-
ciently large  vote  to  secure  his  election.  On  the
erection  of  Rhode  Island  into  a  separate  diocese  he

VOL.  III. — 12


was  chosen  its  head  in  1843,  and  made  rector  of
Grace  church,  Providence.  In  1848  his  health  be-
gan to  fail,  and  in  1850  he  had  a  stroke  of  apo-
plexy. In  the  summer  of  1852  he  was  called  to
Serform  episcopal  functions  in  the  diocese  of
faryland  during  Bishop  Wittingham's  absence  in
Europe,  but  was  again  stricken  with  apoplexy,  this
time  fatally,  after  he  had  been  engaged  about  two
weeks  in  the  discharge  of  these  duties.  Bishop
Henshaw  possessed  a  mind  naturally  clear,  sound,
and  vigorous,  trained  to  patient  labor.  He  ranked
high  as  a  preacher,  never  reading  his  sermons,  but
composing  them  with  care.  He  was  also  exceed-
ingly happy  as  an  extemporaneous  speaker.  He
published  many  sermons,  charges,  and  books,
among  which  were  "  An  Oration  delivered  before
the  Associated  Alumni  of  Middlebury  College"
(1827):  "Hymns"  (5th  ed.,  1832);  "The  Useful-
ness of  Sunday  Schools  "  (1833) ;  "  Henshaw's  Sheri-
dan," being  "  Lessons  on  Elocution,"  etc.  (1834) ;
"Theology  for  the  People"  (1840);  "Memoir  of
Right  Rev.  Channing  Moore,  D.  D."  (1842) ;  "  An
Inquiry  concerning  the  Second  Advent "  (1842) ;
"  Lectures  on  the  Terms  Priest,  Altar,  etc.,"  and
"  The  Work  of  Christ's  Living  Body  "  (1843).

HENSHAW,  Joshua  Sidney,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  29
April,  1859.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Jonathan
Belcher,  and  his  name,  which  was  originally  Joshua
Henshaw  Belcher,  was  changed  by  an  act  of  the
Pennsylvania  legislature  in  1845.  He  became  a
teacher  in  ChaunceyHall  institute,  Boston,  in  1833,
and  from  September,  1837,  till  1841  was  instructor
of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  During  this
period  he  made  a  voyage  in  the  frigate  "  Columbia,"
an  account  of  which  was  published  under  the  title
"Around  the  World,  by  an  Officer  of  the  U.  S.
Navy"  (New  York,  1840).  After  resigning  his
professorship  in  the  navy  he  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia,  but  in  1843  he
was  reinstated  in  his  former  post.  From  1848  till
his  death  he  practised  law  in  Utica.  He  published
"  Philosophy  of  Human  Progress"  (1835) ;  "  Incite-
ments to  Moral  and  Intellectual  Well-Doing"
(1836);  "Life  of  Father  Mathew"  (1847);  and
"United  States  Manual  for  Consuls"  (1849).  A
work  on  "  Bible  Ethics  "  was  left  unfinished.

HENSHAW,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1735;  d.  in  Leicester,  Mass.,  21
Feb.,  1820.  He  was  one  of  the  original  settlers  of
Leicester,  whither  he  removed  in  1748.  He  was  a
lieutenant  of  provincial  troops  under  Amherst  in
1759,  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  Little's  regiment
at  the  siege  of  Boston,  and  took  part  subsequently
in  the  battles  of  Long  Island,  White  Plains,  Tren-
ton, and  Princeton.  He  left  the  service  early  in  1777.
— His  nephew,  David,  secretary  of  the  navy,  b.  in
Leicester,  Mass.,  2  April,  1791;  d.  there,  11  Nov.,
1852,  was  apprenticed  to  a  druggist  in  Boston  at
the  age  of  sixteen,  and  carried  on  business  on  his
own  account  from  1814  till  1829.  He  devoted  his
leisure  to  study,  acquired  note  as  a  political  writer,
published  pamphlets  and  review  articles  in  advo-
cacy of  free-trade,  and  zealously  supported  the
principles  of  the  Democratic  party.  He  was  elected
to  the  state  senate  in  1826  and  to  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives in  1839,  after  holding  the  post  of  collector
of  customs  at  Boston  since  1830.  He  was  active  in
promoting  the  earlier  railroad  enterprises  in  Massa-
chusetts, and  was  interested  in  the  construction  of
the  Boston  and  Worcester,  the  Boston  and  Albany,
and  the  Boston  and  Providence  railroads.  On  24
July,  1843,  he  was  appointed  by  President  Tyler
secretary  of  the  navy,  but.  after  holding  the  office
several  months,  was  rejected  by  the  senate,  and


178


HENSLER


HENTZ


succeeded  by  Thomas  W.  Gilmer,  of  Virginia,  on
15  Feb.,  1844.  Among  his  publications  were
"  Letters  on  the  Internal  Improvement  and  Com-
merce of  the  West"  (Boston,  1839).  —  William's
grandson,  Daniel,  lawyer  and  journalist,  b.  in
Leicester,  Mass.,  9  May,  1782 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
9  July,  1863,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1806,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1809,
and  practised  in  Winchendon,  Mass.,  till  1830,  then
for  a  number  of  years  at  Worcester,  and  afterward
at  Lynn.  He  gave  up  his  professional  business
in  order  to  undertake  the  editorship  of  the  Lynn
"  Record,"  which  he  conducted  till  its  discontinu-
ance, a  period  of  fourteen  vears,  after  which  he
resided  in  Boston.  He  read  many  papers  before
the  New  England  Historic-genealogical  society.

HENSLER,  Eliza,  singer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
about  1835.  She  was  the  daughter  of  a  German
shoemaker,  possessed  a  fine  voice  and  a  grace-
ful person,  and  was  educated  for  the  operatic
stage.  Her  first  appearance  was  at  the  Academy
of  Music,  New  York,  at  the  age  of  fifteen.  She
afterward  went  to  Paris  to  complete  her  training,
and  appeared  at  the  Grand  Opera  in  that  city,  but
had  little  success.  She  then  went  to  Lisbon,  and
became  a  favorite.  On  10  June,  1869,  she  married
the  ex-king  of  Portugal,  Ferdinand,  Duke  of  Saxe-
Coburg-Gotha,  who  first  caused  her  to  be  raised
to  the  nobility  with  the  title  of  Countess  of  Edla.

HENSON,  Josiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Port  To-
bacco, Charles  co.,  Md.,  15  June,  1787;  d.  in  Dres-
den. Ontario,  in  1881. He  was  a  pure-blooded

negro,  and  was
born  and  bred  as  a
slave.  The  story  of
his  life  served  as
the  foundation  for
Mrs.  Harriet  B.
Stowe's  novel  of
"  Uncle  Tom's  Cab-
in." When  a  young
man  and  a  preach-
er, he  took  all  his
master's  slaves  to
a  relative  in  Ken-
tucky, to  prevent
their  passing  into
the  hands  of  cred-

/itors. There  they
t/2-V1-^-*?^ '&—tsZ*-~> were  hired  out  to
"  neighboring  plant-

ers. He  worked  most  of  the  time  for  a  good-
natured  master  named  St.  Clair,  whose  young
daughter  read  to  him.  His  arms  were  crippled,
like  those  of  Uncle  Tom  in  the  novel,  the  re-
sult of  a  blow  from  the  Maryland  overseer.  He
paid  $500  toward  purchasing  his  freedom,  but  was
taken  to  New  Orleans  by  his  master's  son  to  be
sold,  when  the  latter  was  attacked  with  yellow
fever,  and  the  slave  accompanied  him  back  to
Kentucky  and  nursed  him  through  his  sickness.
He  finally  escaped  with  his  wife,  carrying  his  two
children  on  his  back  through  the  swamps  to  Cin-
cinnati, where  he  had  friends  among  the  colored
people,  and  then  across  the  wilderness  to  San-
dusky, whence  they  were  conveyed  to  Canada  by
the  benevolent  captain  of  a  schooner.  "  Uncle
Si,"  as  he  was  called,  settled  with  his  family  at
Colchester,  Ontario.  He  was  the  captain  of  a
company  of  colored  men  during  the  Canadian  re-
bellion. Subsequently  he  took  up  a  tract  of  land
on  Sydenham  river,  where  the  town  of  Dresden
was  afterward  situated.  There  he  prospered  as  a
farmer,  and  was  the  pastor  of  a  church.  At  the
age  of  fifty-five  he  began  to  learn  to  read and


write.  He  met  Mrs.  Stowe,  and  described  to  her
the  events  of  his  life.  He  also  wrote  an  "  Autobi-
ography," which  was  afterward  published,  with  an
introduction  by  Mrs.  Stowe  (Boston,  1858).  In
1850  he  went  to  England,  and  lectured  in  London.
He  visited  England  again  in  1852,  and  a  third
time  in  1876,  on  which  occasion  he  lectured  and
preached  in  various  cities,  and  was  entertained  at
Windsor  Castle  by  Queen  Victoria.

HENSON,  Poindexter  Smith,  clergyman,  b.
in  Fluvanna  county,  Va.,  7  Dec,  1831.  He  was
graduated  at  Richmond  college  in  1848,  and  at  the
University  of  Virginia  in  1851.  He  taught  in
Milton,  N.  C,  for  two  years,  at  the  same  time
studying  law  and  editing  a  weekly  paper,  and  was
professor  of  natural  science  in  the  Chowan  female
college  at  Murfreesborough,  N.  C,  for  two  years.
After  beginning  the  practice  of  the  law  in  his  na-
tive county,  he  was  ordained  as  minister  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Fluvanna  in  February,  1856.
He  also  conducted  a  female  seminary  while  he  was
there.  On  27  Dec,  1867,  he  became  pastor  of  the
Broad  street  church  in  Philadelphia,  which  he  left
in  1867,  to  organize  the  Memorial  church,  where
he  gathered  the  largest  Protestant  congregation  in
that  city.  Dr.  Henson  is  also  editor  of  the  "  Bap-
tist Teacher."  In  1878  he  declined  the  presidency
of  Lewisburg  university.

HENTZ,  Nicholas  Marcellus,  educator,  b.  in
Versailles,  France,  25  July,  1797 ;  d.  in  Marianna,
Fla.,  4  Nov.,  1856.  He  studied  medicine  and
learned  the  art  of  miniature-painting  in  Paris,
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1816,  taught
French  and  miniature-painting  in  Boston,  Phila-
delphia, and  other  places,  and  in  1824-'5  was  as-
sociated with  George  Bancroft  in  the  Round  Hill
school  at  Northampton,  Mass.  In  1826-'30  he  was
professor  of  modern  languages  and  belles-lettres
in  the  University  of  North  Carolina.  He  removed
with  his  wife  to  Covington,  Ky.,  in  1831,  and  in
the  following  year  they  took  charge  of  a  female
seminary  near  Cincinnati.  They  afterward  con-
ducted various  schools  in  Alabama  and  Georgia,
and  in  1851  removed  to  Marianna,  Fla.,  on  account
of  the  illness  of  Prof.  Hentz.  He  was  an  ento-
mologist of  repute,  and  the  author  of  a  monograph
on  the  "Arachnides,  or  Spiders  of  the  Tinted
States,"  published  by  the  Boston  society  of  natural
history  (Boston,  1875). — His  wife.  Caroline  Lee,
author,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Mass.,  1  June,  1800 ;  d.  in
Marianna,  Fla.,  11  Feb.,  1856,  was  a  daughter  of
Gen.  John  Whiting,  and  married  Mr.  Hentz  in
1824.  While  at  Covington,  Ky.,  Mrs.  Hentz,  who
had  written  a  poem,  a  novel,  and  a  tragedy  before
she  was  twelve  years  old,  competed  for  a  prize  of
$500  that  had  been  offered  for  a  play  by  the  di-
rectors of  the  Arch  street  theatre  in  Philadelphia.
The  prize  was  awarded  to  her  for  the  tragedy  of
"  De  Lara,  or  the  Moorish  Bride,"  which  was  pro-
duced on  the  stage,  and  afterward  published  if
book-form.  "  Lamorah,  or  the  Western  Wild,"
another  tragedy,  was  acted  at  Cincinnati  and  pub-
lished in  a  newspaper  at  Columbus,  Ga.  "  Con-
stance of  Werdenberg,"  a  third,  remained  unpub-
lished. She  was  the  author  of  numerous  snow
poems,  and  a  voluminous  writer  of  tales  and  nov-
elettes that  were  published  in  periodicals  and
newspapers,  and  many  of  them  afterward  collected
into  volumes.  She  was  successful  in  depicting  the
phases  of  southern  social  life.  Her  first  two  books,
which  were  the  most  extensively  read  of  her  pro-
ductions, were  "Aunt  Patty's  Scrap-Bag "  (Phila-
delphia, 1846)  and  "The  Mob  Cap"  (1848).  H«
other  tales  include  "  Linda,  or  the  Young  Pilot  of
the Belle  Creole" (1850); "Rena, or  the  Snow


I


HEPBURN


HERBERT


179


Bird  "  (1851) ;  "  Marcus  Warland,  or  the  Long  Moss
Spring  "  (1852);  "Wild  Jack,  or  the  Stolen  Child  "
(1853) ;  "  Helen  and  Arthur,  or  Miss  Thusa's  Spin-
ning-Wheel" (1853);  "The  Planter's  Northern
Bride  "  (1854) ;  "  Love  after  Marriage,  and  other
Stories  "  (1854) ;  "  The  Lost  Daughter  " ;  "  Robert
Graham,  a  Sequel  to  '  Linda ' "  (1856) ;  and  "  Ernest
Linwood  "  (1856).  Mrs.  Hentz  was  the  author  of  a
novel  called  "  Lovell's  Folly,"  the  purpose  of  which
was  to  show  the  incorrectness  of  the  prejudices
entertained  against  each  other  by  northern  and
southern  people.  A  sketch  of  her  life,  by  the  Rev.
William  C.  Langdon,  was  prefixed  to  "Linda."
— Their  daughter,  Julia  L.,  b.  at  Chapel  Hill,
N.  C,  in  1829 ;  d.  in  1879,  was  educated  by  her  par-
ents, and  in  1846  married,  at  Tuskegee,  Dr.  J.  W.
Keyes,  with  whom  she  removed  to  his  home  in
Florida.  Before  and  after  her  marriage  she  wrote
short  poems,  most  of  which  were  never  published.
In  1857  she  removed  with  her  husband  to  Mont-
gomery, Ala.  Dr.  Keyes  became  an  officer  in  the
Confederate  army,  and  after  the  war  took  his
family  to  Brazil,  but  returned  in  1870  to  Mont-
gomery. In  1859  Mrs.  Keyes  wrote  a  prize  poem
entitled  "  A  Dream  of  Locust  Dell."  A  selection
of  her  poems  was  published  by  her  husband.
—  Another  daughter,  Caroline  Therese,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  22  Nov.,  1833,  was  educated  by
her  parents,  and  married  Rev.  James  0.  Branch.
She  sent  a  series  of  letters  from  California  to  the
"Southern  Christian  Advocate  "in  1875,  and  has
published  many  tales  and  sketches  in  magazines.

HEPBURN,  James  Curtis,  missionary,  b.  in
Milton.  Northumberland  co.,  Pa.,  in  1815.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1833.  and  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1836.  After  practising  in  Norristown,
Pa.,  he  married  and  went  as  a  medical  missionary
to  China.  The  ports  not  being  opened,  he  spent  a
year  at  Singapore,  prior  to  five  years  of  labor  at
Amoy.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1845,
and  settled  in  New  York  city,  but  in  1859  aban-
doned a  large  practice  to  go  as  missionary  to  Japan.
Settling  at  Kanagawa,  he  has  been  engaged,  with
few  interruptions,  in  daily  dispensary  work,  as  well
as  in  translation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  in  philan-
thropic and  literary  labors,  and  especially  in  lexi-
cography. In  the  autumn  of  1872  the  mikado
accepted  from  his  hands  a  copy  of  the  Bible — an
event  of  profound  significance,  and  so  felt  by  the
Japanese.  He  has  published  a  "  Japanese-English
and  English  -  Japanese  Dictionary  "  in  Roman,
kata-kana  Japanese,  and  Chinese  characters  (1867 :
2d  ed.,  with  grammar,  1872;  3d  ed.,  1886).  The
finished  work  includes  the  archaic  words  of  the
most  ancient  texts,  besides  the  expanded  vocabulary
which  the  amazing  progress  of  new  Japan  has
necessitated.  All  other  dictionaries  of  Japanese
vocables,  in  other  languages,  are  based  on  this
American  scholar's  monument  of  industry,  which
he  created  from  materials  that  were  gathered  by
himself,  or  bv  natives  trained  under  his  own  eye.

HEP  WORTH,  George  Husrhes,  clergvman,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  4  Feb.,  1833.  He  studied  theology
at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1855.  His  first  pastorate  was  in  the  Unitarian
congregation  at  Nantucket,  Mass.,  from  1855  till
1857.  In  1858  he  became  pastor  of  the  Church  of
the  Unity,  Boston,  with  which  he  remained  con-
nected until  1870.  In  1862  he  took  temporary
leave  of  his  church,  serving  at  first  as  chaplain
with  the  47th  Massachusetts  regiment  in  Louisiana.
In  1863  he  was  transferred  to  the  staff  of  Gen.
Banks,  and  at  the  end  of  that  vear  returned  to  his
congregation  in  Boston. In  1*870  Mr.  Hepworth


left  the  Church  of  the  Unity  and  spent  part  of
the  year  in  Cambridge  as  a  resident  graduate,  at
the  same  time  preaching  on  Sunday  evenings  in
the  Boston  theatres.  In  1870  he  was  invited  to
fill  the  pulpit  of  the  Church  of  the  Messiah,  New
York  city.  Here  he  remained  nearly  two  years,
but  in  the  autumn  of  1872  delivered  a  farewell
sermon,  in  which  he  declared  himself  a  believer  in
the  divinity  of  Christ,  He  then  formed  a  new
Independent  congregation,  the  Church  of  the  Dis-
ciples, and  continued  for  several  years  with  his
followers.  Subsequently  Mr.  Hepworth  minis-
tered to  different  congregations  in  New  Jersey.
He  has  recently  left  the  pulpit,  and  is  now  (1887)
a  journalist  connected  with  the  "  New  York  Her-
ald." His  published  works  include  "  Whip,  Sword,
and  Hoe  "  (Boston,  1864) ;  "  The  Little  Gentleman
in  Green"  (1865);  "Rocks  and  Shoals"  (1870);
"  Lectures  to  Young  Men  "  (1870) ;  "  Christ  and  his
Church  "  (New  York,  1872) ;  "  Starboard  and  Port "
(1876) ;  and  a  story  that  has  for  its  title  three  ex-
clamation-marks, " !  !  ! "  (New  York,  1885).

HERAULI),  Andr6,  French  scientist,  b.  in
Dijon  in  1662 :  d.  in  Versailles  in  1724.  The  Paris
academy  of  sciences  having  invited  Louis  XIV.  to
send  a  mission  to  Mexico  in  1706,  Huet  proposed
Herauld,  who  sailed  from  Brest  on  the  frigate
"  La  Vaillante  "  in  May,  1706,  landing  in  Mexico  in
July.  He  immediately  began  his  explorations,  and
in  two  years  collected  900  botanical  and  over  1,200
mineralogical  specimens.  Returning  to  France  in
1709.  his  vessel  was  captured  by  the  English,  who
confiscated  his  collections  and  took  him  to  Plym-
outh as  a  prisoner.  The  Academy  of  Paris  com-
plained to  the  Royal  institute  of  London,  and
Herauld  obtained  the  restitution  of  his  collections
in  1719.  He  devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  to
arranging  them,  and  left  them  by  his  will  to  the
Academy  of  sciences,  which  afterward  gave  them
in  part  to  the  Jardin  des  plantes  and  the  Museum
of  natural  history.  Herauld  published  "  Flore  de
la  Nouvelle  Espagne "  (6  vols.,  with  illustrations
and  charts.  Paris.  1722);  "  Les  plantes  medicinales
de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne"  (with  illustrations,  1721);
and  "Plan  de  mineralogie  du  royaume  de  la
Nouvelle  Espagne"  (1723).

HERBERMANN,  Charles  George,  educator,
b.  near  Munster,  Westphalia,  8  Dec,  1840.  He
came  to  the  United  States  with  his  parents  at  the
age  of  ten.  and  was  graduated  at  St.  Francis  Xa-
vier's  college,  New  York  city,  in  1858.  After  teach-
ing there  for  several  years,  he  was  appointed  in
1869  professor  of  Latin  in  the  College  of  the  city
of  New  York,  and  was  made  librarian  there  in
1873.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  St.
Francis  Xavier  in  1884.  He  has  published  "  Busi-
ness Life  in  Ancient  Rome"  (New  York,  1880),
and  an  edition  of  Sallust's  "  Jugurtha  "  (1886),  and
is  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  "Catholic  Quar-
terly Review  "  and  other  periodicals.

HERBERT,  Henry  William,  author,  b.  in
London,  England,  7  April,  1807;  d.  in  New  York
city,  17  May,  1858.  His  father.  Rev.  William
Herbert,  was  a  cousin  of  the  Earl  of  Carnarvon.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1829,  with
honors.  In  the  winter  of  the  following  year,
having  lost  his  property  through  the  dishonesty
of  a  trustee,  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and
after  teaching  the  classics  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
in  1831  became  Greek  and  Latin  preceptor  in  a
classical  institute  in  New  York  city,  where  he
taught  for  about  eight  years,  devoting  his  leisure
hours  to  writing.  His  first  literary  efforts  were
essays,  which  were  sent  anonymously  to  the  lead-
ing weeklies,  but  rejected  when  payment  was  de-


180


HERBERT


HERBST


J&n*y£^$dQ{ir


manded  for  them.  Irritated  by  this,  and  especial-
ly by  the  return  of  a  carefully  prepared  article
offered  to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  he  soon
afterward  established  the  "  American  Monthly
Magazine,"  the  editorship  of  which  he  finally  trans-
ferred to  Charles  Fenno  Hoffman.  His  first  novel,
entitled  "  The  Broth-
ers, a  Tale  of  the
Fronde  "  (1834),  was
issued  anonymously
at  the  urgent  request
of  the  publishers.  It
was  well  received  by
the  critics  of  the  day,
and  attributed  to  G.
P.  R.  James,  Gilmore
Simms;  Theodore  S.
Fay,  and  to  other  na-
tive as  well  as  for-
eign novelists.  But
the  financial  reward
for  so  much  labor
disheartened  the  au-
thor, and  he  resolved
to  begin  the  study  of
law,  and  to  practise  it  as  a  profession.  In  order
to  do  this,  as  he  soon  discovered,  he  must  become
an  American  citizen,  and  he  would  not  do  this,
notwithstanding  his  strong  desire  to  be  regarded
as  an  American  in  sentiment  and  sympathy.  Be-
tween 1837  and  1855  he  published  various  novels,
but  afterward  devoted  himself  to  historical  com-
position. He  was  an  enthusiastic  sportsman,  and
was  the  first  in  this  country  to  give  prominence  to
that  department  of  literature.  Under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Frank  Forester  "  he  wrote  largely  for
sporting  papers,  issuing  also  several  works  on  hunt-
ing and  fishing.  He  was  also  industrious  as  a
translator.  During  the  last  twelve  years  of  his
life,  Mr.  Herbert's  home  was  midway  between
Newark  and  Belleville,  N.  J.,  on  the  banks  of  the
Passaic,  where  he  owned  three  quarters  of  an  acre
of  land,  with  a  cottage.  This  spot  he  called  "  The
Cedars,"  and  here  after  the  death  of  his  first  wife
in  1846  he  lived  most  of  the  time  alone,  surrounded
by  his  dogs,  of  which  he  was  very  fond.  In  Feb-
ruary, 1858,  he  married  again,  and  about  three
months  afterward  his  wife,  influenced  by  reports
concerning  his  former  dissipation,  left  him,  and
notified  him  through  the  newspapers  that  she  had
applied  for  a  divorce.  Thereupon  he  ordered  a
grand  dinner  to  be  served  in  his  rooms  in  New
York  city,  and  invited  to  it  his  friends  of  olden
times,  only  one  of  whom,  however,  accepted.  After
dinner  Herbert  rose  from  the  table,  placed  himself
before  a  full-length  mirror,  and,  taking  aim  from
the  reflection  in  the  glass,  shot  himself  through
the  heart.  His  body  was  carried  back  to  "The
Cedars,"  and  thence  through  his  private  gate,
which  opened  into  Mount  Pleasant  cemetery,  he
was  borne  to  his  grave  only  a  few  hundred  yards
from  his  cottage.  A  plain  stone  marks  the  spot,
and  on  it  is  carved,  according  to  his  wishes,  the
word  Infelicissimus.  A  movement  has  been  set
on  foot  to  erect  a  monument  to  his  memory.
His  novels  include  "  Cromwell "  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1837);  " Marmaduke  Wyvil"  (1843);  '"The
Roman  Traitor  "  (2  vols.,  Baltimore,  1846) ;  "  The
Puritans  of  New  England:  A  Historical  Ro-
mance of  the  Days  of  Witchcraft "  (1853),  which
was  subsequently  issued  under  the  title  of  "  The
Puritan's  Daughter  "  (Philadelphia).  His  last  ro-
mance was  the  "  Saxon  Serf,"  which  first  appeared
as  a  serial,  and  when  completed  was  reprinted  in
book-form  under  the  title  of  "  Sherwood  Forest "


(1855).  His  historical  works  are  "  The  Captains  of
the  Old  World  "  (New  York,  1851) ;  "  The  Cava-
liers of  England,"  and  "  The  Knights  of  England  "
(1852) ;  "  The  Chevaliers  of  France  "  (1853) ;  "  Per-
sons and  Pictures  from  French  and  English  His-
tory," and  "  The  Captains  of  the  Great  Roman  Re-
public "  (1854) ;  and  "Memoirs  of  Henry  VIII.  and
his  Six  Wives  "  (1855).  A  companion  volume,  en-
titled "The  Royal  Marys  of  Mediaeval  History,"
was  fully  completed  at  the  time  of  his  death,  but
unfortunately  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  money-lender
to  whom  he  had  hypothecated  it,  chapter  by  chap-
ter, as  the  work  progressed.  It  probably  went  to
the  junk-dealer,  for  it  has  not  yet  been  found.  His
books  on  outdoor  sports  include  "  The  Field  Sports
of  the  United  States  and  British  Provinces  of
North  America,"  with  illustrations  by  himself  (2
vols.,  1848);  "Fish  and  Fishing  of  the  United
States  and  British  Provinces  "  (1849) ;  "  Frank  For-
ester and  his  Friends  "  (London,  1849) ;  "  Warwick
Woodlands,"  a  series  of  sketches  that  he  had  con-
tributed in  1839  to  the  "American  Turf  Register"
(New  York) ;  three  collections  of  articles  that  had
appeared  in  "  Graham's  Magazine,"  entitled  "  My
Shooting- Box "  (1846);  "American  Game  in  its
Season "  (1853) ;  and  "The  Deerstalkers";  "Com-
plete Manual  for  Young  Sportsmen  "  (1852) ;  and
"  Horse  and  Horsemanship  in  North  America  "  (2
vols.,  1857),  a  large  and  costly  work,  the  practical
portions  of  which  he  condensed  into  a  small  vol-
ume, entitled  "  Hints  to  Horsekeepers  "  (1859).  As
a  translator,  Mr.  Herbert  was  very  industrious.
With  the  exception,  however,  of  the  "  Prometheus
and  Agamemnon  "  of  ^Eschylus,  done  mostly  for
amusement  (1849),  his  translations  were  chiefly  from
the  French,  and  consisted  of  five  of  the  romances
of  Eugene  Sue,  with  two  or  three  of  those  of
Alexander  Dumas,  and  Weiss's  "  Protestant  Refu-
gees "  (1854) ;  "  Fugitive  Sporting  Sketches,  edited
by  Will  Wildwood,"  appeared  in  1879,  and  his
"  Poems,"  edited  bv  Morgan  Herbert,  are  in  press
(1887).  David  W.  Judd  is  also  editing  the  "  Life
and  Writings  of  Frank  Forester,"  to  comprise  ten
volumes,  two  of  which  have  been  issued  in  New
York.  See  "Frank  Forester's  Life  and  Writ-
ings," by  Col.  Thomas  Picton  (1881).

HERBETTE,  Andr6  Paul,  French  iconog-
rapher,  b.  in  Santo  Domingo  in  1769 ;  d.  in  Paris
in  1817.  He  served  in  garrison  at  Santo  Domingo,
1787-'91,  and  afterward  establishing  himself  in  the
island  of  Tortugas,  made  a  rich  collection  of  plants.
He  left  Tortugas  in  1798  for  the  United  States,  was
employed  as  a  master  of  design  in  Harvard  college,
and  accompanied  Humboldt  and  Bonpland  to  Paris
in  1802.  There,  with  Poiteau  and  Turpin,  Herbette
was  given  the  task  of  illustrating  Humboldt's  pub-
lications concerning  America,  and  had  exclusive
charge  of  the  iconography,  1803-'ll.  He  also  con-
tributed designs  to  botanical  periodicals  in  Ger-
many, France,  and  England,  and  published
"Apercu  sur  la  situation  politique  de  Saint  Do-
mingue  "  (Paris,  1809 ;  2d  ed.,  with  charts,  revised,
1817);  "Traite  d'iconographie  vegetale  des  Antil-
les" (2  vols.,  1807);  and  "  Dictionnaire  raisonne
d'iconographie  vegetale"  (1815).  Humboldt  ac-
knowledges his  obligations  to  Herbette.

HERBST,  John,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Kemp-
ten,  Germany,  23  Julv,  1735  ;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  C,
15  Jan.,  1812.  He  came  in  1786  to  the  United
States,  where,  after  serving  for  twenty-five  years
the  churches  at  Lancaster  and  Lititz,  Pa.,  he  was,
although  nearly  seventy-six  years  of  age,  conse-
crated, 12  May,  1811,  to  the  episcopacy,  and  ap-
pointed the  presiding  bishop  of  the  southern  dis-
trict of  the  Moravian  church.


HERDONANA

HERDONANA,  Antonio  Modesto,  Mexican
clergyman,  b.  in  Tepeapulco,  Mexico.  12  Feb.,
1709 ;  d.  in  Puebla  de  Los  Angeles,  31  May,  1758.
He  became  a  member  of  the  Jesuit  order  on  1
June,  1730,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  ministry
of  the  Indians  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  where  he
lived  twenty-four  years.  He  founded  the  College
of  St.  Francis  Xavier  in  Puebla  de  Los  Angeles  for
the  training  of  Jesuit  missionaries  to  the  Indians,
and  built  in  Mexico  the  College  of  St.  Mary  of  Gua-
deloupe for  Indian  girls.  He  wrote  "Constitu-
ciones  para  el  Colegio  de  Indias  doncellas  de  Ntra
Sra  de  Guadelupe  de  Mejico,"  "  Consultas  al  Rmo
P.  Ignacio  Visconti,  General  de  la  Compania  de
Jesus,"  "  Carta  al  Rmo  P.  General  de  la  Com  p.  de
Jesus  Luis  Centurione."  and  "  Representaciones  al
Arzobispo  y  a  la  Real  Audiencia  de  Mejico,  sobre
la  f  undacion  del  Colegio  para  las  Indias."

HEREDIA,  Jose"  Maria  de  (ay-ray'-dee-ah),
Cuban  author,  b.  in  Santiago  de  Cuba,  31  Dec,
1803 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in  May,  1839.  His  early  years
were  spent  in  travelling  with  his  parents  in  Cuba,
Florida,  Santo  Domingo,  Venezuela,  and  Mex-
ico. In  1817  he  went  to  Havana,  where  his  studies
were  completed.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1823,  and  in  the  same  year,  on  account  of  his  po-
litical and  liberal  ideas,  he  was  banished  to  the
United  States.  There  he  published  a  volume  of
poems  (New  York,  1825  ;  new  ed.,  enlarged,  2  vols.,
1832).  which  made  his  name  at  once  famous  as  a
lyrical  poet  in  every  Spanish-speaking  country.
In  the  same  year  he  was  called  by  President  Victo-
ria to  Mexico,  and  practised  law  there  till  the  end
of  his  life,  filling  several  high  offices.  His  trag-
edy "Sila"  was  performed  in  1826.  "Tiberio"  in
1827,  and  "Los  ultimos  romanos"  in  1829.  The
poems  of  Heredia  have  passed  through  numerous
editions  in  Spain  as  well  as  in  the  Spanish-American
countries,  and  have  been  translated,  totally  or  par-
tially, into  English,  French.  Italian,  German,  and
Portuguese.  The  best  Spanish  critics,  like  Lista,
Quintana,  Bello,  Canete,  (Janovas  del  Castillo,  and
Menendez  Pelayo,  have  paid  high  tributes  to  his
lyrical  talent ;  while  French  and  English  writers,
like  Villemain,  Ampere,  De  Mazade,  Kennedy,  and
Longfellow,  have  also  bestowed  their  praises  on
the  Cuban  poet.  There  has  been  recently  a  move-
ment in  Cuba  for  the  erection  of  a  monument  to
his  memory.  Heredia  also  published  "  Lecciones
de  Historia"  Universal"  (4  vols.,  1830-'l),  and  trans-
lations in  verse  of  Alfieri's  "Saul,"  Chenier's
"  Cayo  Graco,"  Ducis's  "  Abufar,"  Voltaire's  "  Ma-
homet," and  Crebillon's  "  Atreo  y  Thiestes."

HEREDIA,  Pedro  de,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in
Madrid  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  15th  century :  d.
at  sea  in  1555.  In  his  youth  he  killed  three  noble-
men in  a  brawl,  and  was  obliged  to  leave  Madrid,
taking  refuge  in  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  in-
herited some  property.  In  1526  he  was  appointeu
to  supersede  the  governor  of  Santa  Marta,  and
went  to  the  American  continent,  where  he  soon  dis-
tinguished himself  in  the  numerous  battles  against
the  Indians.  Heredia  went  to  Spain  and  obtained,
in  1532,  from  Charles  V.,  permission  to  explore
and  possess  the  territory  from  the  river  Magdalen
to  the  Atrato,  as  far  inland  as  the  equator.  With
three  vessels  and  about  100  men,  he  sailed  from
Spain,  touched  at  Hispaniola,  where,  from  his  es-
tates, he  obtained  more  men  and  a  supply  of  horses,
and  on  15  Jan.,  1533,  reached  the  coast  of  what
was  then  called  the  province  of  Calamari,  entering,
in  11°  N.,  a  port  which  he  called  Cartagena  de  las
Indias,  and  on  a  small  island,  Codego,  he  laid,  on
21  Jan.,  the  foundations  for  the  city  of  that  name.
After  defeating  the  Indians  in  the  battles  of  Ca-


HERING


181


nopote  and  Turvaco,  he  conquered  a  large  terri-
tory, and  founded  the  cities  of  San  Sebastian  de
Buena  Vista,  Santiago  de  ToM,  and  Villa  Maria.
In  1535  he  had  a  disagreement  with  the  newly
elected  bishop,  Tomas  de  Toro,  and  was  accused
of  appropriating  the  treasure  found  in  the  Indian
villages  without  accounting  to  the  crown  for  its
share.  He  was  tried  and  sent  as  a  prisoner  to
Spain.  But  the  council  of  India  exonerated  him,
and  he  soon  returned  to  his  government.  Hearing
that  Antioquia,  which  he  claimed  as  belonging  to
his  dominions,  was  occupied  by  Benalcazar's  troops,
he  marched  against  them ;  but  on  4  March,  1542,
was  taken  prisoner  and  sent  to  Panama  for  trial.
The  judges  acknowledged  his  right,  and  he  was
liberated.  On  27  July,  1543,  the  French  fleet  took
Cartagena  by  surprise.  Heredia  fled  to  the  woods,
and  the  city  was  plundered.  A  special  commis-
sioner was  sent  to  investigate  the  government  of
New  Granada,  Heredia  was  accused  of  malfea-
sance, was  again  deposed,  and  in  1556  was  sent  as  a
prisoner  to  Spain  on  the  fleet  commanded  by  Ad-
miral Cosme  Rodriguez  Farfan,  which  was  lost  on
the  coast  of  Africa.

HEREFORD,  Frank,  senator,  b.  in  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  4  July,  1825.  He  received  a  liberal
education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  After  beginning  practice  in  Virginia  he  re-
moved to  California,  where  from  1855  till  1857  he
was  district  attorney  of  Sacramento  county.  He
afterward  settled  in  West  Virginia,  was  elected  to
congress,  and  twice  re-elected,  serving  from  4
March,  1871,  to  4  Dec,  1876,  when  he  took  his  seat
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  having  been  appointed  in  the
place  of  Allen  T.  Caperton,  deceased.  He  was
elected  by  the  legislature  for  the  remainder  of  the
term,  which  expired  in  1881.

HERING,  Constantin,  phvsician.b.  in  Oschatz,
Saxony,  1  Jan.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  July,
1880.  He  studied  medicine  at  Leipsic.  at  Wiirz-
burg,  where  he  was  graduated  as  doctor  of  medi-
cine, obstetrics,  and  surgery  in  1826,  and  at  the
surgical  academy  in  Dresden.  Having  been  en-
gaged to  write  a  book  confuting  homoeopathy,
he  read  Hahnemann's  works,  became  a  convert,
sought  out  the  author,  and  became  his  personal
friend.  He  was  for  a  time  instructor  in  mathe-
matics and  natural  science  in  Berckmann's  insti-
tute, Dresden,  and  was  sent  by  the  king  of  Saxony
to  Surinam  to  make  botanical  and  zoological  col-
lections. After  practising  medicine  for  a  time  in
Paramaribo  he  sailed  for  Philadelphia,  where  he
arrived  in  January,  1833.  There  he  founded  a
homoeopathic  school,  the  first  of  its  kind  in  any
country.  From  1845  till  1869  he  filled  the  chairs
of  institutes  of  medicine  and  materia  medica  in
the  Philadelphia  college  of  homoeopathy.  He  de-
voted much  study  to  cures  for  the  bites  of  venom-
ous serpents  and  for  hydrophobia,  and  developed
many  of  Hahnemann's  theories.  He  was  joint
editor  of  the  "Medical  Correspondent"  (Allen-
town,  1835-'6),  of  the  "  Miscellanies  of  Homoeopa-
thy" (Philadelphia,  1839),  of  the  "North  American
Homoeopathic  Quarterly"  (New  York,  1851 -'2),
and  of  the  "Homoeopathic  News"  (1854),  and
founded  and  edited  the  "American  Journal  of
Homoeopathic  Materia  Medica."  He  published
many  books  in  both  German  and  English,  includ-
ing "  Rise  and  Progress  of  Homoeopathy  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1834),  which  was  translated  into  several
languages :  "  Condensed  Materia  Medica  " ; "  Effects
of  Snake  Poison  "  (1837) ;  "  Guiding  Symptoms  and
Analytical  Therapeutics  " ;  "  Hering's  Domestic
Physician  "  (6th  ed.,  1858) ;  and  "  American  Drug
Provings"  (vol.  i.,  Leipsic,  1853).


182


HERIOT


HERKIMER


HERIOT,  George,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
the  island  of  Jersey,  2  Jan.,  1766;  d.  in  Drum-
raondville,  Canada,  30  Dec,  1844.  He  emigrated
to  Canada,  and  was  a  clerk  in  the  ordnance  de-
partment at  Quebec  in  1799.  He  was  deputy
postmaster-general  of  British  North  America  in
1800-'6,  and  was  appointed  first  postmaster-gen-
eral of  British  North  America  in  1774.  He  par-
ticipated in  several  battles  during  the  war  of
1812-'15,  was  second  in  command  under  De  Sala-
berry  at  Chateauguay,  and  was  made  a  C.  B.  as  a
recognition  of  his  services.  He  was  deputy  for  the
county  of  Drummond  from  1830  till  1834,  a  pro-
vincial aide-de-camp,  and  was  promoted  major-
general  in  1841.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "De-
scriptive Poem,"  written  in  the  West  Indies  (Lon-
don, 1781) ;  "  History  of  Canada  "  (2  vols.,  London,
1804) ;  and  "  Travels  through  the  Canadas  "  (1807).
His  history  is  taken  largely  from  Charlevoix's.

HERKIMER,  Nicholas,  soldier,  b.  about  1715;
d.  in  Danube,  N.  Y.,  16  Aug.,  1777.  His  name,  as
commonly  written,  is  an  anglicized  form  of  the
German  Herchheimer.  His  father,  a  native  of
the  Rhine  Palatinate,  was  one  of  the  patentees  of
the  tract  called  Burnet's  field,  in  what  is  now
Herkimer  county,  N.  Y.  Nicholas  became  at  the
age  of  thirty  a  lieutenant  of  militia,  and  was  in
command  at  Port  Herkimer  when  the  French  and
Indians  attacked  German  Plats  in  1758.  He  after-
ward lived  in  the  Canajoharie  district,  was  com-
missioned colonel  in  1775,  became  chairman  of  the
committee  of  safety  of  Tryon  county,  and  a  year
later  was  made  a  brigadier-general  in  the  New
York  militia.  He  was  a  man  of  energetic  charac-
ter, and  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  widely
respected  of  the  German  citizens  of  the  province,
and  by  identifying  himself  with  the  popular  cause
contributed  an  element  of  strength  to  the  move-
ment throughout  central  New  York.  He  had  be-
come schooled  in  the  methods  of  Indian  fighting
in  the  French  war.  In  1776  he  led  an  expedition
against  Sir  John  Johnson's  force  of  Tories  and
Indian  allies.  His  alert  and  vigorous  nature  is
exemplified  in  the  following  curious  order,  the
spelling  of  which  proves  that  his  acquaintance
with  the  English  language  was  very  slight :  "  Ser
yu  will  orter  your  bodellyen  do  merchs  Immie-
dietlih  do  ford  edward  weid  for  das  brofiesen  and
amonieschen  fied  for  on  betell.  Dis  yu  will  disben
yur  berrell  from  frind  Nicolas  herchheimer.  To
Carnell  pieder  bellinger,  ad  de  plats,  ochdober  18,
1776 "  [Sir :  You  will  order  your  battalion  to
march  immediately  to  Fort  Edward,  with  four
days'  provisions  and  ammunition  fit  for  one  bat-
tle. This  you  will  disobey  at  your  peril.  From
your  friend,  Nicolas  Herchheimer.  To  Colonel
Peter  Bellinger,  at  the  Flats,  October  18,  1776].
After  the  fall  of  Ticonderoga  and  the  retreat  of
Gen.  Schuyler  to  the  Hudson,  Burgoyne  threat-
ened to  capture  Albany  and  join  his  forces  with
Howe's  in  the  east.  When  the  co-operating  force.
led  by  Col.  Barry  St.  Leger,  and  consisting  of
British  regulars,  New  York  loyalists,  and  Brant's
Indians,  had  invested  Fort  Schuyler,  or  Fort  Stan-
wix,  as  it  was  originally  called,  which  stood  near
the  present  site  of  Rome,  N.  Y.,  Herkimer  marched
to  the  relief  of  the  latter  place  at  the  head  of  the
militia  of  Tryon  county.  St.  Leger's  force,  which
had  marched  up  the  St.  Lawrence,  crossed  over  to
Oswego,  and  passed  through  the  Mohawk  valley.
It  consisted  of  about  800  white  troops  and  1,000
Indians,  while  Col.  Gansevoort  had  only  750  men
in  B\>rt  Schuyler.  Gen.  Herkimer,  when  setting
out  for  the  relief  of  the  garrison,  sent  word  to
Col.  Gansevoort,  in  order  that  he  might  arrange  a


sortie  at  the  moment  when  the  relieving  force
came  up.  The  plan  failed,  because  the  militia
were  delayed  in  the  march.  Herkimer  decided
then  to  move  cautiously,  but  allowed  his  judg-
ment to  be  swayed  by  the  reproaches  of  the
younger  officers.  Col.  St.  Leger  had  knowledge
of  Herkimer's  approach,  and  sent  a  detachment
to  intercept  the  militia,  who  were
1,000  strong.  As  they  advanced  f
in  hasty  march  through  a  wooded
ravine  near  Oriskany,  the  British
regulars  in  ambush  at  the  other
end  and  the  Indians  on  both  sides
opened  fire.  The  rear-guard  of
the  Americans,  cut  off  from  the
main  body,  was  dispersed,  many
of  them  were  taken  prisoners,  and
the  supply -train  was  captured.
Herkimer's  horse  was  killed,  and
he  was  severely  wounded.  His
subordinates  urged  him  to  retire,
but  he,  declaring  that  he  would
face  the  enemy,  seated  himself  be-
neath a  tree,  and  issued  his  orders
while  smoking  a  pipe.  His  men,
experienced  in  Indian  warfare,
separated  into  groups  of  two  or  I
three,  and  sought  the  shelter  of  HHRHj^Bj
trees  and  rocks.  After  a  long  and  [
obstinate  fight,  and  an  impetuous
sally  from  the  fort,  led  by  Col.  Willett,  the  In-
dians retreated,  and  after  them  the  British  troops.
The  intelligence  of  the  approach  of  another  re-
lief party  caused  St.  Leger  to  raise  the  siege  and
hasten  back  to  Canada  soon  after  the  battle.
About  one  third  of  the  militia  fell  on  the  battle-
field, and  as  many  more  were  mortally  wounded
or  carried  into  captivity.  Herkimer  was  carried
on  a  litter  to  his  house,  thirty-five  miles  away.
The  wound  that  he  had  received  in  the  leg  ren-
dered amputation  necessary,  but  the  operation
was  unskilfully  performed,  and  he  died  ten  days
afterward.  Congress,  in  October,  1777,  ordered
a  monument  to  his  memory,  but  it  was  not
erected.  In  1827  Gov.  De  Witt  Clinton  urged  on
the  New  York  legislature  the  duty  of  building  a
monument  to  the  hero  of  Oriskany,  but  the  bill
failed.  He  repeated  the  suggestion  in  his  last
annual  message  in  1828,  with  the  same  result.
In  1844  Judge  William  Campbell,  author  of  the
"  Annals  of  Tryon  County,"  sought  without  suc-
cess an  appropriation  from  congress  to  redeem
the  pledge  of  the  old  congress.  He  renewed  the
proposition  in  the  succeeding  congress,  supported
by  a  petition  from  the  New  York  historical  soci-
ety. After  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  bat-
tle of  Oriskany,  the  Oneida  historical  society,  pre-
sided over  by  Horatio  Seymour,  brought  the  sub-
ject again  to  the  attention  of  congress,  and  $4,100
was  voted,  being  the  original  appropriation  of
$500,  with  simple  interest.  The  sum  was  in-
creased to  $10,000  by  private  subscriptions  and  an
additional  appropriation  made  by  the  New  York
legislature  in  1882.  The  foundation  is  of  lime-
stone, and  the  pedestal  and  obelisk  of  granite.
The  total  height  of  the  monument  is  85  feet.  On
each  side  of  the  pedestal  is  a  bronze  tablet  6  by  4£
feet.  One  represents  the  wounded  general  direct-
ing the  battle;  another  the  conflict  between  In-
dians and  white  men ;  another  contains  the  dedi-
cation ;  and  the  fourth  the  names  of  250  out  of  the
800  men  in  the  battle.  These  tablets  were  the  work
of  the  National  fine  art  foundry  of  New  York  city.
(See  illustration  above.) — His  nephew,  John,  jur-
ist, b.  in  Herkimer  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1773;  d.  in


HERMAN


HERNANDEZ


183


Danube,  N.  Y.,  8  June,  1848,  was  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives  from  1800  till  1808,
and  as  major  in  the  war  of  1812  commanded  a  bat-
talion of  New  York  volunteers  in  the  defence  of
Sackett's  Harbor  on  29  May,  1813.  For  several
years  he  was  a  judge  of  the  circuit  court,  resid-
ing at  Danube.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat  in  1816.  After  removing  to  Meriden,
N.  Y..  he  was  again  sent  to  congress  in  1822,  and
re-elected  for  the  following  term.

HERMAN,  John  Gottlieb,  Moravian  bishop,
b.  in  Niesky,  Prussia,  18  Nov.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Missouri,
20  July,  1854.  He  was  educated  at  the  college  and
the  theological  seminary  of  the  Moravian  church
in  Germany.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in
1817,  and  labored  for  twenty-seven  years  in  vari-
ous capacities,  among  others  as  principal  of  the
Brown  boarding-school  for  boys  at  Nazareth,  Pa.
Having  been  elected  to  the  supreme  executive
board  of  the  Moravian  church  in  1844,  he  returned
to  Europe,  where  he  was  consecrated  to  the  epis-
copacy, 27  Sept.,  1846.  In  that  same  year  he  went
out  on  a  protracted  official  visit  to  the  missions  in
the  West  Indies.  Two  years  later,  in  1848,  the
general  synod  of  the  entire  Moravian  church,  a
body  composed  of  bishops,  other  clergy,  and  lay
delegates  from  many  parts  of  the  world,  met  at
Herrnhut,  in  Saxony.  Of  this  synod  Bishop  Her-
man was  chosen  president.  But  the  longer  he
remained  in  Germany  the  more  he  was  dissatis-
fied. He  longed  for  his  adopted  country,  and  in  the
following  year  returned  to  the  United  States  as
the  presiding  bishop  of  the  southern  district.  In
1854  he  undertook  an  official  visit  to  the  mission
in  the  Cherokee  country.  There  being  compara-
tively few  railroads  in  the  south  at  that  time,  he
travelled  all  the  way  in  a  private  carriage.  The
hardships  of  this  journey  were  too  great  for  his
waning  strength.  On  the  way  back  he  died  in  a
log-cabin  in  the  wilderness  of  southwestern  Mis-
souri. Bishop  Herman  was  noted  for  his  earnest
eloquence  and  for  his  genial  social  qualities.

HERMSTAEDT,  Nicholas  Piet,  Dutch  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Haarlem,  Holland,  in  1521  ;  d.  in
Para,  Brazil,  in  1589.  He  was  a  Jesuit,  went  to
Brazil  in  1545,  and  prepared  himself  for  missionary
work  among  the  Indians,  meanwhile  teaching  in
the  college  in  Bahia.  He  was  attached  in  1551  to
the  mission  of  Pirahguinga,  and  distinguished
himself  by  his  energy  and  his  success  with  the  In-
dians, who  surnamed  him  Abare  bebe  ("the  flying
father ?').  He  organized  the  Mamaluco  half-breeds
in  a  colony,  which  he  named  San  Antonio,  six
miles  from  Pirahguinga,  built  a  college,  and  trained
some  Mamalucos  as  assistants  to  the  missionaries.
His  popularity  with  Indians  increased  as  he  learned
the  Tupi,  a  dialect  of  the  Guarani  language,  which
he  spoke  afterward  more  fluently  than  either  Span-
ish or  Dutch.  At  the  invitation  of  Meen  de  Saa',
governor  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  he  formed  a  battalion
of  Mamalucos,  and  marched,  in  1558,  against  Ville-
gaignon  and  his  French  forces,  who  occupied  an
island  at  the  entrance  of  the  bay  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.
But  the  Tupinambos  and  Tomayos,  allies  of  the
French,  invaded  the  Mamaluco  territory,  and  Herm-
staedt,  returning  for  their  protection,  waged  against
the  hostile  Indians  a  bloody  war,  which  lasted  four
years,  1558-'62,  and  was  terminated  by  the  treaty
of  I  pabeba,  in  which  the  invaders  agreed  to  leave
the  country.  In  1574  Hermstaedt  was  appointed
visitor  to  the  missions  between  the  rivers  Plate
and  Amazon.  He  built  several  colleges  in  Per-
nambuco  and  Rio  de  Janeiro,  civilized  and  organ-
ized the  Aymaros,  forming  the  villages  of  the  Pa-
panaces  in  the  province  of  Espiritu-Santo,  and


founded  the  city  of  Rerigtibo  on  the  north  bank
of  the  Cabapuana.  Hermstaedt  is  the  author  of
"  Arte  da  Grammatica  mais  usada  na  Costa  do  Bra-
sil"  (Lisbon,  1611).  His  "Drama  ad  extirpanda
Brasilia?  vitia,"  "Annales  ecclesiasti  Brasilia?,"
and  other  works,  were  published  in  the  "  Biblio-
theca  Scriptorum  Societatis  Jesu  "  (Rome,  1677).

HERNANDEZ,  Francisco,  Spanish  naturalist,
b.  in  Toledo,  Spain,  in  1530 ;  d.  in  Madrid,  28  Jan.,
1587.  He  was  physician  to  Philip  II.,  and  was
sent  by  him  in  1572  to  Mexico  to  study  the  plants
and  animals  of  that  country.  Hernandez  wrote  a
large  number  of  works  on  the  natural  history  of
Spanish  America,  some  of  which  are  still  in  manu-
script in  the  library  of  the  Escurial.  Among  his
published  works  is  "  Francisci  Hernandez  rerum
medicarum  Nova?  Hispaniae  Thesaurus,  seu  Plan-
tarum,  Animalium,  Mineralium  Mexicanorum  His-
toria  cum  notis  Joannis  Terentii  Lincrei "  (Rome,
1648).  This  appears  to  be  the  same  as  a  similar
work  in  Spanish,  entitled  "  Plantas  y  Animales  de
la  Nueva  Espaiia,  y  sus  virtudes  por  Francisco
Hernandez,  y  de  Latin  en  Romance  por  Fr.  Fran-
cisco Ximenez"  (Mexico,  1615).  The  title  of  the
latter  book  indicates  that  it  was  at  first  written  in
Latin  by  Hernandez,  and  the  Rome  edition  is  an
extract  of  the  original  work.

HERNANDEZ,  Joseph  Marion,  soldier,  b.  in
St.  Augustine,  Fla. ;  d.  near  Matanzas,  Cuba,  8
June,  1857.  When  Florida  was  annexed  to  the
United  States  he  became  an  American  citizen,  and
was  elected  the  first  delegate  to  congress  from  the
territory  of  Florida,  serving  from  3  Jan.,  1823,  to
3  March.  1825.  He  was  a  member  of  the  territorial
house  of  representatives,  and  was  chosen  its  pre-
siding officer.  He  was  a  brigadier-general  in  the
Florida  militia,  and  during  the  war  with  the  In-
dians entered  the  U.  S.  service,  and  served  from
1835  till  1838.  The  expedition  that  captured  the
Indian  chief  Osceola  in  1837  was  under  his  com-
mand. He  was  appointed  brigadier  -  general  of
mounted  volunteers  in  July,  1837,  and  on  10  Sept.,
1837,  took  part  in  an  engagement  with  the  Indians
near  Mosquito  inlet.

HERNANDEZ,  Yieente,  Spanish  missionary,
b.  in  Leon,  Spain,  about  1480 ;  d.  in  Tlaltelolco,
Mexico,  in  1543.  He  was  a  Franciscan,  and  went
to  Hispaniola,  in  1520  with  Bishop  Geraldini.
Witnessing  there  the  cruelties  of  the  Spaniards
toward  the  Caribs,  which  in  a  few  years  caused  an
almost  total  depopulation  of  the  island,  he  took  the
part  of  the  Indians,  and  strenuously  opposed  that
policy.  Hernandez  lived  several  years  among  the
Caribs,  learned  their  language,  and  had  gathered
several  thousand  around  his  mission,  when,  in
1524,  he  was  ordered  to  leave  the  country  at  once.
He  went  to  New  Spain,  and  founded  a  convent  of
his  order  in  Santiago  de  Tlaltelolco,  for  the  sup-
port of  which  he  was  given  fourteen  Indian  villages.
He  also  established  a  model  garden  for  the  benefit
of  the  Indians,  and  that  institution,  called  Tepe-
tlaxtoc,  soon  became  celebrated.  Hernandez  found
that  the  condition  of  the  Aztecs  in  New  Spain  was
no  better  than  that  of  the  Caribs  in  Hispaniola,
since  the  Spaniards  treated  them  as  slaves.  lie
sought  the  help  of  the  pope,  and  in  company  with
Betanzos,  provincial  of  Guatemala,  sailed  for
Rome,  where  he  laid  his  complaints  before  the
holy  father  in  1535.  Paulus  III.  promulgated
the  celebrated  bull  "Yeritas  Ipsa  (1537),  in
which  he  reminded  the  conquerors  that  Indians
are  men.  The  persecutions  ceased  for  a  time,  but
the  conquerors  revenged  themselves  by  persecut-
ing Hernandez  on  his  return  in  1538.  He  was
accused  of  heresy,  which  brought  about  his  death.


184


IIERNDON


n ERR AN


HERNDON,  Mary  Eliza,  author,  b.  in  Fa-
yette county,  Ky.,  1  March,  1820.  She  was  a
daughter  of  Beverly  A.  Hicks,  an  educator,  taught
in  Bowling  Green,  and  married  Reuben  Herndon,
and  for  her  second  husband  Lundsford  Chiles.
She  published  "Louisa  Elton,"  a  reply  to  "Uncle
Tom's  Cabin"  (Philadelphia,  1853),  and  subse-
quently "  Bandits  of  Italy  "  and  other  novels ;  also
a  volume  of  "  Select  Poems."

HERNDON,  William  Lewis,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  25  Oct.,  1813 ;  lost  at  sea,
12  Sept.,  1857.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midship-
man in  1828,  and  was  promoted  passed  midship-
man in  1834  and  lieutenant  in  1841.  He  served
on  various  cruising-stations  and  was  actively  em-
ployed during  the  Mexican  war.  After  three  years
of  duty  at  the  naval  observatory  he  was  sent  to
the  south  Pacific  station,  where  in  1851  he  received
orders  detaching  him  from  his  ship,  and  directing
him  to  explore  the  valley  of  the  Amazon  to  ascer-
tain its  commercial  resources  and  capabilities.  He
started  from  Lima,  and  crossed  the  Cordilleras  in
company  with  Lieut.  Lardner  Gibbon,  who  sepa-
rated from  him  to  explore  the  Bolivian  tributaries,
while  Herndon  followed  the  main  trunk  of  the
Amazon  to  its  mouth,  returning  to  the  United
States  in  1852.  The  report  of  this  expedition  was
published  by  the  government  in  two  volumes,  of
which  Herndon  wrote  vol.  i.,  "  Explorations  of  the
Valley  of  the  River  Amazon  "  (Washington,  1853).
This  work  was  extensively  circulated,  and  is  still
cited  in  works  on  ethnology  and  natural  history.
In  1855  he  was  made  commander.  He  took  service
in  the  line  of  mail-steamers  plying  between  New
York  and  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  On  Tuesday,  8
Sept.,  1857,  he  left  Havana  in  command  of  the
"  Central  America "  (an  old  steamer,  formerly
named  the  "  George  Law  "),  carrying  a  large  number
of  passengers  returning  from  California  and  gold
amounting  to  $2,000,000.  The  ship  encountered  a
cyclone  in  the  edge  of  the  Gulf  stream,  and  her
lack  of  water-tight  bulkheads  and  general  unsea-
worthiness allowed  water  to  extinguish  the  fires,  so
that  steam  could  not  be  used  to  keep  the  ship  un-
der control  or  to  pump  her  out  after  Friday  noon.
The  next  day  a  small  brig  was  signalled  to  stand
by,  and  all  the  women  and  children  were  trans-
ferred to  her  in  the  three  remaining  boats.  Hern-
don kept  the  boats  from  being  overloaded,  and
preserved  order  on  board  to  the  last.  He  sent  his
watch  to  his  wife,  saying  that  he  could  not  leave
the  ship  while  there  was  a  soul  on  board.  He  took
his  station  on  the  paddle-box  when  the  ship  was
seen  to  be  sinking,  and  made  signals  for  assistance.
At  8  p.  m.  the  steamer  went  down.  Some  of
those  who  remained  on  deck  were  picked  up  by
passing  vessels,  after  clinging  to  spars,  but  Hern-
don and  426  others  were  lost.  His  devotion  to
duty  excited  general  admiration,  and  led  his
brother  officers  to  erect  a  fine  monument  to  his
memory  at  the  naval  academy  in  Annapolis.  A
daughter  of  Commander  Herndon  became  the  wife
of  Chester  A.  Arthur,  who  was  afterward  president
of  the  United  States.

HERON,  Matilda,  actress,  b.  near  London-
derry, Ireland,  1  Dec,  1830;  d.  in  New  York
city,  7  March,  1877.  She  came  to  this  country  in
early  childhood,  with  her  parents,  who  settled  in
Philadelphia.  In  that  city  Miss  Heron  studied
for  the  stage,  under  the  tuition  of  Peter  Richings,
and  made  her  first  appearance  at  the  Walnut
street  theatre  on  17  Feb.,  1851,  as  Bianca  in  Dean
Milman's  play  of  "  Fazio."  In  1852  she  went  to
St.  Louis,  and  in  1853  played  with  success  in  San
Francisco,  although  her  manager  had  died  during


fafc^S&XJ*'


the  voyage,  and  she  was  without  friends  and  un-
known even  by  reputation  when  she  arrived  in
that  city.  From  California,  in  1854,  Miss  Heron
came  to  New  York  city,  where  her  success  was
confirmed.  Thereafter  she  appeared  throughout
the  country,  and,  returning  to  New  York  in  1857,
was  much  admired  at  Wallack's  theatre  asCamille.
In  the  same  year  she
married  Robert  Stoe-
pel,  a  German  musi-
cian of  note,  from
whom  she  afterward
separated.  In  1861
Miss  Heron  played
in  London  at  the  Ly-
ceum theatre  with
English  audiences,
making  her  debut
there  as  Rosalie  Lee
in  "New- Year's  Eve."
She  met  with  only
qualified  success,  and
in  the  year  following
returned  to  the  Unit-
ed States.  Her  last
engagement  was  at  Booth's  theatre,  in  the  winter
of  1874-'5,  where,  among  other  characters,,  she  es-
sayed Lady  Macbeth.  Miss  Heron's  final  appear-
ance took  place  in  April.  1876,  as  Medea,  on  the
occasion  of  her  daughter's  benefit.  The  latter  part
of  Miss  Heron's  life  was  spent  obscurely  in  New
York  city,  as  a  teacher  of  stage  elocution.  She
was  a  remarkably  emotional  actress  in  sensational
dramas,  but  was  not  successful  in  Shakespeare's
characters.  In  "  Medea,"  an  adaptation  from  the
Greek  of  Euripides,  she  was  forcible ;  but  her  one
great  success  was  in  the  part  of  Camille,  which  she
performed  for  many  years  to  crowded  houses,  and
from  it  alone  received  about  $200,000.

HERRAN,  Jeronimo  (er-rahn'),  clergyman,  b.
in  Spain  in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th  century.
The  date  of  his  death  is  unknown.  He  belonged
to  the  Jesuit  order,  was  sent  to  labor  among  the
Indians  of  Paraguay,  and  afterward  appointed
procurator-general  of  the  Paraguayan  mission.  His
works  are  "  Relaoion  Historial  de  las  Misiones  de
los  Indios,  que  llaman  Chiquitos,  que  estan  a  cargo
de  los  Padres  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus  en  la  Pro-
vincia  del  Paraguay "  (Madrid,  1726);  "  Letter  of
Father  Herran  to  His  Excellency  the  Marquis  de
Castel  -  Fuerte,  Viceroy  of  Peru,  on  the  Events
that  happened  among  the  Thirty  Tribes  who  live
under  the  Laws  of  the  Jesuits"  (Buenos  Ayres,
1733) ;  and  two  reports  on  missions  that  are  pub-
lished in  "  Lettres  edifiantes  et  curieuses  "  (Paris,
1843).  The  works  of  Father  Herran  were  trans-
lated into  German  and  published  in  the  "  Neue
Weltbote."  edited  by  Father  Stocklein.

HERRAN,  Pedro  Alcantara,  Colombian  sol-
dier, b.  in  Bogota,  19  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  there,  26  April,
1872.  He  entered  the  military  service  when  a  boy,
and  participated  in  all  campaigns  from  1812  till
1828,  and  also  in  the  victorious  battles  of  Junin  and
Ayacucho,  6  Aug.  and  9  Dec,  1824.  In  the  latter
he  distinguished  himself  in  a  cavalry  charge,  ob-
taining from  Marshal  Sucre  the  name  of  "  the  hus-
sar of  Ayacucho."  After  the  war  of  independence
he  served  with  success  during  the  struggle  for
the  preservation  of  order,  and  in  1840  was  pre-
sented, by  order  of  congress,  with  a  sword.  He
was  a  leader  of  the  Liberal  party,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  and  secretary  of  war,  of  the  interior,
and  of  foreign  relations.  After  subduing  the  revo-
lution against  the  government  of  Marquez  in  1841,
he  was  elected  president  of  the  republic,  and  re-


HERRERA


HERRERA


185


mained  in  office  till  the  end  of  1845.  From  1846
till  1849  he  was  minister  at  Washington,  when  he
signed  the  treaty  for  the  Panama  railroad.  He  was
afterward  entrusted  with  a  diplomatic  mission  -  to
Costa  Rica,  and  from  1853  till  1861  was  again
minister  to  the  United  States.

HERRERA,  Bartolome  (er-ray'-rah),  Peruvian
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Lima,  24  Aug.,  1808:  d.  in  Are-
quipa  in  1864.  In  1828  he  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  San  Marcos,  where  for  three  years  he
occupied  the  chair  of  philosophy  and  mathematics.
In  1831  he  was  ordained  priest,  and,  besides  filling
his  duties  as  vice-rector  of  the  College  of  San  Car-
los and  professor  of  theology,  he  soon  became
known  as  one  of  the  most  eloquent  pulpit  orators.
In  1834  he  was  appointed  to  the  parish  of  Cajacay,
province  of  Cajatambo,  and  so  distinguished  him-
self that  the  Archbishop  of  Lima  made  him  his
secretary-general  in  the  visit  to  the  archdiocese  in
1836.  Being  next  year  a  member  of  a  commission
to  examine  the  new  civil  code,  which  attacked  the
clerical  immunity,  Dr.  Herrera  demonstrated,  from
documents  and  former  conventions  between  the  !
government  and  the  church,  the  right  of  asylum  in  I
the  temples.  On  returning  to  his  parish  at  the  end  j
of  1837,  he  was  prostrated  by  a  long  and  serious
sickness,  and  obtained  leave  to  go  to  Lima,  where
he  resided  till  1840,  when  he  obtained  the  parish  of
Burin,  province  of  Lima.  There  he  was  consulted.
in  1842.  by  the  victorious  Gen.  Vidal,  who  appointed
him  rector  of  the  College  of  San  Carlos.  In  1846  he
was  elected  canon  of  the  cathedral,  and  in  1848
deputy  to  congress,  which  body  chose  him  its
president.  In  1850  he  was  appointed  councillor  of
state,  and  next  year  he  undertook  the  formation  of
a  cabinet,  taking  for  himself  the  portfolio  of  justice,
public  worship,  and  instruction,  and  temporarily
those  of  the  interior  and  foreign  relations.  He
took  vigorous  measures  against  the  powerful  party
leaders  and  revolutionary  chieftains,  and  estab-
lished peace  in  the  interior.  Afterward,  in  order  to
settle  the  frequent  disputes  between  the  govern-
ment and  the  church  by  means  of  a  concordat,  he
accepted  the  mission  to  European  governments.
On  his  return  in  1853,  as  the  government  refused
to  ratify  the  concordat  negotiated  by  him,  he  re-
tired from  politics  to  his  duties  as  rector  of  the
.College  of  San  Carlos.  In  1859  Gen.  Castilla  nomi-
nated him  for  the  bishopric  of  Arequipa,  of  which
he  took  possession  the  same  year.  When  in  1860
a  modification  of  the  constitution  was  proposed,  he
was  elected  to  congress  to  defend  the  ultramontane
Catholic  principles  and  the  rights  of  the  church.
He  was  again  elected  president  of  the  lower  house,
and  ably  defended  the  church  against  the  encroach-
ments of  the  government ;  but,  when  he  saw  that
his  ideas  could  not  prevail,  he  retired  again  to  the
exercise  of  his  episcopal  duties.

HERRERA,  Jos6  Joaqnin  de.  Mexican  presi-
dent, b.  in  Jalapa,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  Tacubaya,  10
Feb.,  1854.  He  entered  the  military  service  at  the
age  of  seventeen,  and  took  part  with  the  Spanish
army  in  the  campaign  against  the  revolutionary
forces,  notably  in  the  battles  of  Aeulco,  Guanaju-
ato, and  Calderon.  In  1814  he  was  promoted  cap-
tain, held  for  -  orae  time  political  and  military  com-
mands, and  after  the  advantages  obtained  by  the
insurgents  on  the  Pacific  coast  retired  to  Perote,
where  he  established  a  pharmacy.  When  inde-
pendence was  proclaimed  by  Iturbide,  24  Feb.,
1821,  Herrera  was  called  by  the  officers  of  the  regi-
ment of  grenadiers  of  Jalapa,  who  had  pronounced
for  independence  and  deposed  their  colonel,  to
take  command,  and  with  them  he  took  part  in  the
final  struggle  against  the  Spanish  forces,  entered


the  capital,  27  Sept.,  1821,  and  was  promoted  brig-
adier-general. He  took  part  in  the  overthrow  of
Iturbide  in  1823,  and  in  the  following  year  was
appointed  secretary  of  war,  and  was  afterward
military  commander  of  Jalapa,  when  a  Spanish  in-
vasion was  threatened.
He  participated  in  the
revolution  that  over-
threw the  government
of  Bustamante  in  1832,
and  during  the  presi-
dency of  Gomez  P  arias
was  twice  called  to  the
ministry  of  war,  but
after  Bustamante  had
again  become  presi-
dent, and  during  San-
ta-Anna's first  and  sec-
ond administrations,
Herrera  retired  from
politics.  In  1844  he
accepted  the  office  of
president  of  the  su-
preme court,  and  took
charge  of  the  executive
after  the  resignation  of
Santa-Anna,  12  Sept.,
until  the  arrival  of  the  provisional  president.  Gen.
Canalizo,  21  Sept.  But  Canalizo  was  deposed  and
imprisoned  by  a  military  revolution.  6  Dec.  and
Herrera  again  took  charge  of  the  executive,  and  was
afterward  elected  president.  During  his  short  ad-
ministration, Santa-Anna,  who  had  risen  in  rebel-
lion, was  taken  prisoner,  and  confined  in  the  fortress
of  Perote,  and  the  difficulties  with  the  United  States
regarding  the  annexation  of  Texas  began.  Her-
rera from  the  beginning  had  favored  the  recog-
nition of  the  independence  of  that  state.  This
rendered  him  unpopular,  and  after  an  abortive
insurrection  in  June,  1845,  on  14  Dec,  the  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  forces  marching  against
Texas,  Gen.  Paredes,  pronounced  against  the  gov-
ernment, which  was  seconded  on  the  30th  by  the
forces  of  the  capital  under  Gen.  Valencia,  and  on
that  day  Herrera  resigned  the  executive  and  re-
tired to  his  home.  During  the  invasion  of  the
American  army  in  1847,  Herrera  served  as  second
in  command  to  Gen.  Santa-Anna,  and  retired  on
14  Sept.  with  part  of  the  army  toward  Toluca.
After  the  peace  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  2  Feb.,
1848,  the  congress  elected  Herrera  president,  30
May.  and,  after  the  evacuation  of  the  capital  by
the  American  forces,  he  took  charge  of  the  govern-
ment. His  administration  was  chiefly  remarkable
for  economy,  leniency  toward  his  enemies,  and
thorough  honesty.  On  8  Jan.,  1851,  congress
elected  Gen.  Mariano  Arista  president,  and  on  the
15th  of  that  month  Herrera  gave  up  the  office  to
his  successor,  the  change  of  government  taking
place  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  Mexico  in
a  constitutional  manner,  and  without  revolution.
Herrera  retired  to  his  countrv-seat  at  Tacubava.

HERRERA,  Miguel  da  Fonseca  e  Silva,
Brazilian  historian,  b.  in  Para  in  1763;  d.  in  Bahia
de  Todos  os  Santos  in  1822.  He  became  a  priest,
and  at  his  death  was  vicar  of  the  cathedral  of
Bahia.  He  gathered  an  important  collection  of
documents,  which  he  bequeathed  to  the  historical
institute  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  which  had  presented
him  in  1820  with  a  gold  medal.  He  published
"  Memorias  historicas  e  politicas  da  provincia  de
Bahia  "  (3  vols.,  Bahia,  1815),  a  collection  of  rare
documents,  valuable  to  the  historians  of  Brazil,
and  "  Corographia  Brasilica,  seu  Descripcao  fisica,
historica  e  politica  do  Brasil "  (Bahia,  1819).


186


HERRERA


IIERRERA Y  TORDESILLAS


HERRERA,  Nicolas,  Uruguayan  statesman,  b.
in  Montevideo  in  1780;  d.  there,  4  March,  1832.
He  studied  law,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-six  was
sent  to  Madrid  by  the  municipality  of  Montevideo
as  their  attorney-general  at  the  court.  He  was
present  at  the  abdication  of  Charles  IV.  in  Aran-
juez,  1808,  and,  after  the  imprisonment  of  the
Spanish  kings  by  Napoleon-,  he  went,  as  a  member
of  the  Spanish  junta,  to  Bayonne:  but,  seeing  the
uselessness  of  opposition,  he  returned  to  the  river
Plate,  and  took  an  enthusiastic  part  in  the  move-
ment for  independence  in  May,  1810.  With  Ber-
nardino Rivadavia,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
secretaries  of  state,  and  in  1813  was  sent  on  a  mis-
sion to  the  director  of  the  Paraguayan  government
junta.  Dr.  Prancia,  which  he  accomplished  satis-
factorily. In, 1814  he  followed  Gen.  Carlos  Maria
Alvear  in  his  campaign  for  the  final  overthrow  of
the  Spanish  dominion  in  Uruguay,  happily  finished
in  the  capitulation  of  Montevideo,  20  June,  and
afterward  sustained  the  policy  of  that  general
against  Artigas ;  but,  when  the  power  of  the  di-
rector Alvear  was  overthrown  by  a  revolution  in
April,  1815,  Herrera  fled  to  Brazil,  where  he  was
received  with  marked  distinction  at  court.  In  the
endeavor  to  liberate  his  country  from  the  oppres-
sion of  the  dictator  Artigas,  and  at  the  same  time
provide  against  a  threatened  re-conquest  of  Uru-
guay by  Spain,  Herrera  favored  the  occupation  of
the  province  by  the  Portuguese  forces,  on  condi-
tion of  preserving  the  autonomy,  in  the  mistaken
hope  that  it  would  be  easy,  after  finishing  with
Artigas  and  the  danger  of  a  Spanish  invasion,  to
liberate  the  Banda  Oriental  again.  With  this
hope  he  accompanied  the  invading  army  in  1816
as  political  secretary  of  the  general-in-chief,  Baron
de  Laguna.  After  the  occupation  of  Montevideo,
20  Jan.,  1817,  he  was  appointed  chief  judge,  and
exercised  great  political  influence ;  but  after  the
final  overthrow  of  Artigas  at  Tacuarembo,  22  Jan.,
1820,  his  hope  of  independence  was  defeated  by
the  forced  vote  of  annexation  to  Brazil,  July,  1821,
and  he  employed  his  official  position,  as  far  as
possible,  to  the  benefit  of  his  oppressed  country-
men. The  independence  of  Brazil  in  1822  did  not
change  the  situation,  and  insurrectionary  move-
ments were  continued,  until  on  19  April,  1825,
Col.  Lavalleja,  with  thirty-two  Uruguayan  refu-
gees, landed  near  Soriano,  and  soon  the  whole  prov-
ince was  in  arms.  On  25  Aug.,  independence  from
Brazil  was  declared,  and  the  revolution  continued,
secretly  assisted  by  the  Argentine  Republic.  In
consequence,  Brazil  declared  war  against  the  Ar-
gentine, 4  Nov.,  1825,  and  Herrera  sympathized
with  the  movement  for  independence,  especially
after  his  former  chief,  Alvear,  had  been  appointed

feneral  commander  of  the  liberating  army.  On  20
'eb.,  1827,  the  Brazilian  army  was  defeated  at
Ituzaingo,  and  the  independence  of  Uruguay  was
recognized  by  the  treaty  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  28
Aug..  1828.  Herrera  was  confirmed  in  his  judicial
functions,  and  afterward  appointed  diplomatical
agent  at  the  court  of  Brazil,  where  he  obtained  the
recognition  of  the  constitution  of  Uruguay.  On
his  return  he  was  elected  to  the  senate,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.

HERRERA  Y  CABRERA,  Desiderio  (er-
ray'-rah),  Cuban  educator,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in
1792  ;  d.  there  in  1856.  He  studied  in  his  native
city,  and  afterward  devoted  himself  to  teaching
and  journalism.  He  published  "  Agrimensura  Cu-
bana,"  a  work  that  was  much  praised  in  Spain
(1834) ;  "  Observaciones  cientificas  "  (Havana,  1843),
which  Arago  deemed  worthy  to  be  translated  and
published  (Paris,  1843) ; "  Huracanes  de  la  isla


de  Cuba  "  (1847,  English  and  French  translations) ;
"  Topografia  medica  de  Cuba,"  "  Lecciones  de  Agri-
mensura," "  Vindicacion  del  sabio  espafiol  Don
Jorge  Juan,"  a  treatise  on  "  Meteorology,"  and
memoirs  and  pamphlets,  chiefly  scientific.  •

HERRERA  Y  OLALLA,  Alonso  de,  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Agudo,  Spain,  about  1500 ;  d.  in  New
Granada  about  1580.  In  1534  he  resolved  to  go
to  Venezuela  with  Jorge  de  Spire,  leaving  his
wife  and  children  in  Spain.  He  met  Federmann
(q.  v.)  in  Coro,  and  went  with  him  to  New  Granada,
where  he  remained.  He  was  not  long  in  Santa  Fe
before  the  Indians  of  Simijaca  revolted,  and  he  was
commissioned  with  Cespedes  to  reduce  them  to
subjection.  The  Indians  held  a  strong  position  on
a  rock,  and  defended  themselves  vigorously.  De-
termined to  dislodge  them,  Herrera  climbed  the
steep  amid  a  shower  of  stones.  He  had  already
reached  the  middle  of  it  when  he  was  struck  by  a
stone  and  hurled  down  a  distance  of  more  than
three  hundred  feet.  His  fall  was  broken  by  the
branches  of  some  trees,  but  he  was  injured,  and  he
did  not  recover  for  two  years.  The  spot  still  bears
his  name,  and  is  called  "  Olalla's  Leap."  After  his
recovery,  he  headed  an  expedition  against  the  na-
tives of  Tocaima,  Pamplona,  and  Mariquilo,  whom
he  conquered.  He  also  reduced  the  natives  of
Bituima  to  subjection  at  his  own  expense  and
without  bloodshed.  He  next  subdued  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  present  department  of  La  Palma,  and,
having  pacified  the  entire  country  between  Honda
and  Bogota,  he  made  also,  at  his  own  expense,
a  road  between  these  two  points  thirty  leagues  in
length.  After  building  a  village  on  this  highway
he  undertook  the  conquest  of  the  Valle  de  la  Plata
and  Moquinque  with  150  men.  The  enterprise
was  successful,  but  he  died  on  the  return  march.

HERRERA  Y  TORDESILLAS,  Antonio  de,
Spanish  historian,  b.  in  Cuellar,  Spain,  in  1559 ;  d.
in  Madrid,  29  March,  1625.  The  name  of  his  father
was  Tordesillas,  but  he  adopted  that  of  his  mother
on  reaching  manhood.  In  1579  he  became  private
secretary  to  Vespasiano  de  Gonzaga,  viceroy  of  Na-
ples, which  place  he  occupied  till  the  death  of  the
latter  in  1591.  Philip  II.  appointed  him  in  1592
historiographer  of  the  Indies  and  Castille,  and
granted  him  a  considerable  pension.  A  short  time
before  his  death  he  was  raised  to  the  post  of  secre-
tary of  state.  His  most  important  work  is  "  His-
toria  general  de  los  hechos  de  los  Castellanos  en
las  islas  y  tierra  firma  del  mar  oceano"  (4  vols.,
Madrid,  1601-'15 ;  new  ed.,  revised  by  Gonzalez
Barcia,  5  vols.,  with  engravings,  1729-30).  There
is  also  an  Antwerp  edition  (4  vols.,  1728),  but  it  is
very  imperfect.  Herrera's  work  covers  a  period  of
over  sixty  years.  Although  he  never  left  Europe,
the  excellent  material  which  he  had  at  his  disposal
enabled  him  to  write  with  exactness  the  history  of
the  discovery  of  America,  and  of  all  that  followed
that  event.  "  Of  all  the  Spanish  writers,"  says
Robertson,  in  his  "  History  of  South  America,"
"  Herrera  furnishes  the  fullest  and  most  accurate
information  concerning  the  conquest  of  Mexico,
as  well  as  every  other  transaction  of  America.  If,
by  attempting  to  relate  the  various  occurrences  in
the  New  World  in  a  strictly  chronological  order,
the  arrangement  of  events  in  his  work  had  not  been
rendered  so  perplexed,  disconnected,  and  obscure,
that  it  is  an  unpleasant  task  to  collect  from  differ-
ent parts  of  his  book  and  piece  together  the  de-
tached shreds  of  a  story,  he  might  justly  have
been  ranked  among  the  most  eminent  historians  of
his  country."  Herrera  has  been  accused  of  using
a  bombastic  style,  of  concealing  some  odious  ac-
tions of  his  countrymen,  and  of  a  love  for  the  mar-


HERRICK


HERRICK


187


vellous.  His  work  is  an  inexhaustible  mine  of
facts,  and  writers  who  have  treated  the  same  sub-
ject after  him  have  taken  him  for  their  guide  and
model.  The  two  first  decades  were  translated  into
French  by  Nicolas  de  la  Coste  (3  vols.,  Paris,
1660-'71).  There  is  an  English  translation  by
John  Stevens  (6  vols.,  London,  1725-'6).  Herrera
wrote  "  Descripcion  de  las  Indias  occidentales "
(Madrid,  1601),  which  is  also  found  at  the  end  of
the  first  edition  of  the  preceding  work.  It  was
translated  into  Latin  by  Van  Baerl,  and  inserted
in  the  collection  which  he  printed  under  the  title
"  Novus  orbis,  sive  Descriptio  Indiae  occidentalis  "
(Amsterdam,  1622).  Herrera  also  wrote  several
other  works  dealing  with  European  history.

HERRICK,  Anson,  journalist,  b.  in  Lewiston,
Me.,  21  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  Feb.,
1868.  His  father  was  a  representative  in  congress
from  Maine.  The  son  received  a  common-school
education,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  was  appren-
ticed to  a  printer.  In  1833  he  established  •'  The
Citizen"  at  Wiscassett,  Me.,  and  in  1836  removed
to  New  York  city  and  worked  as  a  journeyman
printer  till  1838,  when  he  began  the  publication  of
the  New  York  "Atlas,"  a  weekly  journal.  In
1857  he  was  appointed  naval  store-keeper  of  the
port  of  New  York,  and  in  1862  was  elected  to  con-

fress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1863,  to
March,  1865.  He  was  a  delegate  in  1866  to  the
National  Union  convention  at  Philadelphia.

HERRICK,  Edward  Claudius,  scientist,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  24  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  there,  11  June,
1862.  He  received  an  academical  education,  be-
came a  bookseller  in  New  Haven,  and  in  1843  was
appointed  librarian  of  Yale  college.  In  1852  he
became  treasurer  of  the  college,  and  in  1858  re-
signed the  post  of  librarian.  After  the  death  of
Prof.  James  L.  Kingsley  in  1852,  he  took  charge  of
the  preparation  of  the  triennial  catalogue,  and  the
annual  obituary  records.  He  also  had  supervision
of  the  college  property.  Aside  from  his  duties  in
the  college  he  took  an  active  part  in  municipal
politics,  and  filled  various  offices.  He  devoted
himself  with  enthusiasm  to  the  sciences  of  astrono-
my and  meteorology,  and  made  important  discov-
eries, especially  in  relation  to  the  periodical  occur-
rence of  meteoric  showers.  He  published  in  the
I  American  Journal  of  Science  "  the  results  of  his
observations  in  these  branches,  notably  papers  on
the  meteoric  showers  of  August,  and  on  the  exist-
ence of  a  planet  between  Mercury  and  the  sun ;
also  papers  on  entomological  subjects,  one  of
which,  treating  of  the  Hessian  fly  and  its  para-
sites, was  the  fruit  of  nine  years  of  patient  inves-
tigation. There  is  a  stained-glass  window  to  his
memory  in  the  Battell  chapel  of  Yale.

HERRICK,  John  Russell,  clergvman,  b.  in
Milton,  Vt.,  12  May,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Vermont  in  1847,  studied  theol-
ogy at  Andover  seminary  for  two  years,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1852.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Con-
gpgationalist  church  at  Malone,  N.  Y.,  from  1854
till  1867,  when  he  became  professor  of  systematic
theology  at  Bangor,  Me.  In  1874  he  returned  to
the  pastorate,  taking  charge  of  a  church  in  South
Hadley,  Mass.  In  1880  Dr.  Herrick  became  presi-
dent of  Pacific  university  at  Forest  Grove,  Oregon,
and  in  1883  of  the  recently  founded  Dakota  uni-
versity in  Vermillion,  Dakota.  He  has  contributed
articles  on  theological  and  philosophical  subjects
to  reviews,  and  published  a  volume  of  Boston  lec-
tures on  "  Positivism  "  (Boston,  1870).

HERRICK,  Joshua,  politician,  b.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,  18  March,  1793  ;  d.  in  Alfred,  Me.,  30  Aug.,


1874.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
removed  to  the  district  of  Maine  in  1811,  settled
in  Brunswick,  engaged  in  lumbering  on  the  An*
droscoggin,  and  was  interested  in  the  first  cotton-
mill  in  Maine.  In  1829  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Jackson  deputy  collector  and  inspector  of
customs  at  Kennebunkport,  which  post  he  retained
until  1841.  He  was  a  Democratic  representative
in  congress  in  1843-'5,  deputy  collector  at  Kenne-
bunkport again  in  1847-'9,  and  register  of  probate
in  York  county  from  1849  till  1855.  He  was  a
friend  of  Prof.  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse,  and  one  of
the  promoters  of  the  first  line  of  telegraph  built
between  Washington  and  Baltimore  in  1844.

HERRICK,  Samuel  Edward,  clergyman,  b.
in  Southampton,  N.  Y,  6  April,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1859,  was  a  teacher  two
years,  studied  theology  at  Princeton  seminary,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1861,  and  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Presbvterian  church  at  Wappinger  s
Falls,  N.  Y,  on  13  Oct.,  1863.  From  1864  till  1871
hp  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  at  Chelsea,
Mass.,  and  afterward  of  the  Mount  Vernon  church
in  Boston.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Some  Heretics
of  Yesterdav."  historical  essavs  (Boston,  1884).

HERRICK,  Sophie  Mcllvaine  Bledsoe,  edi-
tor, b.  in  Gambier,  Ohio,  26  March,  1837.  She  is
the  daughter  of  Dr.  Albert  T.  Bledsoe,  and  in  1860
married  James  Burton  Herrick.  Her  education  was
received  first  at  home  under  the  direction  of  her
father,  and  then  at  the  Cooper  female  institute  in
Dayton,  Ohio.  From  1868  till  1872  she  was  prin-
cipal of  a  school  in  Baltimore.  In  1874  she  became
associated  with  her  father  in  the  editorial  manage-
ment of  the  "  Southern  Review,"'  becoming  editor-
in-chief  in  1877.  A  year  later  she  joined  the  edi-
torial staff  of  "  Scribner's  Monthly "  (now  the
"  Century  '").  Mrs.  Herrick  is  known  as  a  skilful
microscopist,  and  has  described  her  investigations
in  numerous  articles,  illustrated  by  herself.  She
has  published  "  The  Wonders  of  Plant  Life  "  (New
York.  1883)  and  "Chapters  in  Plant  Life"  (1885).

HERRICK,  Stephen  Solon,  phvsician  and
surgeon,  b.  in  West  Randolph,  Vt.,  11  Dec,  1833.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1854,  and
taught  in  Kentucky  and  Mississippi  till  1859.  He
then  studied  medicine,  and  was  graduated  M.  D.
at  the  University  of  Louisiana  in  1861.  He  served
as  assistant  surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army  in
1862-*3,  and  afterward  in  the  navy  of  the  Confed-
eracy till  the  end  of  the  war,  and  then  returned  to
New  Orleans  to  practise.  He  was  one  of  the  edi-
tors of  the  New  Orleans  "Medical  and  Surgical
Journal "  in  1866-'7,  visiting  surgeon  in  the  New
Orleans  charity  hospital  in  1865-'9,  a  member  of
the  Louisiana  board  of  health,  and  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  New  Orleans  school  of  medicine
in  1869-70.  For  several  years  between  1870  and
1877  he  was  a  sanitary  inspector,  and  in  1877-'9
inspector  of  coal-oil.  In  1876  he  became  professor
of  chemistry  and  physics  in  the  Agricultural  and
mechanical  college  of  Louisiana,  and  retained  that
post  for  two  years.  In  1878  he  resumed  his  edi-
torial connection  with  the  New  Orleans  "  Medical
Journal."  In  1879  he  became  secretary  of  the  state
board  of  health.  He  has  contributed  to  the  medi-
cal journals  of  New  Orleans,  Louisville,  Philadel-
phia, and  New  York,  and  in  1869  received  a  prize
from  the  American  medical  association  for  an
essay  on  "  Quinine."  The  "  Transactions  "  of  the
American  public  health  association  and  of  the
American  medical  association  contain  papers  by
him;  also  the  "Transactions"  of  the  Louisiana
medical  society,  of  which  he  became  corresponding
secretary  in 1878. He has  contributed  also to


188


nERRING


HERRMAN


Wood's  "  Handbook  of  Hygiene  and  Public  Health"
and  "  Handbook  of  the  Medical  Sciences." — His
brother,  Lucius  Carroll,  physician,  b.  in  West
Randolph,  Vt.,  2  Sept.,  1840,  was  graduated  M.  D.
at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1864,  served  as  a
private  and  as  assistant  surgeon  during  the  civil
war,  attended  medical  lectures,  and  served  as  at-
tending physician  at  the  Lying-in  asylum  and  in
dispensaries  in  New  York  city  for  two  years.  In
1869  he  settled  in  Woodstock,  Ohio,  whence  he  re-
moved to  Columbus  in  1882.  He  prepared  a  "Ge-
nealogical Register  of  the  Family  of  Herrick"
printed  privately,  Columbus,  1885).

HERRING,  Elbert,  jurist,  b.  in  Stratford,
Conn.,  8  July,  1777 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20  Feb.,
1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1795,  stud-
ied law,  and  practised  in  New  York  city.  Charles
O'Conor  was  one  of  his  law-students.  He  was
judge  of  the  marine  court  there  from  its  establish-
ment in  1805  till  1808,  and  a  few  years  later  was
re-appointed.  He  was  a  friend  of  De  Witt  Clinton,
who  made  him  the  first  register  of  the  state  of  New
York  in  1812,  an  office  which  he  held  for  five  years.
In  July,  1832,  President  Jackson  appointed  him
the  first  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs.  He  filled
this  post  till  July,  1836.  A  few  years  later  he  re-
tired from  active  life,  but  remained  hale  till  the
end  of  his  career  of  almost  a  century.

HERRING,  James,  artist,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 12  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  in  October,
1867.  His  father  emigrated  to  the  United  States
in  1804,  and  became  a  brewer  and  distiller  in  the
Bowery,  New  York.  The  son  began  by  coloring
prints  and  maps,  and  removed  to  Philadelphia,
where  he  entered  into  the  business  of  coloring
maps,  but  returned  to  New  York,  and  settled  in
Chatham  square  as  a  portrait-painter.  He  illus-
trated, with  Longacre,  American  biography  in  the
"National  Portrait-Gallery" (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1834-'9). — His  son,  Frederick  William,  artist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  24  Nov.,  1821,  studied  art  with
his  father  and  Henry  Inman,  and  devotes  his  at-
tention to  portrait-painting.

HERRMAN,  Augustine,  colonist,  first  Lord  of
Bohemia  Manor,  b.  in  Prague,  Bohemia,  about
1605 ;  d.  on  Bohemia  Manor,  Md.,  in  1686. He

was  the  son  of  Au-
gustine Ephraim
Herrman,  council-
man of  Prague,  and
Beatrice,  daughter
of  Caspar  Redel.
He  received  a
good  education,
speaking  German,
Dutch,  French,
Spanish,  English,
and  Latin,  was  a
surveyor  by  pro-
fession, skilled  in
sketching  and
drawing,  and  be-
came an  enterpris-
ing merchant.  He
entered  the  ser-
vice of  the  Dutch
West  India  com-
pany, and  made  voyages  in  their  employ  to  the
Antilles,  Curacoa,  and  Surinam.  He  claimed  to
have  been  "  the  first  founder  of  the  Virginia  tobac-
co-trade," and  so  must  have  been  in  America  at
least  as  early  as  1629.  He  also  made  successful
experiments  in  planting  indigo  near  New  Amster-
dam, where  he  settled  in  1643.  He  was  agent  for
the  mercantile  house  of  Gabry,  of  Amsterdam,  and


made  several  commercial  voyages  to  Holland.  He
likewise  became  interested  in  privateering,  and  was
one  of  the  owners  of  the  frigate  "  La  (farce,"  en-
gaged in  depredations  on  Spanish  commerce.  He
opposed  Gov.  Stuyvesant  in  some  of  his  measures
of  self-aggrandizement  at  the  expense  of  the  set-
tlers in  New  Netherland,  and  rendered  important
service  to  the  colony.  He  was  one  of  the  board  of
nine  men  organized  in  1647,  and  held  thai  office
in  1649  and  1650;  one  of  the  ambassadors  to
Rhode  Island  in  1652 ;  and  in  the  same  capacity,
in  company  with  Resolved  Waldron,  was  sent  to
Maryland  in  September,  1659.  He  kept  a  journal
of  their  travels  and  proceedings  in  this  service,
and,  with  his  associate,  urged  with  great  ability
before  the  Maryland  governor  and  his  council  the
rights  of  the  New  Netherland  government  in  oppo-
sition to  Lord  Baltimore's  claim  to  the  South  river.
To  the  arguments  then  used,  employed  eighty
years  later  in  the  interest  of  Perm,  the  existence  of
the  present  state  of  Delaware,  as  independent  of
Maryland,  is  mainly  to  be  attributed.  In  1660
Herrman  visited  Virginia,  and  in  the  same  year
transported  his  people  from  New  Amsterdam  to
Maryland,  obtaining  in  1661  a  charter  from  Lord
Baltimore  for  the  founding  of  Cecil  town  and
county,  and  in  1662  (in  consideration  of  his«ervices
in  making  a  valuable  map  of  Maryland  and  Vir-
ginia) patents  for  a  tract  of  land  called  Bohemia
Manor,  and  one  known  as  Little  Bohemia,  to  which
was  added,  in  1671,  St.  Augustine's  Manor,  includ-
ing the  territory  east  of  the  former,  between  St,
George's  and  Appoquinimink  creeks,  to  the  shores
of  the  Delaware.  These  liberal  concessions  from
the  proprietor  embraced  about  30,000  acres,  am
were  accompanied  with  manorial  privileges,  and
the  title  of  "  Lord  "  applied  to  the  grantee.  In  1684
he  conveyed  a  tract  of  3,750  acres  to  a  company  of
Hollanders  and  others,  who  established  a  commu-
nity of  Labadists  upon  it.  Herrman  was  a  member
of  the  governor's  council  and  a  justice  of  Baltimo:
county,  and  in  1678  was  appointed  a  commission
to  treat  with  the  Indians.  He  married  Jannetj
daughter  of  Caspar  and  Judith  Varleth,  of  Hol-
land (afterward  of  New  Netherland),  and  left  issue.
— Ephraim  George,  second  Lord  of  Bohemia
Manor,  b.  in  New  Amsterdam  in  1652 ;  d.  on  Bo-
hemia Manor  in  1689,  was  the  eldest  son  of  Au-;
gustine  Herrman.  In  1673  he  was  clerk  in  the  office
of  the  secretary  of  state  at  New  York,  and  in  1676
was  appointed  clerk  of  the  courts  of  Upland  and
New  Castle,  in  1677  clerk  of  the  customs  and  re-
ceiver of  quit-rents  within  the  jurisdiction  of  those
courts,  and  in  1680  surveyor  for  the  counties  of
New  Castle  and  St.  Jones.  With  John  Moll,  he
was  appointed  attorney  for  the  Duke  of  York  to
present  the  territory  of  New  Castle  county  to
William  Penn,  a  duty  he  performed  in  1682.  He
became  a  Labadist,  but,  almost  in  exact  fulfilment
of  his  father's  malediction  that  he  might  not  live
two  years  after  joining  the  community,  was  taken
sick,  lost  his  mind,  and  died.  He  married  Eliza-
beth, daughter  of  Lucas  Rodenburg,  vice-director
of  the  island  of  Curacoa  from  about  1646  until  his
death  in  1657,  who  survived  him,  subsequently
marrying  Maj.  John  Donaldson,  a  member  of  the
provincial  council  of  Pennsylvania. — Caspsirus,
third  Lord  of  Bohemia  Manor,  b.  in  New  Amster-
dam in  1656;  d.  on  Bohemia  Manor  in  1704.  He
was  a  son  of  Augustine  Herrman,  and  succeedea
his  brother  Ephi"aim  in  the  title  and  estate  in  1 089.
He  represented  the  county  of  New  Castle  in  the
general  assembly  of  Pennsylvania  from  1683  to
1685,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  of  Mary-
land in  1694. — Ephraim  Augustine,  fourth  Lord


HERRON


HESS


189


of  Bohemia  Manor,  b.  on  St.  Augustine's  Manor,
in  New  Castle  county,  near  the  Delaware  river ;  d.
on  Bohemia  Manor  in  1735.  He  was  the  son  of
Casparus  Herrman,  whom  he  succeeded  in  the  title
and  estate  in  1704.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature of  Maryland  from  Cecil  county  in  1715, 1716,
1728,  and  173*1.

HERRON,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  near  Ship-
pensburg,  Cumberland  co..  Pa..  28  June,  1774;  d.
6  Dec,  1860.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  in  1794,  studied  theology
under  Robert  Cooper,  and  was  licensed  by  the  Car-
lisle presbytery  in  1797.  He  began  his  work  as  a
missionary,  travelling  through  the  backwoods  of
Ohio  with  a  guide,  preaching  in  taverns,  and  en-
camping with  the  Indians.  He  was  pastor  of  the
Rocky  Spring  church  from  1800  till  1811,  and  of
the  1st  Presbyterian  church  from  1811  till  1850.
In  1827  he  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly.
He  was  influential  in  securing  the  location  of  the
Western  theological  seminary  at  Allegheny  City,
Pa.,  and  was  its  president  from  1827  till  1860.  He
was  a  trustee  of  Jefferson  college  in  1817-'49.

HERRON,  Francis  Jay,  soldier,  b.  in  Pitts-
burg. Pa.,  17  Feb.,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Western  university  of  Pennsylvania  in  1853,  and
about  1856  removed  to  Dubuque,  Iowa,  where  he
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  In  1861  he  organ-
ized and  commanded  the  Governor's  Grays,  with
which  he  served  in  the  1st  Iowa  regiment,  and  was
engaged  in  the  battles  of  Dug  Springs,  Ozark,  and
Wilson's  Creek.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  9th  Iowa  regiment  in  September,  1861,
commanding  it  through  the  campaigns  in  Mis-
souri, Arkansas,  and  the  Indian  territory.  He
was  wounded  and  captured  in  the  battle  of  Pea
Ridge  during  the  second  day's  engagement,  but
was  soon  exchanged.  He  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  29  July,  1862,  and  had
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Frontier  during
the  battle  of  Prairie  Grove,  Ark.,  for  which  he
was  made  major-general  of  volunteers.  29  Nov.,
1862.  Subsequently  he  captured  Van  Buren,  Ark.
After  commanding  the  left  wing  of  the  investing
forces  at  Vicksburg,  and  of  the  army  and  navy
expedition  that  captured  Yazoo  City,  he  was  in
charge  of  the  13th  army  corps  on  the  Texas  coast
till  he  was  assigned  to  command  the  northern  di-
vision of  Louisiana  during  Gen.  Banks's  opera-
tions. In  May,  1865,  he  negotiated,  and  in  June
received,  the  formal  surrender  of  the  trans-Mis-
sissippi army  and  all  Confederate  forces  west  of
the  Mississippi,  and  in  July,  1865.  was  appointed
one  of  the  commissioners  to  negotiate  treaties
with  the  Indian  tribes.  He  resigned  his  commis-
sion as  major-general  and  also  that  of  Indian
commissioner  in  August,  1865.  He  then  prac-
tised law  in  New  Orleans,  was  U.  S.  marshal  of
the  district  of  Louisiana  from  1867  till  1869,  sec-
retary of  state  of  Louisiana  in  1872-'3.  and  has
since  practised  his  profession  in  New  York  city.

HERSEY,  Ezekiel,  physician,  b.  in  Hingham,
Mass.,  21  Sept.,  1709 ;  d.  there,  9  Dec,  1770.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1728.  After  study-
ing medicine  under  Dr.  Dalhoude,  of  Boston,  he
established  himself  in  his  native  town.  He  be-
queathed £1.000,  and  a  similar  sum  at  the  death  of
his  widow,  for  the  support  of  a  professor  of  anat-
omy and  surgery  at  Harvard,  and  also  left  funds
for  the  establishment  of  an  academy  at  Hingham.
— His  brother,  Abner,  physician,  b.'in  Barnstable,
Mass.,  in  1722;  d.  there  in  1787,  acquired  some  dis-
tinction in  his  profession.  His  will  is  one  of  the
strangest  documents  on  record,  and  the  legislature
was  forced  to  put  an  end  to  his  scheme  for  per:


petuating  his  estate.  He  added  £500  to  the  fund
left  by.  his  brother  to  Harvard.  He  railed  at  peo-
ple and  at  the  fashion  of  the  time,  and  wore  a  coat
made  of  seven  tanned  calf-skins.

HERSEY,  Samnel  Freeman,  philanthropist,
b.  in  Sumner,  Me.  (then  Massachusetts),  12  April,
1812 ;  d.  in  Bangor,  Me.,  3  Feb.,  1875.  After  his
graduation  at  Hebron  academy  in  1831,  he  became
a  bank-clerk,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in
Bangor  in  1844.  Subsequently  he  was  interested
in  the  lumber  business  and  banking  in  Maine,
Minnesota,  and  Wisconsin.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Maine  legislature  in  1842, 1857, 1865, 1867,  and
1869,  and  of  the  executive  council  of  Maine  in
1851-2.  Mr.  Hersey  was  a  delegate  to  the  national
Republican  convention  at  Chicago  in  1860,  and  to
that  held  in  Baltimore  in  1864.  From  1864  till
1868  he  was  a  member  of  the  national  Republican
committee,  and  served  as  a  representative  in  con-
gress from  1873  till  1875.  He  left  a  large  fortune,
giving  $100,000  to  Bangor,  which  supports  a  public
library,  a  bequest  to  Westbrook  seminary,  Deering,
Me.,  and  a  sum  for  a  summer  retreat  on  the  Penob-
scot for  the  Universalist  Sunday-school  of  Bangor.

HERTEL  DE  ROUVILLE,  Francis,  soldier,
b.  in  Three  Rivers,  Canada,  in  1643  ;  d.  in  Boucher-
ville,  Canada,  29  May,  1722.  He  adopted  the  mili-
tary profession,  and  soon  distinguished  himself
both  for  valor  and  piety.  In  1681  he  was  made
prisoner  by  the  Iroquois,  and  was  led  to  Agniers,
where  he  endured  frightful  tortures.  A  finger  of
his  right  hand  was  burned  in  the  bowl  of  a  calu-
met, and  the  thumb  of  the  left  was  hacked  off.
His  patience  under  these  afflictions  excited  the
admiration  of  t>he  savages.  After  a  long  captivity,
the  Indians  prepared  to  burn  him,  but  he  was  res-
cued by  an  aged  Iroquois  woman,  who  consented
to  adopt  him  after  the  manner  of  the  tribe.  Some
time  afterward  he  escaped  and  rejoined  his  regi-
ment. In  1690  he  was  placed  in  command  of  a
body  of  troops  raised  in  Three  Rivers,  and  on  the
invasion  of  the  English  colonies  by  Frontenac,  he
set  out  from  Three  Rivers  at  the  head  of  fifty
Canadians  and  twenty-five  Indians,  on  28  Jan.,
and  by  a  long  march  through  snow  and  ice  reached
the  English  village  of  Salmon  Falls,  where  they
massacred  thirty  or  forty  of  the  inhabitants  in  cold
blood.  Having  learned  what  was  taking  place  at
Salmon  Falls,  the  inhabitants  of  Dover  armed
themselves  and  advanced,  over  two  hundred  strong,
to  succor  their  countrymen.  Hertel,  having  heard
of  their  march,  and  fearing  that  he  might  be  sur-
rounded, took  possession  of  the  bridge  that  crossed
the  river  in  front  of  the  enemy.  Without  firing  a
shot,  he  allowed  them  to  advance  on  the  bridge,
and  then  charged  them,  sword  in  hand,  compelling
them  to  retreat.  He  then  united  with  the  troops
levied  in  the  district  of  Quebec.  He  afterward
commanded  a  part  of  the  forces  that  besieged  Casco
Bay.  The  capture  of  this  place  was  largely  due
to  his  skilful  manoeuvres,  and  he  contributed  much
to  the  success  of  Frontenac's  campaign  against  the
Iroquois.  In  return  for  these  services,  he  was
promised  letters  of  nobility  from  Louis  XIV.  in
1690,  entitling  him  and  his  descendants  to  the
privileges  enjoyed  by  the  French  nobles ;  but  the
letters  were  not  delivered  to  Hertel  until  1716.

HESS,  George,  sculptor,  b.  in  Germany  in  1832.
He  was  brought  to  the  United  States,  and  left  an
orphan  without  money,  but  studied  in  Munich,
where  he  went  at  the  age  of  twenty-five,  and  prac-
tised his  art  in  New  York  city.  His  bust  of  Mine.
Janauschek  is  well  known.  His  other  works  include
"Echo,"  "The  Water-Lily,"  and  two  humorous
pieces  called  "  Gold  Up  "  and  "  Gold  Down."


190


HETII


HEWES


HETH,  William  (heath),  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1735 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va„  15  April,  1808.  He
was  an  officer  in  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery's  regi-
ment during  the  French  war,  and  was  wounded  at
the  battle  of  Quebec.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  joined  the  Continental  army ;  in
1777  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
3d  Virginia  regiment,  and  was  in  command  till
the  end  of  the  war,  serving  with  Gen.  Benjamin
Lincoln  at  the  siege  of  Charleston.  After  the  war
he  received  a  lucrative  government  office  under
Gen.  Washington. — His  grandson,  Henry,  soldier,
b.  in  Virginia  in  1825,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1847,  and,  entering  the  6th
infantry,  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1853,  adjutant
in  1854,  and  captain  in  1855.  In  1861  he  resigned,
and  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  brigadier-
general.  In  May,  1863,  he  was  commissioned  ma-
jor-general. He  commanded  a  division  of  Gen.
Ambrose  P.  Hill's  corps  in  Virginia,  and  was  en-
gaged at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg  and.  in  the  cam-
paigns of  1864-'5.  Since  the  war  he  has  been
engaged  in  business  in  South  Carolina.

HEUSTIS,  Jabez  Wiggins,  physician,  b.  prob-
ably in  St.  John,  N.  B.,  in  1784;  d.  in  Talladega
Springs,  Ala.,  in  1841.  He  received  his  medical
education  in  the  New  York  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons,  and  in.l806-'7  was  assistant  surgeon
in  the  U.  S.  navy.  He  then  became  surgeon  in  the  U.
S.  army  under  Gen.  Jackson,  and  served  throughout
the  southern  campaigns.  Afterward  he  resided  in
Cahawba,  Ala.,  until  he  removed  to  Mobile  in  1835.
His  death  was  caused  by  blood-poisoning,  contracted
while  performing  an  operation.  His  publications
are  "Physical  Observations  and  Medical  Tracts
and  Researches  on  the  Topography  and  Diseases
of  Louisiana"  (New  York,  1817);  "Medical  Facts
and  Inquiries  respecting  the  Causes.  Nature,  Pre-
vention, and  Cure  of  Fever  "  (Cahawba,  1821) ;  and
the  "  Bilious  Remittent  Fever  of  Alabama  "  (1825).
He  also  contributed  largely  to  the  "  American
Journal  of  Medical  Science."  —  His  son,  James
Fountain,  physician,  b.  in  Cahawba,  Ala.,  15  Nov.,
1829,  was  educated  in  the  common  schools  of  Mo-
bile and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Louisiana,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1848.  He  was  assistant-surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  navy
in  1850-'7,  and  afterward  practised  his  profession
in  Mobile.  He  was  elected  professor  of  anatomy
in  the  Alabama  medical  college  in  1859,  served  as
surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army  throughout  the
civil  war,  and  since  1875  has  been  professor  of
surgery  in  Alabama  medical  college.  He  has  been
successful  as  a  surgeon,  having  performed  many
important  operations,  and  has  contributed  to  cur-
rent medical  literature.

HERVAS  Y  PANDURO,  Lorenzo  (ayr-vahs '),
Spanish  philologist,  b.  in  Horcajo  in  1735  ;  d.  in
Rome  in  1809.  He  was  a  Jesuit,  and  taught  phi-
losophy in  the  Seminary  of  Madrid  and  the  College
of  Murcia.  About  1760  he  was  sent  to  the  missions  of
South  America,  and  for  several  years  he  labored  in
the  district  of  Mainas,  Peru,  where  he  made  a  special
study  of  the  Indian  languages.  On  the  expulsion
of  the  Jesuits  from  the  Spanish  dominions  in  1787,
he  went  to  Italy,  became  canonical  adviser  to  the
cardinals  Albani  and  Roberello,  and  was  appointed
prefect  of  the  Quirinal  library.  Here  he  prose-
cuted his  favorite  studies  of  geography  and  abo-
riginal languages.  Besides  many  philosophical  and
historical  works,  he  published  "  Vocabulario  poli-
glota,"  containing  the  grammatical  elements  of
eighteen  South  American  languages  (Rome,  1784) ;
"  Origen,  formation,  mecanismo,  y  armonia  de  los
idiomas "  (Madrid,  1790);  "Historia  de  las  pri-


meras  colonias  de  America  "  (Madrid,  1794) ;  "Arit-
metica  de  las  naciones  y  division  del  tiempo  entre
los  Orientales  "  (Madrid,  1796) ;  and  the  most  im-
portant work,  "  Catalogo  de  las  lenguas  de  las  na-
ciones conocidas  ;  y  numeration,  division,  y  clases
de  estas  segun  la  diversidad  de  sus  idiomas  y  dia-
lectos  "  (2  vols.,  Madrid,  1800).  This  work,  in  the
4th  and  5th  chapters,  treats  of  the  languages  of
Peru,  and  especially  of  Mainas.  The  author  says  that
he  cannot  even  pretend  to  count  the  South  Ameri-
can Indian  dialects,  but  they  must  number  at  least
500.  He  has  also  investigated  the  question  of  the
origin  of  the  American  races,  and  concludes  that
the  tribes  peopling  the  Pacific  coast  must  have
come  from  Asia  by  way  of  the  Aleutian  islands,
while  those  on  the  Atlantic  side  came  from  Africa
by  way  of  the  West  Indian  islands,  which  formerly
connected  with  the  fabulous  submerged  Atlantis."

HEW  AT,  Alexander,  historian,  b.  in  Scotland
about  1745 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1829.  He
was  educated  at  Kelso  grammar  school,  Scotland,
and  it  is  supposed  came  to  the  United  States  in
1762,  since  the  records  of  St.  Andrew's  society  of
Charleston,  S.  C,  show  him  to  be  moderator  of  the
session  of  the  Presbyterian  church  there  about  that
time.  He  continued  pastor  of  the  "  Scotch  church  "
of  Charleston  until  the  near  prospect  of  war  with
Great  Britain  induced  his  return  to  England  in
1774.  He  was  the  first  historian  of  South  Carolina,
being  the  author  of  "  History  of  South  Carolina
and  Charleston  "  (London,  1779) ;  and  he  also  pub-
lished "  Sermons  "  (1803).

HEWES,  George  Robert  Twelves,  one  of  the
"  Boston  tea-partv,"  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  Nov.,
1731 ;  d.  in  Richfield,  Oswego  co.,  N.  Y,  5  Nov.,
1840.  His  only  instruction  was  from  the  wife  of
the  town-crier,  who  taught  him  to  read  and  write.
He  supported  himself  by  fishing,  hunting,  and  rude
shoemaking,  until  1758,  when  he  made  an  unsuc-
cessful attempt  to  enlist  in  the  Colonial  army
against  the  French.  He  was  unable  to  pass  muster,
made  an  equally  unsuccessful  attempt  to  enter  the
navy,  and  through  necessity  returned  to  his  trade.
In  the  various  disturbances  in  Boston  at  the  time
of  the  stamp  act,  Hewes,  who  was  excitable  but
patriotic,  was  one  of  the  foremost.  He  took  an
active  part  in  the  destruction  of  the  tea  in  Decem-
ber, 1773,  and  is  probably  the  only  man  who  ever
confessed  to  a  share  in  this  transaction.  His  own
account  is  given  in  "  The  Boston  Tea- Party,"  a
memoir  of  his  life  (New  York,  1834).  Hewes  was
imprisoned  with  other  patriots,  but  escaped,  and
entered  the  navy.  He  afterward  joined  the  army,
and  was  stationed  at  West  Point  under  Gen.  Alex-
ander McDougal.  After  the  Revolution  he  re-
turned to  Boston,  and  again  led  a  seafaring  life.
He  removed  to  Richfield  many  years  previous  to
his  death,  and  in  his  extreme  age  was  supported
by  the  residents  of  the  town.  In  his  107th  year,
Hewes  is  described  as  "  a  hale  old  man,  with  blue
eyes  undimmed  by  age,  and  with  alert  faculties."
At  the  dedication  of  the  Bunker  Hill  monument
he  was  a  guest  of  the  city  of  Boston.

HEWES,  Joseph,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Kingston,  N.  J.,  in  1730  ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  Nov.,  1779.  His  parents
were  Connecticut  farmers  who  escaped  from  the
Indians  in  1728,  and  settled  near  Kingston.  Jo-
seph, after  receiving  a  common-school  education,
went  to  Philadelphia  and  engaged  in  business,
removing  to  Edenton,  N.  G,  in  1763.  He  was  in
the  state  senate  in  that  year  ;  in  1774  was  a  delegate
to  the  continental  congress,  and  assisted  in  tlie
preparation  of  the  report  on  "  The  statement  of
the  rights  of  the  colonists  in  general,  the  several


HEWETT


HEWIT


191


J(H^n^^o<^^f


instances  in  which  these  rights  are  violated  and  in-
fringed, and  the  means  most  proper  to  be  pursued
for  obtaining  their  restoration."  Although  a  mer-
chant, he  insisted  on  the  plan  of  importation,  and
served  with  distinction  on  this  and  many  of  the
most  important  com-
mittees during  1775-
'6.  In  the  beginning
of  1775  the  Society
of  Friends,  to  which
he  and  his  family  be-
longed, held  a  gen-
eral convention  de-
nouncing the  pro-
ceedings of  congress,
and  such  was  Hewes's
patriotism  that  he  at
once  severed  his  con-
nection with  the  So-
ciety and  became  not
only  a  promoter  of
war  but  of  gay  and
worldly  habits.  In
1776  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  secret  com-
mittee, of  the  committee  on  claims,  and  was  vir-
tually first  secretary  of  the  navy.  With  Gen.
Washington,  he  conceived  the  plan  of  operations
for  the  ensuing  campaign,  and  voted  in  favor  of
the  immediate  adoption  of  the  declaration  of  4
July  in  accordance  with  the  resolutions  passed  by
the  North  Carolina  convention  of  the  preceding
April,  that  state  being  the  first  of  the  colonies
to  declare  in  favor  of  throwing  off  all  connec-
tion with  Great  Britain.  He  was  again  chosen  a
delegate  to  congress  in  1776,  but  was  prevented  by
illness  from  serving,  and  was  again  returned  in
1779.  but  died  in  the  second  month  of  his  term.
His  funeral  was  conducted  with  public  ceremonies,
and  attended  by  Gen.  Washington  and  a  distin-
guished civil  and  military  escort.  He  left  no
children  to  inherit  his  large  estates.  His  miniature
shows  him  to  have  possessed  great  personal  beauty.
HEWETT,  Edward  Osborne,  Canadian  en-
gineer, b.  in  Glamorgan,  England.  25  Sept.,  1835.
He  was  educated  at  Cheltenham  college  and  the
Royal  military  academy  at  Woolwich,  commis-
sioned lieutenant  in  the  Royal  engineers  in  1854,
captain  in  1860,  major  in  1872,  lieutenant-colonel
in  1879,  colonel  in  1881,  and  was  created  a  com-
panion of  the  order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George
in  1883.  In  1861,  in  anticipation  of  a  war  with  the
United  States,  he  took  command  of  the  field  com-
pany of  royal  engineers  for  active  service  in  Canada.
He  subsequently  commanded  the  Royal  engineers
of  Ontario,  west  of  Toronto,  was  engaged  in  report-
ing on  the  defences  and  resources  of  Canada,  and
was  afterward  in  charge  of  the  designing  and  con-
struction of  the  military  and  naval  fortifications
in  Halifax,  N.  S.  He  visited  both  National  and
Confederate  camps  during  the  civil  war.  In  1875
he  was  appointed  commandant  of  the  proposed
military  college  of  Canada,  and  he  has  had  the  sole
organization  and  working  of  this  institution  from
its  conception  till  the  present  date  (1887).

HEWETT,  Waterman  Thomas,  educator,  b.  in
Miami,  Saline  co.,  Mo.,  10  Jan.,  1846.  He  removed
in  early  youth  to  South  Paris,  Me.,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Amherst  in  1869.  He  then  went  abroad,
Was  a  student  at  the  University  of  Athens  and  in
the  school  of  modern  languages  at  Heidelberg  in
1870.  on  his  return  to  the  United  States  became
assistant  professor  of  German  at  Cornell,  and  since
1883  has  been  professor  there  of  the  German  lan-
guage and  literature. Prof.  Hewett  is  a  constant


contributor  to  the  magazines  on  scientific  and  liter-
ary subjects,  especially  on  the  life,  character,  and
literature  of  Goethe,  and  has  published  "  The  Fris-
ian Language  and  Literature"  (Ithaca,  N.  Y.,
1879) ;  "  Monograph  on  the  Aims  and  Efforts  of
Collegiate  Study  of  the  Modern  Languages  "  (Balti-
more, 1886) ;  and  the  "  Mutual  Relations  of  High
Schools  and  Colleges  "  (Syracuse,  1887).

HEWIT,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Lon-
don, Conn.,  28  Aug.,  1788 :  d.  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,
3  Feb.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,
and  studied  law,  but  afterward  entered  the  divinity-
school  at  Andover,  and  in  1815  was  licensed  to
preach.  He  officiated  successfully  in  the  Presby-
terian churches  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  and  Fairfield,
Conn.,  until  1828,  when  he  resigned  to  become  the
agent  of  the  American  temperance  society.  He
was  signally  successful  in  this  work,  and  earned
the  title  of  the  "  Luther  of  the  early  temperance
reform."  He  became  pastor  of  the  2d  Congrega-
tional church  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  in  1830,  made
a  visit,  in  aid  of  the  temperance  reform,  to  England
in  1831.  and,  returning  in  1834,  continued  pastor
of  the  2d  church  of  Bridgeport,  and  then  of  a  Pres-
byterian church  that  was  formed  of  members  of  his
old  parish,  until  increasing  age  and  infirmities  com-
pelled him  to  withdraw  from  active  labors  in  1862.
He  was  a  founder  and  liberal  benefactor  of  the
Hartford  theological  seminary.  His  wife  was  a
daughter  of  Senator  James  Hillhouse  of  Connecti-
cut.— His  son,  Nathaniel  Augustus,  clergyman,
b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  27  Nov.,  1820,  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1839.  He  studied  law,  but  at  the
end  of  a  year  abandoned  it,  and  entered  the  Theo-
logical institute  of  Connecticut,  which  was  then  at
Windsor.  In  1842  he  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a
Congregationalist,  but  in  the  following  year  he
was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  was  selected  to  accompany  Bishop
Southgate  as  a  missionary  to  Constantinople,  but
the  missionary  committee  refused  to  ratify  the  ap-
pointment on  the  ground  that  Mr.  Hewit  held  be-
liefs that  were  distinctively  Roman  Catholic.  He
was  received  into  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in
1846,  and  was  ordained  in  1847  by  Bishop  Reynolds.
He  was  then  appointed  vice-principal  of  the  Charles-
ton collegiate  institute.  He  joined  the  Redemp-
torist  order  in  1850,  and  in  1858,  on  the  founda-
tion of  the  congregation  of  St.  Paul  by  Father
Hecker,  became  one  of  its  chief  members,  taking
the  religious  name  of  Augustine  Francis.  Since
1865  he  has  been  employed  in  literary  work,  and  as
professor  of  philosophy,  theology,  and  Holy  Scrip-
ture in  the  Paulist  seminarv,  New  York  city.
From  1869  till  1874  he  edited  the  "Catholic
World."  Amherst  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1877.  Father  Hewit's  works  are  "  Reasons  for
submitting  to  the  Catholic  Church"  (Charleston,
1846) ;  "  Life  of  Princess  Borghese  "  (New  York,
1856) ;  "  Life  of  Dumoulin-Borie,"  an  Annamite
missionary  (1857) ;  "The  Little  Angel  of  the  Copts";
"Life  of  Rev.  Francis  A.  Baker"  (1865);  "Prob-
lems of  the  Age.  with  Studies  in  St.  Augustine  on
Kindred  Subjects  "  (1868) ;  "  Light  in  Darkness,  a
Treatise  on  the  Obscure  Night  of  the  Soul "  (1870) ;
"  The  King's  Highway,  or  the  Catholic  Church  the
Way  of  Salvation,  as  revealed  in  Holy  Scriptures  "
(1874).  Father  Hewit  has  been  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  religious  periodicals,  and  has  edited  the
"  Complete  Works  of  Bishop  England  "  (Baltimore,
1850).— Another  son,  Henry  Stewart,  surgeon,
b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  26  Dec,  1825 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  19  Aug.,  1873,  was  educated  at  Yale,
and  graduated  in  medicine  from  the  University  of
New  York  in  1848,  entering  the  array  as  acting


192


HEWITT


HEWITT


assistant-surgeon  in  the  autumn  of  this  year.  He
was  stationed  at  Vera  Cruz  during  the  latter  part
of  the  Mexican  war,  in  1849  was  commissioned  as-
sistant surgeon,  was  stationed  at  Fort  Yuma,  Cal.,
and  accompanied  Capt.  William  H.  Warner  on  the
surveying  expedition  in  which  that  officer  was
killed  by  the  Sierra  Nevada  Indians.  In  the  spring
of  1852  he  resigned  from  the  army,  and,  removing
to  San  Francisco,  practised  medicine  there  three
years.  He  then  returned  to  New  York,  and  estab-
lished himself  in  his  profession.  In  August,  1861,
he  re-entered  the  army  as  brigade-surgeon  of  vol-
unteers, served  under  Gen.  Charles  F.  Smith,  and
afterward  as  medical  director  on  Gen.  Grant's  staff
at  Fort  Donelson,  Shiloh,  and  Vicksburg.  He
afterward  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  M.
Scofield,  and  was  bre vetted  colonel  in  March,  1865,
for  gallant  conduct  during  the  war.  Dr.  Hewit
became  a  Roman  Catholic  in  1855,  and  was  devoted
to  the  benevolent  enterprises  of  his  church.  Set-
tling in  New  York  after  the  war,  he  had  charge
of  the  House  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  was  a  director
of  St.  Stephen's  Orphan  Asylum,  and  president  of
the  medical  board  of  the  Charity  hospital.

HEWITT,  Abram  Stevens,  statesman,  b.  in
Haverstraw.  N.  Y.,  31  July,  1822.  He  was  educated
first  at  a  public  school  in  New  York  city,  where  by
a  special  examination  he  gained  a  scholarship  at

Columbia,  and  was
graduated  in  1842
at  the  head  of  his
class.  During  his  col-
lege course  he  sup-
ported himself  by
teaching,  and  after
his  graduation  he  re-
mained as  an  assist-
ant, being  in  1843
acting  professor  of
mathematics.  In
1844  he  visited  Eu-
rope with  his  class-
mate, Edward  Coop-
er, whose  partner  he
Jjf  '  •, afterward became,

\^/Y  ^J7 }f£t~r^--P&  and  whose  sister  he
i  ]  married  in  1855.
^  Meanwhile  he  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,
after  an  examination  in  which  twenty-four  out
of  fifty-seven  applicants  were  rejected.  He  soon
gave  up  the  practice  of  his  profession  on  account
of  impaired  eyesight,  and  became  associated  with
Peter  Cooper  in  the  iron  business.  The  firm  of
Cooper  and  Hewitt  now  own  and  control  the  Tren-
ton, Ringwood,  Pequest,  and  the  Durham  iron-
works. The  development  and  management  of  these
vast  enterprises  have  been  principally  the  result  of
Mr.  Hewitt's  efforts.  In  1862  he  went  to  England
to  learn  the  process  of  making  gun-barrel  iron,  and
at  a  heavy  loss  to  his  firm  furnished  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment with  material  during  the  civil  war.  The
introduction  of  the  Martins-Siemens  or  open-hearth
process  for  the  manufacture  of  steel  in  this  country
is  due  to  his  judgment.  No  serious  labor  trou-
bles have  ever  affected  their  works,  and  in  times
of  commercial  depression  the  furnaces  have  been
carried  on  at  a  loss,  rather  than  add  by  suspen-
sion to  the  distress  of  the  community.  The  plan
of  the  Cooper  Union  was  devised  by  its  own
trustees,  with  Mr.  Hewitt  as  their  active  head,
and  as  secretary  of  this  board  he  has  directed  its
financial  and  educational  details,  bestowing  upon
it  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  an  amount
of labor  exceeding  the  duties of some  college


F  residents.  He  left  the  Tammany,  joined  the
rving  Hall  society,  and  was  one  of  the  organ-
izers of  the  County  Democracy  in  1879.  He  was
elected  to  congress  in  1874,  and  served  continu-
ously, with  the  exception  of  one  term,  until  1886.
Mr.  Hewitt  was  an  advocate  of  honest  finan-
cial legislation,  of  a  moderate  and  discriminating
tariff  reform,  and  has  been  a  frequent  speaker  on
subjects  connected  with  finance,  labor,  and  the
development  of  national  resources.  The  II.  S.
geological  survey  owes  its  existence  principally  to
an  address  delivered  in  its  favor  by  Mr.  Hewitt,
and  his  speeches  generally  have  commanded  the
attention  of  both  parties.  In  October.  1886,  he
was  nominated  as  the  Democratic  candidate  for
mayor  of  New  York  city,  and  at  the  subsequent
election  received  90,552  votes  against  68,110  for
Henry  George  and  60,435  for  Theodore  Roosevelt.
His  management  of  the  municipal  government
has  been  marked  by  a  rigid  enforcement  of  the
laws,  and  holding  the  heads  of  the  various  de-
partments to  a  strict  accountability.  Mr.  Hewitt
was  chairman  of  the  Democratic  national  com-
mittee in  1876.  He  has  taken  an  interest  in  all
matters  pertaining  to  the  development  of  New
York  city,  and  in  1883  was  chosen  to  be  the  orator
at  the  opening  of  the  East  River  bridge.  Colum-
bia gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1887,  and
he  was  the  president  of  its  alumni  association  in
1883.  In  1876  he  was  elected  president  of  the
American  institute  of  mining  engineers,  and  his
retiring  address  on  "A  Century  of  Mining  and
Metallurgy  in  the  United  States  "  attracted  favor-
able criticism  at  home  and  abroad.  His  report  on
"  Iron  and  Steel "  at  the  World's  fair  held  in  Paris
in  1867  was  received  with  approval,  and  was  re-
published at  home  and  abroad.

HEWITT,  Charles  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.  in
Vergennes,  Vt.,  3  June,  1836.  He  was  educated
at  Hobart  college,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Al-
bany medical  college  in  1857.  He  practised  his
profession  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  until  1861,  when  he
entered  the  U.  S.4  army  as  assistant  surgeon  of  the
50th  New  York  regiment,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of
brigade  surgeon.  After  the  war  he  removed  to
Red  Wing,  Minn.,  where  he  is  professor  of  public
health  in  the  University  of  Minnesota.  Dr.  Hew-
itt devotes  himself  especially  to  surgery,  and  has
invented  a  modification  of  the  starch  bandage.

HEWITT,  Edward  Crawford,  educator,  b.  in
Sutton,  Mass.,  7  Nov.,  1828.  He  was  educated  at
the  County  academy  and  the  State  normal  school
in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  working  at  the  shoemaker's
trade  during  his  vacations  to  obtain  a  support.
He  taught  successively  in  Pittsfield,  Pa.,  Bridge-
port, Conn.,  and  Worcester,  Mass.,  until  1858,  when
he  removed  to  Bloomington,  111.,  was  professor  of
history  and  geography  in  the  State  normal  uni-
versity, and  since  1876  has  been  its  president.  Mr.
Hewitt  is  a  licensed  clergyman  of  the  Baptist
church,  has  served  one  term  as  president  of  the
Illinois  teachers'  association,  and  for  several  years
edited  "  The  Schoolmaster,"  an  educational  maga-
zine. He  has  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Shurtleff  college,  and  has  published  '"Pedagogy
for  Young  Teachers  "  (Cincinnati,  1883).

HEWITT,  Mary  Elizabeth,  authoress,  b.  in
Maiden,  Mass.,  in  1818.  Her  father,  a  fanner
named  Moore,  died  when  she  was  three  years  old.
Her  mother  then  removed  to  Boston,  where  Mary
resided  until  her  marriage  to  James  L.  Hewitt,  of
New  York  city.  Several  years  after  his  death  she
married,  in  1854,  R.  Stebbins  of  the  same  city.  She
is  chiefly  known  by  her  poetical  contributions  to
periodicals. She  edited  a  gift-book  entitled  "  The


HEWLETT


HEYWARD


193


Gem  of  the  Western  World "  (New  York,  1850) ;
"  A  Memorial  of  Prances  S.  Osgood  "  (1851) ;  and
is  the  author  of  "  Songs  of  our  Land  "  (New  York,
1845> ;  "  Heroines  of  History  "  (1856) ;  and  "  Poems,
Sacred,  Passionate,  and  Legendary  "  (1864).

HEWLETT,  Richard,  soldier,"b.  in  Hempstead,
N.  Y.,  about  1712  ;  d.  near  Gagetown,  New  Bruns-
wick, in  1789.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  Prench
war  of  1757-'9,  and  participated  in  the  capture  of
Fort  Frontenac.  During  the  Revolution  he  was
an  active  loyalist,  and  received  from  the  "  Asia,"  a
British  man-of-war.  a  great  quantity  of  firearms
and  cannon,  secreting  them  on  his  premises.  So
obnoxious  was  his  course  to  the  colonists  that
Gen.  Henry  Lee  issued  an  order  that  "  Richard
Hewlett  should  have  no  conditions  offered  him,
but  must  be  secured  without  ceremony."  When
De  Lancey's  corps  was  raised,  he  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  battalion,  and  in  1777
commanded  the  garrison  of  260  men  at  Setauket,
L.  I.,  when  it  was  attacked  by  Gen.  Parsons,  who
demanded  its  surrender.  Hewlett  asked  his  sol-
diers whether  he  must  submit,  and,  receiving  the
response  "  No,"  exclaimed :  "  I  will  stick  to  you
then  as  long  as  there's  a  man  left."  After  a  can-
nonade of  three  hours,  the  patriots  retreated.
Hewlett  received  mention  in  the  general  orders
that  were  issued  after  the  affair.  He  also  com-
manded the  130  Tories  who  came  from  the  west
end  of  Long  Island,  and  pillaged  the  citizens  of
Southhold,  Oyster  Pond,  in  1778.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  retired  on  half  pay,  removed  to
St.  Johns,  N.  B.,  and  became  a  grantee  of  the  town,
and  its  mayor. — His  son,  Thomas,  was  a  captain
in  the  N.  Y.  loyal  volunteers,  and  was  killed  in
1780  at  Hanging  Rock,  N.  C,  while  looking  out  of
a  block-house  "  to  see  what  the  rebels  were  about."

HEWSON,  Thomas  Tickell,  physician,  b.  in
London,  England.  9  April.  1773 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, 17  Feb.,  1848.  His  father,  the  celebrated
anatomist,  William  Hewson,  died  in  1774,  and
Thomas  removed  with  his  mother  to  the  United
States  in  1786.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Phila-
delphia medical  college  in  1789,  returned  to  Lon-
don, and  was  house-surgeon  in  St.  Bartholomew's
hospital,  afterward  taking  a  course  of  medical  lec-
tures in  Edinburgh.  Returning  to  Philadelphia
in  1796,  he  established  himself  in  practice,  was
physician  to  the  Walnut  street  prison  in  1806-'18,
and  rendered  valuable  service  during  the  epidemic
of  1817-18.  He  was  censor  and  secretary  of  the
College  of  physicians,  Philadelphia,  from  1802  till
1835,  professor  of  comparative  anatomy  in  1816,
and  president  from  1835  till  his  death.  For  many
years  he  was  surgeon  to  the  Philadelphia  alms-
house, thirteen  years  physician  to  the  Pennsylvania
hospital,  physician  to  the  orphan  asylum,  and  took
an  active  part  in  the  formation  of  the  National
pharmacopoeia.  In  1822  he  established  a  school  of
medicine  in  which  he  taught  anatomy  and  prac-
tice. He  was  a  member  and  officer  of  various
medical  societies,  and  translated  Swediaur's  "  Trea-
tise on  Syphilis"  (Philadelphia,  1815). — His  son,
Addinell,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  22  Nov.,
1828,  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college
in  1850,  studied  in  Paris,  and  in  Dublin  under  Sir
William  Wilde,  and,  on  his  return  to  the  United
States,  was  appointed  resident  physician  to  the
Pennsylvania  hospital.  He  was  visiting  surgeon
to  the  Episcopal  hospital  in 1852-'3,  from  1853

1  1876  physician  to  Wills  hospital,  and  since
1861  has  filled  that  office  in  the  Pennsylvania  hos-
pital. He  edited  Sir  William  Wilde's  "Aural  Sur-
gery," at  the  author's  request  (Philadelphia,  1853) ;
the  American  edition  of  Laurence's  "  Diseases  of

VOL.  III. — 13


the  Eye  " ;  and,  besides  many  professional  papers,
has  published  in  book-form  "  The  Use  of  Earth  in
Surgery  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).

HEY,  William,  English  jurist,  b.  in  England;
d.  there  in  1797.  He  was  appointed  chief  justice
of  Canada,  25  Sept.,  1766.  In  1773  he  proceeded
to  England  in  connection  with  the  bill  providing
for  the  more  effectual  governing  of  the  province
of  Quebec,  and  on  its  passage  through  the  house
of  commons  in  1774  gave  important  evidence  rela-
tive to  it  before  a  special  committee.  By  com-
mand of  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  secretary  of
state  for  war  and  the  colonies,  he  prepared  a
draught  of  a  provincial  ordinance  to  be  submit-
ted to  the  governor  and  legislative  council  in  Can-
ada. It  provided  for  the  re-establishment  of  the
English  laws  relating  to  habeas  corpus,  trial  by
jury  in  civil  cases,  and  the  laws  relative  to  com-
mercial matters.  Chief-Justice  Hey  arrived  with
it  in  Quebec  in  June,  1775,  and  in  the  ensuing
September  laid  it  before  the  council.  Soon  after-
ward he  returned  to  England.  In  1774  he  was
elected  to  parliament,  but  vacated  his  seat  in  1776
on  being:  appointed  a  commissioner  of  customs,
which  office  he  filled  till  his  death.

HEYER,  Christian  Frederick,  missionary,  b.
in  Helmstedt,  Brunswick,  Germany,  in  1793 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  Nov.,  1873.  He  emigrated  in
1810  to  the  United  States,  studied  theology,  was
licensed  in  1817,  and  preached  a  short  time  in
Philadelphia.  He  was  ordained  as  a  missionary  in
1820,  and  labored  in  organizing  Lutheran  churches
in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Maryland,  and  western
Pennsylvania.  In  1840  he  was  elected  to  go  as  a
missionary  to  India,  and  during  the  following
winter  attended  medical  lectures  in  Baltimore.
He  arrived  at  Guntur,  in  the  presidencv  of  Madras,
on  31  July,  1842,  and  remained  there  till  1847,
when  he  visited  the  United  States.  He  went  back
in  1848,  and  settled  at  Rajahmundry,  on  the  Goda-
very.  He  established  missions  among  the  Telugus,
who  inhabit  the  eastern  coasts  of  the  peninsula.
In  1857  he  left  India,  and  was  engaged  in  minis-
terial work  in  Germany  for  eleven  years.  Return-
ing to  Rajahmundry  in  December,  1869,  he  re-
mained there  a  year,  and  then  came  to  the  United
States,  and  was  chaplain  of  the  Lutheran  theologi-
cal seminarv  in  Philadelphia  until  his  death.

HEYWARD,  Thomas,  Jr.,  signer  of  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence,  b.  in  St.  Luke's  parish,
S.  C,  in  1746 ;  d.  there,  6  March,  1809.  His  father,
Col.  Daniel,  was
a  wealthy  planter.
Thomas  was  edu-
cated under  pri-
vate tutors,  and
studied  law  in  the
Temple  in  Lon-
don. After  sev-
eral years  of  Eu-
ropean travel  he
returned  to  South
Carolina.  He  ear-
ly opposed  Brit-
ish supremacy,  be-
came a  leader  of
the  Revolution-
ary party  in  his
state,  and  was  a
member  of  the
first  assembly  af-
ter the  abdication
of  the  colonial
governor.  He  was  also  one  of  the  first  committee
of  safety,  and  a  delegate  to  congress  in  1775-'8. In


^**\//


194


HEYWOOD


HIBBARD


1780  he  became  judge  of  the  criminal  and  circuit
court  of  South  Carolina,  and  not  long  afterward,
while  the  British  lay  encamped  before  Charleston,
he  presided  at  the  trial  of  some  colonists  who  were
convicted  of  holding  treasonable  correspondence
with  the  enemy,  and  were  executed  within  sight  of
the  British  lines.  He  held  at  the  same  time  a  mili-
tary commission,  and  in  the  Beauford  skirmish  of
1780  he  received  a  wound  of  which  he  bore  the  scar
till  his  death.  At  the  siege  of  Charleston,  12  May,
1780,  he  commanded  a  battalion  of  volunteers,  and,
on  the  surrender  of  the  city  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton
and  Admiral  Arbuthnot,  he  was  taken  prisoner,  and
sent  with  Edward  Rutledge,  Richard  Hutson,  and
other  patriots  to  St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  where  he  was
confined  one  year.  Here  he  amused  himself  by
composing  patriotic  words  to  such  British  national
songs  as  "  God  save  the  King,"  that  the  prisoners
might  indulge  their  republican  sentiments  under
cover  of  loyal  tunes.  During  his  imprisonment  a
party  of  the  British  visited  his  plantation  and  car-
ried away  all  his  slaves,  which  were  afterward  sold
by  their  captors  to  the  sugar-planters  in  Jamaica.
On  his  release  he  took  passage  for  Philadelphia,
fell  overboard,  and  escaped  drowning  by  holding
to  the  ship's  rudder.  On  his  return  to  South  Car-
olina he  resumed  his  judicial  duties,  was  a  member
of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1790,  and  the
next  year  retired  to  his  estate.

HEYWOOD,  Charles,  officer  of  marines,  b.  in
Waterville,  Me.,  3  Oct.,  1839.  He  was  appointed  a
2d  lieutenant  in  the  marine  corps  from  New  York
on  5  April,  1858,  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  in
May,  1861,  and  captain  on  23  Nov.,  1861.  He  was
in  active  service  during  the  civil  war,  and  was
attached  to  the  North  Atlantic,  and  subsequently  to
the  Gulf,  squadron  as  fleet  marine-officer.  He  was
engaged  at  the  battle  of  Hatteras  Inlet  on  28  Aug.,

1861,  and  continued  to  serve  on  the  sloop  "  Cum-
berland "  till  that  vessel  was  sunk  on  8 March,

1862,  by  the  Confederate  ram  "  Merrimac."  For  his
conduct  during  this  engagement  he  was  brevetted
major.  He  was  attached  to  the  frigate  "  Sabine  "
on  special  service  in  1863,  and  to  the  steam  sloop
"  Hartford,"  the  flagship  of  Farragut's  squadron,
in  1864-'5.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Mobile
Bay,  and  was  brevetted  for  gallantry  in  that  action.
He  was  promoted  major  on  1  Nov.,  1876.  In  1886
he  was  on  duty  at  the  navy-yard  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

HEYWOOD,  John  Healy,  clergyman,  b.  in
Worcester,  Mass.,  30  March,  1818 ;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  in  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1832,  and  at  the  divinity-school  there  in  1840,  en-
tered the  ministry  and  was  called  to  the  1st  Uni-
tarian church  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  succeeding  Rev.
James  Freeman  Clarke.  He  strove  to  obtain  a  pub-
lic-school system  of  high  order  for  Louisville,  and
was  for  fourteen  years  president  of  the  city  school
board,  and  for  many  years  more  a  member.  Dur-
ing the  war  he  gave  unremitting  attention  to  the
U.  S.  sanitary  commission  and  to  the  relief  of
the  needy  in  many  other  ways.  The  Old  Ladies'
Home  in  Louisville  was  partially  an  outgrowth
of  his  activity.  He  was  two  years  editor  of  the
"  Louisville  Examiner,"  and  a  writer  for  the
"  Christian  Register,"  "  Unitarian  Review,"  and
other  periodicals.  He  continued  his  pastorate  in
Louisville  for  over  forty  years,  the  oldest  ministe-
rial charge  in  the  city.

HEYWOOD,  Levi,  inventor,  b.  in  Gardner,
Mass.,  10  Dec,  1800  ;  d.  there,  21  July,  1882.  After
attending  school,  he  taught  during  the  winters  in
1820-'2,  kept  a  country  store  with  his  brother  in
1823-'9,  and  in  1826  began  to  make  wood-seated
chairs. In  1853  the  Heywood  chair-manufacturing


company  was  organized.  Mr.  Heywood  was  among
the  first  to  experiment  in  shaving  and  splitting
cane,  and  made  many  useful  inventions,  including
a  tilting-chair,  machines  for  splitting,  shaving,  and
otherwise  manipulating  rattan,  and  machinery  Cor
bending  wood.  He  also  invented  a  process  for  in-
jecting rattan  with  India-rubber  as  a  substitute  for
whalebone.  He  was  active  in  public  affairs,  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1853,  and  of  the  legislature  in  1871.  The  town  of
Gardner  owes  much  of  its  prosperity  to  him,  and
he  gave  liberally  for  the  support  of  schools  t here.
— His  brother,  Walter,  b.  in  Gardner,  Mass.,  1$
Feb.,  1804,  was  for  some  time  associated  with  Levi
in  his  business,  and  in  1869  organized  the  Walter
Heywood  chair  company  at  Fitchburg,  Mass.,  and
became  its  president.

HIACOOMES,  Indian  preacher,  b.  about  1610 ;
d.  at  Martha's  Vineyard,  Mass.,  about  1690.  lie
was  the  first  Indian  converted  to  Christianity  in
New  England,  being  persuaded  to  embrace  the
Christian  religion  by  Thomas  Mayhew,  after  Mar-
tha's Vineyard,  where  he  lived,  was  settled  by
white  people  in  1642.  He  learned  to  read,  and  in
1653  began  to  preach  to  his  fellow-Indians.  He
made  many  converts,  and  boldly  rebuked  the  pa-
gan Indians  for  adhering  to  their  superstitions,
while  he  himself  was  often  threatened  by  the  In-
dian priests,  whose  sorceries  he  defied.  A  church
was  built  at  Martha's  Vineyard  for  his  congrega-
tion of  Indian  Christians,  and  he  was  ordained  its
pastor  by  Eliot  and  Cotton  on  22  Aug.,  1670.

HIBBARD,  Ellery  Albee,  jurist,  b.  in  St.
Johnsbury,  Vt,  31  July,  1826.  He  obtained  an
academic  education  by  his  own  efforts,  studied
law  in  Haverhill  and  Exeter,  N.  H.,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  July,  1849,  and  practised  in
Plymouth,  N.  H.,  till  1853,  and  subsequently  in
Laconia,  N.  H.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New-
Hampshire  house  of  representatives  in  1865-'6,  and
was  elected  a  representative  in  congress  from  New
Hampshire  by  the  Democrats  and  Labor  Reformer*
in  1870.  After  the  conclusion  of  his  term  he  be-
came judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Hamp-
shire, but  in  1874  declined  re-appointment  under
the  revised  laws,  and  returned  to  his  practice.

HIBBARD,  Freeborn  (xarretson,  clergy-
man, b.  in  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1811.
His  father,  Rev.  Billy  Hibbard,  was  a  well-known
clergyman  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
The  son  entered  the  ministry  of  the  same  church
in  the  New  York  conference  at  the  age  of  eighteen,
before  he  had  completed  his  college  course,  and
continued  in  this  work,  chiefly  in  western  New
York,  from  1830  till  1856,  when  he  was  elected
editor  of  the  "Northern  Christian  Advocate,"
printed  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.  In  1860  he  resumed
the  pastorate,  and  became  presiding  elder  of  the
Geneva  district.  Dr.  Hibbard's  principal  works
are  "  Christian  Baptism,  its  Subjects,  and  its  Iin-

?ort,  Mode,  Efficacy,  and  Relative  Order  "  (New
'ork,  1845) ;  "  Geography  and  History  of  Pales-
tine "  (1851);  "The  Psalms,  Chronologically  Ar-
ranged, with  Historical  Introductions,  and  a  Gen-
eral Introduction  to  the  Whole  Book  "  (1856) ;  and
"  The  Religion  of  Childhood,  or  Children  in  their
Relation  to  Native  Depravity,  to  the  Atonement,
to  the  Family,  and  to  the  Church"  (1864).  He
has  also  edited  the  "  Sermons  "  (1869)  and  "  Works"
(1872),  and  published  a  "  Biography "  of  Bishop
Leonidas  L.  Hamline  (1880).  The  "Commentary
on  the  Psalm"  (1882)  in  the  Whedon  series  of
"  Commentaries  on  the  Old  Testament "  was  written
by  him.  He  also  published  a  "  History  of  the  late
East  Genesee  Conference  "  (1887).


1


HICKCOX


HICKS


195


HICKCOX,  John  Howard,  librarian,  b.  in
Albany.  N.  Y.,  10  Aug.,  1832.  He  was  educated
at  the  Albany  academy,  and  in  1848  became  assist-
ant librarian  of  the  state  library  in  that  city,
where  he  remained  till  1863.  From  1874  till  1882
he  was  employed  in  the  Congressional  library  at
Washington,  D.  C.  He  has  contributed  to  peri-
odicals, and  published  "  An  Historical  Account  of
American  Coinage,"  with  plates,  of  which  only  two
hundred  copies  were  printed  (Albany,  1858) ;  "  His-
tory of  the  Bills  of  Credit,  or  Paper  Monev,  issued
by  New  York  from  1709  to  1789  "(1866);  ""Bibliog-
raphy of  the  Writings  of  Dr.  Franklin  B.  Hough  "
(1886) ;  and  "  Catalogue  of  United  States  Govern-
ment Publications  "  (3  vols.,  Washington,  1885-'7).

HICKENLOOPER,  Andrew,  engineer,  b.  in
Hudson,  Ohio,  31  Aug.,  1837.  He  was  educated
at  Woodward  college,  Cincinnati,  but  was  not
graduated,  and  in  1855  became  city  surveyor  of
that  city,  afterward  conducting  the  government
survey  of  Indian  lands  at  Little  Travers  Bay.
He  was  made  captain  of  the  5th  Ohio  independ-
ent battery  on  31  Aug.,  1861,  and  was  afterward
chief  of  artillery  and  chief  engineer  of  the  17th
corps,  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  till  after  the  cap-
ture of  Vicksburg.  He  was  then  judge-advocate-
general  and  afterward  chief  of  artillery  of  that
army,  and  was  finally  given  command  of  a  brigade
in  the  17th  corps.  He  was  engaged  in  the  princi-
pal battles  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  from
Shiloh  to  Sherman's  campaign  through  the  Caro-
linas,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  After  the  war  he  was
U.  S.  marshal  for  the  southern  district  of  Ohio  in
1866-'70,  elected  city  civil  engineer  of  Cincinnati
in  1871,  and  in  1877  became  president  of  the  Cin-
cinnati gas-light  and  coke  company,  of  which  he
had  been  vice-president  since  1872.  In  1880  he
was  chosen  lieutenant-governor  of  Ohio.  He  has
published  "Competition  in  the  Manufacture  and
Delivery  of  Gas  (1881),  and  "  Incandescent  Elec-
tric Lights  for  Street  Illumination  "  (1886).

HICKEY,  Thomas,  conspirator,  d.  in  New
York  city,  27  June,  1776.  When  Gen.  Howe  set
out  from  Halifax  to  attack  New  York  city  in  June,
1776,  Gov.  Tryon,  with  the  aid  of  bribes,  ar-
ranged a  conspiracy  to  blow  up  the  magazine  and
murder  the  American  generals,  or  at  least  to
abduct  Washington  and  deliver  him  to  the  Brit-
ish. Among  500  persons  that  were  seduced  were
two  of  Washington's  guard.  One  of  these  was
Hickey,  who  was  immediately  arrested,  with  a
dozen  others.  He  was  convicted  by  the  unani-
mous decision  of  a  court-martial,  and  hanged  in
the  presence  of  twenty  thousand  spectators  near
the  Bowery  lane.  This  was  the  first  military  exe-
cution in  New  York.

HICKMAN,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Chester  county,
Pa.,  11  Sept.,  1810 ;  d.  in  West  Chester,  Pa.,  23
March,  1875.  He  was  educated  by  private  tutors,
read  law  in  West  Chester,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  there  in  1832.  He  acquired  reputation  at  the
bar  and  as  a  political,  speaker,  and  in  1854  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  a  strong
Whig  district.  He  was  re-elected  in  1856.  changed
his  views  on  the  slavery  question,  was  again  elected
in  1858  as  a  Douglas  Democrat  by  a  large  major-
ity over  both  the  regular  nominees,  and  became  a
leader  on  the  side  of  the  north,  acquiring  a  na-
tional reputation  through  his  brilliant  speeches.
In  1860  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  Republican
nomination  for  the  vice-presidency.  He  was  again
elected  to  congress  in  1860  as  a"  Republican,  and
was  the  first  to  propose  in  congress  the  freeing  of
the  slaves  and  the  enlisting  of  negro  soldiers. At


the  close  of  his  fourth  congressional  term  he  de-
clined a  re-election,  and  with  the  exception  of  a
single  term  in  the  legislature  passed  the  remain-
der of  his  life  at  his  home  in  West  Chester.

HICKMAN,  Robert  S.,  b.  in  1813  j  d.  in  Wash-
ington. D.  C,  2  Sept.,  1873.  He  was  a  native  of
Virginia  or  Maryland,  went  to  Washington  about
the  time  of  the  Mexican  war,  and  there  soon  be-
came noted  for  the  elegance  of  his  dress  and  man-
ners, acquiring  the  name  of  "Beau"  Hickman.
He  was  on  familiar  terms  with  many  public  men,
and  in  later  life  entertained  many  visitors  in
Washington  with  his  reminiscences  and  anec-
dotes, and  subsisted  by  means  of  trifling  sums
that  he  pretended  to  borrow  from  his  hearers.

HICKMAN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  King
and  Queen  county,  Va.,  4  Feb.,  1747;  d.  in  Ken-
tucky in  1830.  He  was  educated  as  an  Episcopa-
lian, but  united  with  the  Baptist  church  in  1773,
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1776,  after  visiting  Ken-
tucky earlier  in  the  year,  where  he  preached  the
first  sermon  delivered  in  the  new  settlement.  In
1784  he  settled  in  Fayette  county,  Ky.,  and
founded  many  churches  in  Kentucky. — His  son,
Paschal,  soldier,  killed  at  the  battle  "of  the  River
Raisin,  22  Jan.,  1813,  led  a  party  of  spies  under
Gen.  Wayne  in  1794-'5.  was  captain  of  Kentucky
volunteers  under  Col.  William  Lewis  in  1812,  and
was  wounded  in  the  action  with  the  British  and
Indians  at  Frenchtown.  and  killed  in  the  massacre
that  took  plage  three  days  afterward.  Hickman
county,  Ky..  was  named  in  his  honor.

HICKOK,  Laurens  Perseus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Danbury,  Conn.,  29  Dec,  1798;  d.  in  Amherst,
Mass.,  6  May,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  col-
lege in  1820,  studied  theology,  and  was  pastor  suc-
cessively at  Newtown,  Kent,  and  Litchfield,  Conn.,
where  he  succeeded  Dr.  Lyman  Beecher.  In  1836
he  was  elected  professor  of  theology  in  the  Western
reserve  college,  Ohio,  where  he  remained  eight
years.  In  1844  he  became  professor  of  the  same
branch  in  the  Auburn  theological  seminary,  and
in  1852  removed  to  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  to  become
professor  of  mental  and  moral  science  and  vice-
president  of  Union  college.  He  assisted  Dr.  Nott
in  the  government  of  the  college  for  eight  years,
had  sole  charge  for  the  succeeding  eight  years,  and
became  president  of  the  college  on  1  March,  1866,
which  post  he  resigned  20  July,  1868,  when  he
removed  to  Amherst,  Mass.  He  published  "Ra-
tional Psychology,  or  the  Subjective  Idea  and
Objective  Laws  of  all  Intelligence"  (Auburn,  1848) ;
"  System  of  Moral  Science  "  (Schenectady,  1853) ;
"  Empirical  Psychology,  or  the  Human  Mind  as
given  in  Consciousness"  (1854);  "Rational  Cos-
mology, or  the  Eternal  Principles  and  the  Neces-
sary Laws  of  the  Universe"  (New  York,  1858):
"  Creator  and  Creation,  or  the  Knowledge  in  the
Reason  of  God  and  His  Works "  (Boston,  1872) ;
"  Humanity  Immortal,  or  Man  Tried,  Fallen,  and
Redeemed  "  (1872) ;  and  "  Rational  Logic,  or  True
Logic  must  strike  Root  in  Reason  "  (1875).  His
collected  works  have  been  published  (Boston,  1875).

HICKS,  Elias,  minister  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  b.  in  Hempstead,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1748;
d.  in  Jericho,  N.  Y.,  27  Feb.,  1830.  His  youth  was
passed  in  carelessness  and  indifference  to  religious
subjects,  but  not  without  frequent  checks  of  con-
science for  his  neglect  of  duty.  At  the  age  of
about  twenty  years  the  subject  of  religion  deeply
affected  his  mind,  and  wrought  a  thorough  change
in  his  conduct.  He  became  interested  in  the  prin-
ciples and  testimonies  of  the  society  of  which  he
was  a  member,  and  when  about  twenty-seven  years
of  age  he  began  his  ministry,  soon  became  an


196


HICKS


HICKS


%£uzj  ffluAj


acknowledged  minister  of  the  society,  and  for
more  than  fifty  years  labored  with  unwearied  dili-
gence. He  travelled  through  almost  every  state  in
the  Union,  and  also
through  Canada  sev-
eral times,  and,  not-
withstanding the  fact
that  his  circum-
stances were  not  af-
fluent, he  never  re-
ceived the  least  com-
pensation for  his  ser-
vices. When  not  en-
gaged in  religious
service,  he  was  dili-
gently occupied  with
his  own  hands  upon
his  farm.  He  was  in
early  life  deeply  im-
pressed with  the  in-
justice and  cruelty  of
keeping  slaves,  and
was  among  the  first
that  brought  the  sub-
ject frequently  and  forcibly  before  his  religious
society.  Not  only  in  his  public  discourses,  but
also  by  his  pen,  his  views  on  this  subject  wide-
ly diffused  themselves  throughout  the  commu-
nity, and  through  his  exertions,  conjoined  with
those  of  other  philanthropists,  the  state  of  New
York  was  induced  to  pass  the  act  that  on  4  July,
1827,  gave  freedom  to  every  slave  within  its  lim-
its. As  a  preacher  he  was  lucid  and  powerful,
and  wielded  an  influence  that  has  been  scarcely
attained  by  any  other  member  of  his  society.  The
prominent  theme  of  his  ministry  was  "  obedience
to  the  light  within,"  which  he  considered  as  the
foundation  of  true  Quakerism.  In  the  latter  years
of  his  life  he  gave  ground  for  uneasiness  to  some
of  the  society  by  his  views  concerning  the  dogmatic
opinions  of  theologians  concerning  the  pre-exist-
ence,  deity,  incarnation,  and  vicarious  atonement
of  Christ.  He  considered  that  the  personality  of
the  meek,  wise,  majestic  prophet  of  Galilee  was
overlaid  with  theological  verbiage  and  technicality,
which  greatly  impaired  its  practical  value  and  au-
thority as  an  example  to  mankind.  Hicks's  min-
istry was  marked  by  much  dignity  and  power.
Notwithstanding  his  pure,  blameless,  and  upright
walk  among  men,  his  doctrinal  views  became  the
cause  of  dissatisfaction,  which  led  to  a  separation
in  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  yearly  meetings  on  the  con-
tinent, his  friends  and  supporters  in  most  of  the
yearly  meetings  being  largely  in  the  majority.  The
contest  was  conducted  with  much  acrimony,  which,
to  the  credit  of  all  concerned,  is  rapidly  passing
away.  Those  members  of  the  society  that  adhere
to  the  teachings  of  Elias  Hicks  are  commonly
known  as  "  Hicksites,"  a  name  that  was  originally
given  in  derision,  but  they  recognize  no  other
name  than  that  of  "  Friends."  Mr.  Hicks  pub-
lished M  Observations  on  Slavery "  (New  York,
1811);  " Sermons "  (1828) ;  "Elias  Hicks's  Journal
of  his  Life  and  Labors"  (Philadelphia.  1828);  and
"The  Letters  of  Elias  Hicks"  (1834).  See  also
Samuel  M.  Janney's  "History  of  the  .Religious
Society  of  the  Friends  "  (1859).

HICKS,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  about  1750;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.  His  father
was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Lexington,  and  it  is  sup-
posed that  the  son  was  with  him.  In  1773,  with
Nathaniel  Mills,  he  bought  of  Green  and  Russell
the  "  Massachusetts  Gazette  and  Post-Boy,"  which
he  conducted  with  spirit  and  ability  in  the  interest
of  the  British. As  many  of  the  articles  gave  evi-


dence of  great  political  knowledge  and  judgment,
it  was  supposed  that  officers  of  the  British  army
were  among  its  contributors.  He  went  to  Hali-
fax in  1776,  and  continued  with  the  royal  troops
throughout  the  war.  He  was  proscribed  and  ban-
ished by  the  Massachusetts  government  in  1778.
After  the  evacuation  of  New  York  he  went  again
to  Halifax,  but  after  remaining  there  a  few  years
returned  and  purchased  an  estate  at  Newton,  Mass.,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.

HICKS,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Newtown,  Bucks
co.,  Pa.,  18  Oct.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Trenton  Falls,  N.  Y..
8  Oct.,  1890.  He  attempted  portrait-painting  at
the  age  of  fifteen.  He  began  his  studies  in  the
Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine  arts  in  Philadelphia,
and  in  1838  entered  the  National  academy  in  New
York,  and  contributed  "  The  Death  of  Abel "  to
the  exhibition  of  1841.  In  1845  he  went  to  Eu-
rope and  studied  in  London,  Paris,  Florence,  and
Rome.  After  a  visit  to  Venice  in  1847  he  returned
to  Rome  and  painted  among  other  works  a  half-
length  figure  entitled  "  Italia."  In  1849  he  re-
turned to  New  York  and  began  a  successful  career
as  a  portrait-painter.
He  was  elected  a  na-
tional academician  in
1851,  and  was  presi-
dent of  the  Artists'
fund  society  of  New
York  from' 1873  till
1885.  Hicks  painted
portraits  of  Henry
Ward  Beecher,  Will-
iam Cullen  Bryant,
Edwin  Booth  as  Iago,
Hamilton  Fish,  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck,  Oli-
ver Wendell  Holmes,
Dr.  Elisha  Kent  Kane
in  the  cabin  of  the
"Advance,"  Abraham
Lincoln, Henry W.

Longfellow,  William  H.  Seward,  Harriet  Beecher
Stowe,  Bayard  Taylor,  and  Gulian  C.  Verplanck,  a
notable  picture  containing  the  authors  of  the  Unit-
ed States,  and  another  representing  the  governors
of  New  York  (1851-5).  Mr.  Hicks  read  before  the
Century  club  of  New  York  city,  on  26  Jan.,  1858,  a.
eulogy  of  Thomas  Crawford,  which  was  printed  by
the  club  and  also  in  an  edition  de  luxe  for  private
circulation  (New  York,  1858).

HICKS,  Thomas  Holliday,  statesman,  b.  in
Dorchester  county,  Md.,  2  Sept.,  1798;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  13  Feb.,  1865.  He  worked  on  his
father's  farm  in  boyhood,  received  a  plain  educa-
tion, and  was  constable  and  sheriff  of  his  county
until  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  1831.
In  1836  he  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  repre-
sentatives. He  became  register  of  wills  in  1838,
in  1849  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  con-
vention, and  from  1858  till  1862  was  governor  of
Maryland,  strongly  opposing  secession.  His  firm-
ness and  adroit  management  were  among  the
efficient  means  of  saving  Maryland  to  the  Union
He  refused,  in  a  published  address,  to  call  a  special
meeting  of  the  legislature  to  consider  an  ordinance
of  secession,  although  he  was  formally  requested  to
do  so  by  a  majority  of  the  state  senate,  who  were
sympathizers  with  the  seceding  states,  and,  when
the  attack  on  the  Massachusetts  6th  regiment  was
made  in  Baltimore,  he  issued  a  proclamation  de-
claring that  all  his  authority  would  be  exercised
in  favor  of  the  government.  He  was  appointed  to
the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  on  the  death  of
James  A.  Pearce,  was  subsequently  elected  by  the


(fflvw  *<JO  M'cALtf


HICKS


HIESTER


197


legislature,  serving  from  1863  till  his  death.  His
term  would  have  ended  in  1867.  In  the  senate  he
was  a  member  of  the  committees  on  naval  affairs.

HICKS,  Whitehead,  lawyer,  b.  in  Flushing,
L.  I.,  24  Aug.,  1728 ;  d.  there  in  October,  1780.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1750,  and
attained  note  in  his  profession.  He  was  clerk  of
Queens  county  from  1752  till  1757,  mayor  of  New
York  city  from  1766  till  1776,  and  judge  of  the
New  York  supreme  court  from  1776  till  his  death.

HIDALGO,  Ignacio  Xavier,  clergyman,  b.  in
Valladolid  de  Michoacan,  Mexico,  28  Nov.,  1698;
d.  in  Puebla  de  Los  Angeles  in  1759.  He  entered
the  Jesuit  order,  15  June,  1717,  and  was  appointed
director  of  the  congregation  of  San  Salvador  in
Mexico.  He  wrote  "  La  Nueva  Ruth  :  elogio  de  la
inclita  Matrona  Dona  Maria  Rosa  de  la  Pena "

SEexico, 1754),  and  "Ochenta  y  cinco  Sermones
orales,"  the  manuscript  of  which  is  in  the  library
of  the  University  of  Mexico.

HIDALGO  Y  COSTILLA,  Miguel  (e -dal'-go),
Mexican  patriot,  b.  on  the  farm  of  Corralejos,
Guanajuato,  8  May,  1753 ;  d.  in  Chihuahua,  30
July  (according  to  others, 1 Aug.), 1811. His

S, rents  were  Cristobal  Hidalgo  y  Costilla  and  Ana
aria  Gallaga,  and  therefore,  according  to  Mexican
custom,  his  name  is  Hidalgo  y  Gallaga,  but  in  his
earlier  years  he  used  to  sign  it  Hidalgo  y  Costilla.
He  studied  philosophy  and  theology  at  Valladolid,
and  in  1779  went  to  the  city  of  Mexico  and  was
ordained  priest.  He  served  in  several  parishes,  and
after  the  death  of  his  elder  brother,  Dr.  Joaquin,
rector  of  Dolores,  he  was  appointed  as  first  assistant
and  afterward  rector  of  that  parish,  which  gave
him  enough  income  to  sustain  a  curate.  He  estab-
lished a  tannery,  a  pottery,  and  a  brick-yard,  and
the  cultivation  of  the  mulberry-tree  and  breeding
of  silk-worms.  The
first  conspiracy,  un-
der the  pretext  of  op-
posing the  French
rule  in  Spain,  was
formed,  21  Dec,  1809,
in  Valladolid,  but
was  discovered  and
thwarted.  But  the
enterprise  was  taken
up  by  Dominguez,
mayor  of  Queretaro,
in  whose  house  the
conspirators  met,  Hi-
dalgo being  one.  The
conspiracy  was  de-
nounced to  the  mayor
of  Guanajuato,  Riano,
who  sent  a  force  to
capture  the  princi-
pals. Dominguez  was  arrested,  but  his  wife  man-
aged to  send  notice  to  Allende  at  San  Miguel,
who  had  gone  to  Dolores  for  consultation  with
Hidalgo,  and  when  Aldama  arrived  there  with  the
news  in  the  night  of  15  Sept.,  1810,  Hidalgo  re-
solved to  anticipate  the  blow,  and  convinced  his
friends  that  it  was  the  only  way  of  salvation.  With
his  brother  Mariano,  Jose  Santos  Villa,  Allende,
Aldama,  and  ten  armed  men,  he  went  to  the  jail,
compelled  the  keeper  to  set  at  liberty  the  prisoners,
whom  he  armed  with  swords,  and  with  the  forces
thus  gathered  he  arrested  the  police  delegate  and
all  the  Spanish  residents.  When  the  country
people  began  to  arrive  for  mass,  it  being  Sunday,
he  issued  the  celebrated  declaration  of  independ-
ence, commonly  called  the  "Grito  de  Dolores."
With  about  300  badly  armed  men,  the  same  day  he
marched  on  San  Miguel,  where  a  regiment  of  dra-


OtAlyr /U^x/o'/o


goons  joined  him,  and,  with  his  forces  continually
augmented  by  the  country  people,  he  continued
his  march,  taking  at  the  shrine  of  Atotonilco  a
picture  of  the  virgin  of  Guadalupe  as  his  banner,
and  on  21  Sept.  occupied  Celaya,  where  he  was
elected  general-in-ehief.  With  about  50,000  men,
poorly  armed,  he  invaded  the  rich  city  of  Guana-
juato, where  the  mayor  had  intrenched  himself  in
the  granary  of  Granaditos,  which  after  an  obsti-
nate defence  was  stormed,  and  all  its  defenders
massacred,  28  Sept.  Here  Hidalgo  established  a
cannon-foundry  and  a  mint,  and  marched,  on  10
Oct.,  although  excommunicated  by  the  church,
against  Valladolid,  which  city  he  occupied  on  the
17th  without  serious  resistance,  and  was  joined  by
the  dragoons  of  Patzcuaro  and  the  militia  battalion
of  Michoacan.  With  a  motley  army  of  about
80,000  men  he  marched  on  the  city  of  Mexico,  and
after  defeating,  20  Oct.,  in  the  wood  of  Las  Cruces,
a  force  of  about  3,000  men,  sent  against  him  by  the
viceroy  Venegas,  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  attack
the  capital.  Many  of  his  men  deprived  of  the  hope  of
plunder  deserted,  and  on  2  Dec.  he  began  his  retreat
on  Queretaro.  On  the  7th  he  was  surprised  near
Aculco  by  the  army  of  Gen.  Calleja,  and  the  greater
part  of  his  army  dispersed.  Allende  retired  with  few
followers  to  Guanajuato,  and  Hidalgo  to  Valladolid,
and,  hearing  there  that  his  followers  had  taken
possession  of  Guadalajora,  he  marched  for  that
city  with  about  7,000  men,  arriving  on  26  Nov.,
and  was  joined  on  12  Dec.  by  Allende.  Here  he  or-
ganized a  government  and  prepared  for  resistance.
But  the  forces  organized  by  the  viceroy,  after
occupying  Guanajuato,  advanced  under  Callejas
against  Guadalajora,  and  the  bridge  of  C'alderon
over  the  Santiago  river  was  chosen  as  the  point  of
resistance.  There  the  forces  met  on  17  Jan.,  1811,
the  independents  with  100,000  badly  organized
men  and  95  cannons,  and  the  Spaniards  with  6,000
disciplined  veterans,  and  the  latter  gained  a  com-
plete victory.  Hidalgo  fled  to  Aguas  Calicutes  and
Zacatecas,  and  was  joined  by  Allende  and  the
other  chiefs,  who  on  25  Jan.  divested  him  of  the
supreme  command,  nominating  Allende  in  his
stead.  It  was  resolved  that  the  principal  chiefs,
with  the  best  troops,  should  march  to  the  United
States,  to  reorganize  and  procure  arms  and  ammu-
nitions ;  but,  after  their  departure  from  Mondova,
a  counter-revolution  broke  out,  1  March,  and  Capt.
Elizondo,  who  at  first  had  taken  their  part,  resolved
to  gain  the  reward  offered  for  their  capture.  With
342  men  he  awaited  them  at  the  Norias  de  Bajan,
and,  feigning  to  receive  them  with  military  honors,
made  them  all  prisoners.  They  were  sent  to
Chihuahua,  and  after  a  long  trial  were  condemned
to  be  shot.  Hidalgo  was  degraded  on  29  July
from  his  sacerdotal  character,  and  at  dawn  of  the
following  day  was  executed.  This  date  is  fixed  by
congress  for  displaying  the  national  flag  at  half-
mast;  but  most  writers  fix  the  date  as  1  Aug.,
probably  counting  the  three  days  that  according
to  the  historian  elapsed  between  the  sentence  and
its  execution.  Hidalgo's  body  was  buried  in  the
church  of  St.  Francis  of  Chihuahua;  but  by  order
of  congress  it  was  carried  to  Mexico  and  buried  in
a  vault  of  the  cathedral,  with  great  ceremony,  on
17  Sept.,  1823.  A  colossal  statue  of  the  revolu-
tionary chief  has  been  modelled  by  the  brothers
Isla,  and  is  to  be  cast  in  bronze  by  order  of  the
Mexican  congress.

HIESTER,  Daniel,  congressman,  b.  in  Bern
township,  Berks  CO.,  Pa.,  25  June,  1747;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  7  March,  1804.  His  father,
Daniel,  emigrated  from  Silesia  in  1737,  and  settled
in  Gosenhoppen,  Pa.,  afterward  purchasing  from


198


HIGBEE


HIGGINSON


the  proprietary  government  a  tract  of  several
thousand  acres  in  Berks  county.  The  younger
Daniel  received  a  good  education  and  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits  in  Montgomery  county,  where
he  served  during  the  Revolution  as  colonel  and
brigadier-general  of  militia.  In  1784  he  was  elected
to  the  supreme  executive  council  of  Pennsylvania,
and  in  1787  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  of
the  Connecticut  land  claims.  He  was  a  member  of
congress  from  1789  till  1796,  when  he  resigned  and
removed  to  Hagerstown,  Md.  In  1801  he  was
again  elected  to  congress,  and  died  during  his  term
of  service.  He  was  among  the  number  that  voted
for  the  location  of  the  seat  of  the  government
on  the  Potomac. — His  brother,  John,  b.  in  Bern,
Pa.,  9  April,  1746;  d.  15  Oct.,  1821,  served  in  con-
gress from  1807  till  1809. — His  cousin,  Joseph,
governor  of  Pennsylvania,  b.  in  Bern  township,
18  Nov.,  1752;  d.  in  Reading,  Pa.,  10  June,  1832,
received  a  common-school  education  in  the  inter-
vals of  farm  labor,  and  became  clerk  in  a  store  in
Reading,  Pa.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution
he  raised  and  equipped  in  that  town  a  company
with  which  he  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Long
Island  and  Germantown.  He  was  promoted  colonel,
was  captured  and  confined  in  the  "Jersey "prison-
ship,  where  he  did  much  to  alleviate  the  sufferings
of  his  fellow-prisoners.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Constitutional  convention  of  1776,  and  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  of  1790,  and  served  five
years  in  the  house  and  four  in  the  senate  of  Penn-
sylvania. In  1807  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  two
major-generals  to  command  the  quota  of  Penn-
sylvania militia  that  was  called  for  by  the  president.
He  served  in  congress  from  1797  till  1805,  and
again  from  1815  till  1820,  when  he  i-esigned.  He
was  governor  of  Pennsylvania  from  1821  till  1823,
when  he  retired  from  public  life. — John's  son,
Daniel,  b.  in  Berks  county,  Pa.,  was  a  representa-
tive in  congress  from  1809  till  1811.  —  John's
nephew,  William,  b.  in  Bern,  Pa. :  d.  in  Lancaster
county,  14  Oct.,  1853,  received  a  public-school  edu-
cation, and  settled  on  a  farm  in  Lancaster  county.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig  in  1831,  serv-
ing until  1837,  in  which  year  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  State  constitutional  convention.  —  "William's
son,  Isaac  Ellmaker,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lancaster
county,  Pa.,  about  1820 ;  d.  there,  6  Feb.,  1871,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1842.  He  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,  and  began  to  practise
in  Lancaster.  In  1848  he  was  deputy  attorney-
general  for  Lancaster  county.  He  was  then  elected
to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  1853  till  1855,
but,  as  he  had  expressed  opinions  on  slavery  that
were  not  in  harmony  with  those  of  his  constituents,
he  was  defeated  in  the  next  election.  He  then
practised  law  with  success  till  his  death.

HIGBEE,  Elnathan  Elisha,  educator,  b.  in
Saint  George,  Vt.,  27  March.  1830.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1849,  com-
pleted his  theological  course  in  the  seminary  of  the
German  Reformed  church  at  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  and
in  1864  was  called  to  take  the  chair  of  church  history
and  exegesis  there  during  the  temporary  absence
of  Dr.  Philip  SchalT  in  Europe.  He  was  elected  to
succeed  Dr.  Schaff  in  1866,  in  1871  was  made  presi-
dent of  Mercersburg  college,  and  in  1881  appointed
superintendent  of  public  instruction  for  Pennsyl-
vania. Dr.  Higbee  has  been  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  "  Mercersburg  Review,"  a  literary  and  theo-
logical periodical  of  the  German  Reformed  church.

HIGGINSON,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1588;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  6  Aug.,  1630.
He  was  graduated  at  Cambridge,  and  about  1615
became  minister  at  Claybrooke,  one  of  the  parishes


of  Leicester.  Here  he  acquired  great  influence  as
a  preacher,  but,  becoming  a  Puritan,  left  his  parish*
although  he  continued  to  preach  occasionally  in
the  pulpits  of  the  established  church.  He  refused
offers  of  many  excellent  livings  on  account  of  his
opinions,  and  was  supporting  himself  by  preparing
young  men  for  the  university,  when,  in  1628,  he
was  invited  by  the  Massachusetts  Bay  company  to
accompany  its  expedition  to  New  England  in  the
following  year.  He  arrived  in  Salem  on  29  June,
1629,  and  on  20  July  was  chosen  teacher  of  the
congregation.  He  drew  up  a  confession  of  faith,
which  was  assented  to,  on  6  Aug.,  by  thirty  per-
sons. In  the  following  winter,  in  the  general  sick-
ness that  ravaged  the  colony,  he  was  attacked  by  a
fever,  which  disabled  him,  and  finally  caused  his
death.  He  wrote  an  account  of  his  voyage,  which
is  preserved  in  Hutchinson's  collection  of  papers,
and  "  New  England's  Plantation  ;  or  a  Short  and
True  Description  of  the  Commodities  of  that
Country  "  (London,  3d  ed.,  1630 ;  reprinted  in  the
Massachusetts  historical  society's  collections,  vol.
L). — His  son,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Claybrooke,
England,  6  Aug.,  1616 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  9  Dec,
1708,  came  to  this  country  with  his  father,  after
whose  death  he  assisted  in  the  support  of  his
mother  and  brothers  by  teaching  in  Hartford.
With  Giles  Firmin  he  was  employed  by  the  magis-
trates and  ministers  of  the  Massachusetts  colony
to  take  down  in  short-hand  the  proceedings  of  the
synod  of  1637.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  fort  at
Saybrook  for  about  four  years,  and  in  1641  went
to  Guilford  as  assistant  to  Rev.  Henry  Whitfield,
whose  daughter  he  married.  In  1643  he  was  one
of  the  "  seven  pillars "  of  the  church  there.  He
sailed  for  England  with  his  family  in  1659,  but  the
vessel  put  into  Salem  harbor  on  account  of  the
weather,  and  he  accepted  an  invitation  to  preach
there  for  a  year,  finally  settling  as  regular  pastor
of  the  church  that  his  father  had  planted.  He  was
ordained  in  August,  1660,  and  continued  there  till
his  death.  He  was  an  active  opponent  of  the
Quakers,  but  subsequently  regretted  his  zeal,  and
took  no  part  in  the  witchcraft  prosecutions  of  1692.
He  was  one  of  the  most  popular  divines  in  New
England,  and  at  his  death  had  been  seventy-two
years  in  the  ministry.  He  published  various  ser-
mons, and  was  the  author  of  the  "  Attestation  "  to
Cotton  Mather's  "  Magnalia,"  which  was  prefixed
to  the  first  book  of  that  work.

HIGGINSON,  Stephen,  merchant,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  28  Nov.,  1743 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Nov.,
1828.  He  was  descended  from  Rev.  Francis  Hig-
ginson,  noticed  above.  Stephen  was  bred  a  mer-
chant, and  from  1765  till  1775  was  an  active  and
successful  shipmaster.  While  on  a  visit  to  Eng-
land in  1774-'5,  he  was  called  to  the  bar  of  the
house  of  commons,  and  questioned  as  to  the  state
of  feeling  in  Massachusetts.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  continental  congress  in  1782-'3,  navy  agent  at'
Boston  in  1797-1801,  and  was  one  of  Gov.  Bow-
doin's  most  active  advisers  in  the  suppression  of
Shays's  rebellion,  serving  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  regiment  that  was  sent  from  Boston  at  that
time.  He  was  a  firm  Federalist,  and  strongly  sup-
ported the  administrations  of  Washington  and
Adams.  He  lost  a  large  part  of  his  fortune  in  the
war  of  1812.  He  published  "  Examination  of  Jay's
Treaty  by  Cato,"  a  pamphlet  (Boston,  1795),  and
the  essays  signed  "Laco,"  attacking  John  Han-
cock, were,  generally  attributed  to  him. — His  son,
Stephen,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  20  Nov.,  1770;  d.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  20  Feb.,  1834,  became  a  mer-
chant and  philanthropist  in  Boston,  and  was  known
as  the  "  Man  of  Ross  "  of  his  day,  on  account  of


1


HIGGINSON


HIGUAIHUE


199


his  charities.  He  was  steward  of  Harvard  univer-
sity from  1818  till  1834. — The  second  Stephen's  son,
Thomas  Wentworth,  author,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  22  Dec,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1841  and  at  the  divinity-school  in  1847,  and  in  the
same  year  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st  Congre-
gational church  in  Newburyport,  Mass.  He  left
this  church  on  account  of  anti-slavery  preaching
in  1850,  and  in  the  same  year  was  an  unsuccess-
ful Free-soil  candi-
date for  congress.
He  was  then  pastor
of  a  free  church  in
Worcester,  Mass.,
from  1852  till  1858.
when  he  left  the
ministry,  and  de-
voted himself  to  lit-
erature. He  had
been  active  in  the
anti  -  slavery  agita-
tion of  this  period,
and  for  his  part  in
the  attempted  res-
cue of  a  fugitive
^^  slave (see Burns,

\/j . ,.  .  Anthony) was m-

(/■ >Y  C^/£^w<r*o dHe(Lfor;  raider
y/  with  Theodore  Par-

ker,  Wendell  Phil-
lips, and  others,  but  was  discharged  through  a  flaw
in  the  indictment.  He  also  aided  in  the  organiza-
tion of  parties  of  free-state  emigrants  to  Kansas  in
1856,  was  personally  acquainted  with  John  Brown,
and  served  as  brigadier-general  on  James  H.  Lane's
staff  in  the  free-state  forces.  He  became  captain
in  the  51st  Massachusetts  regiment,  25  Sept.,  1862,
and  on  10  Nov.  was  made  colonel  of  the  1st  South
Carolina  volunteers  (afterward  called  the  33d  U.  S.
colored  troops),  the  first  regiment  of  freed  slaves
mustered  into  the  national  service.  He  took  and
held  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  but  was  wounded  at  Wil-
town  Bluff,  S.  C,  in  August,  1863,  and  in  October,
1864,  resigned  on  account  of  disability.  He  then
engaged  in  literature  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  till  1878,
and  afterward  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  is  an  earnest  advocate  of  woman
suffrage,  and  of  the  higher  education  for  both  sexes.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature
in  1880  and  1881,  serving  as  chief  of  staff  to  the
governor  during  the  same  time,  and  in  1881-'3  was
a  member  of  the  state  board  of  education.  He  has
contributed  largely  to  current  literature,  and  several
of  his  books  consist  of  essays  that  first  appeared  in
"The  Atlantic  Monthly."  His  first  publication
was  a  compilation  with  Samuel  Longfellow  of
poetry  for  the  sea-side,  entitled  "  Thalatta  "  (Bos-
ton, i853).  He  is  the  author  of  "Out-door  Pa-
pers" (Boston,  1863);  "Malbone,  an  Oldport  Ro-
mance "(1869);  "Army Life  in  a  Black  Regiment"
(1870;  French  translation  bv  Madame  de  Gaspa-
rin,  1884) ;  "  Atlantic  Essays*"  (1871) ;  "  The  Sym-
pathy of  Religions."  (1871) ;  "  Oldport  Days "
(1873);  "Young  Folks'  History  of  the  United
States  "  (1875  ;  French  translation,  1875 ;  German
translation,  Stuttgart,  1876) ;  "  Historv  of  Educa-
tion in  Rhode  Island  "  (1876) ;  "  Young" Folks'  Book
of  American  Explorers  "  (1877) ;  "  Short  Studies  of
American  Authors"  (1879);  " Common-Sense  about
Women  "  (1881) ;  "  Life  of  Margaret  Fuller  Ossoli"
("  American  Men  of  Letters  "  series,  1884) ;  "  Larger
History  of  the  United  States  "  to  the  close  of  Jack-
son's administration  (New  York,  1885);  "The
Monarch  of  Dreams  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Hints  on  Writ-
ing and Speech-making" (1887). He has also


translated  the  "Complete  Works  of  Epictetus"
(Boston,  1865),  and  edited  "  Harvard  Memorial
Biographies"  (2  vols.,  1866),  and  "Brief  Biogra-
phies of  European  Statesmen  "  (4  vols.,  New  York,
1875-'7).  Several  of  his  works  have  been  reprinted
in  England. — Thomas  Wentworth's  nephew,  Fran-
cis John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  19  July,
1843,  was  graduated  at  the  naval  academy  in  1861,
and  ordered  into  active  service.  He  participated
in  the  boat  expedition  from  the  "  Colorado  "  that
destroyed  the  Confederate  privateer  "  Judith  "  in
Pensacola  navy-yard,  and  was  present  at  the  pas-
sage of  Fort  Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip,  acting  as
signal  midshipman  to  Capt.  Theodorus  Bailey.  He
took  part  in  the  blockade  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and
the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  and  Fort  Moul-
trie, was  on  board  the  "  Housatonic  "  when  she  was
blown  up  by  a  torpedo  off  Charleston,  and  com-
manded a  detachment  of  launches  operating  by
night  on  the  communications  between  Morris  isl-
and and  Charleston.  He  became  lieutenant  in  1862,
lieutenant-commander  in  1866,  and  commander  in
1876,  and  is  now  (1887)  in  charge  of  the  torpedo
station  at  Newport,  R.  I. — The  first  Stephen's  great-
grandson,  Henry  Lee,  banker,  b.  in  New  York
city,  18  Nov.,  1834,  entered  Harvard  in  1851,  but
left  before  the  end  of  his  second  year.  He  served
in  the  civil  war,  attaining  the  rank  of  major  and
brevet  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  1st  Massachusetts
cavalry,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Aldie,  Va.,
in  1863.  Since  the  war  he  has  engaged  in  banking
in  Boston.  He  has  devoted  much  of  his  income  to
the  promotion  of  music  there,  and  especially  to  the
organization  of  ^the  symphony  orchestra.

HIGUAIHUE  (ee-gwy-way'),  Araucanian  ca-
cique, b.  in  the  valley  of  Momches  about  1576 ;  d.
in  Chilian  in  September,  1616.  He  belonged  to  the
tribe  of  Bio-bio,  began  in  early  life  to  fight  the  Span-
ish forces  at  the  head  of  his  people,  and  on  account
of  his  valor  and  sagacity  was  elected  toqui  or  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  confederated  tribes  in  1603.
In  August,  1614,  he  captured  the  city  of  Chilian,
almost  entirely  destroying  it,  and  in  September  of
the  same  year  defeated  the  forces  of  Alonso  de
Rivera  near  Santa  Cruz,  which  city  he  occupied
and  demolished.  In  October  and  November  he
defeated  the  rest  of  Rivera's  forces  near  Angol  and
Villa  Rica,  which  cities  he  also  stormed  and  totally
destroyed.  He  continued  the  war  without  inter-
ruption, and  in  a  few  months  had  captured  and
razed  all  the  forts  and  colonies  that  the  Spaniards
had  established  south  of  the  Bio-bio,  but  without
committing  any  cruelties  against  the  colonists  or
the  captured  soldiers.  In  February,  1615,  he  at-
tacked the  city  of  Imperial,  which  was  defended
by  a  strong  Spanish  force  under  the  command  of
the  lady  Ines  de  Aguilera,  and  after  a  desperate
defence  captured,  pillaged,  and  burned  the  city.
But  the  Spaniards  invaded  Arauca  again,  and  in
May-,  Gen.  Ramon  had  nearly  defeated  another  In-
dian chieftain,  Huenecura,  in  the  valley  of  Santa
Cruz,  when  he  was  suddenly  attacked  by  Higuai-
hue  and  beaten  with  great  loss.  In  July  of  the
same  year  he  was  defeated  near  Angol  by  the
Spanish  forces  and  carried  from  the  field  covered
with  wounds,  but  soon  recovered,  and,  gathering
the  different  tribes,  began  a  war  of  vengeance.  He
dispersed  the  Spanish  forces  under  Gen.  Ramon
in  a  bloody  battle  on  the  banks  of  the  Bio-bio  in
August,  1616,  and  retired  incautiously  toward  the
south,  when  suddenly  he  was  attacked  near  Chilian
by  the  Spaniards.  After  a  long  and  sanguinary
battle  Higuaihue  was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner,
and  soon  executed  by  the  Spaniards.  The  cacique
was  of  tall  and  commanding  appearance,  and  gift-


200


HILBERNAZ


ed  with  great  strength.  Like  all  the  Araucanians,
he  had  become  an  adept  in  the  management  of  the
horses  that  had  been  imported  by  the  Spaniards,
and  as  he  liked  to  fight  in  armor  that  he  had  cap-
tured from  them,  they  were  accustomed  to  call
him  the  "  Indian  knight."

HILBERNAZ,  Francisco  de  Faria  (eel-ber-
nath),  Brazilian  philanthropist,  b.  in  Sao  Paulo  in
1669  ;  d.  there  in  1731.  He  was  a  mining  engineer,
and  discovered  in  1720  the  rich  gold-mines  at  the
foot  of  the  rock  called  "  Itabira  "  (shining  stone).
After  the  mine  had  proved  successful  he  built  a
town  near  it  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  with  a
church,  city-hall,  and  court-house,  and  the  place
soon  became  one  of  the  foremost  of  the  province
of  Minas  Geraes.  Afterward  Hilbernaz  sold  his
claims  to  the  land  and  the  mine,  and  returned  to
his  native  place,  where  he  devoted  his  riches  to
the  benefit  of  the  people.  He  founded  a  botani-
cal garden,  a  museum  of  natural  history  in  Sao
Paulo,  and  otherwise  contributed  his  great  wealth
to  the  improvement  of  his  birthplace.  Auguste
de  Saint  Hilaire,  in  his  "  Voyage  dans  les  provinces
de  Rio  de  Janeiro  et  de  Minas  Geraes,"  asserts  that
Hilbernaz  intended  to  establish  a  university  in
Sao  Paulo,  and  bequeathed  in  his  will  a  large  sum
for  that  purpose ;  but  for  some  reason,  although
the  city  received  the  money,  it  never  fulfilled  the
intention  of  the  testator.

HILDEBURN,  Charles  Swift  Riche\  bibli-
ographer, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  Aug.,  1855.
He  received  his  education  in  private  schools.  Since
1876  he  has  been  librarian  of  the  Athenaeum  of
Philadelphia.  He  edited  with  notes  "  The  Inscrip-
tions in  St.  Peter's  Church -Yard,  Philadelphia,
copied  by  Rev.  William  White  Bronson  "  (1879) ;  is
the  compiler  of  "  A  Century  of  Printing :  the
Issues  of  the  Press  in  Pennsylvania,  1685-1784"
(2  vols.,  l885-'6) ;  and  has  contributed  numerous
historical  and  biographical  articles  to  various  maga-
zines. He  is  one  of  the  commissioners  to  prepare
and  publish  the  statutes  at  large  of  Pennsylvania
prior  to  1800,  which  will  require  about  ten  vol-
umes, the  first  to  appear  in  1888.

HILDEBURN,  Mary  Jane,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  2  Dec,  1821 ;  d.  there,  18  Sept.,  1882.
Her  maiden  name  was  Reed,  and  she  was  educated
in  Philadelphia.  She  wrote  a  great  number  of
Sunday-school  books,  the  principal  of  which  are
"Day  Dreams"  (Philadelphia,  1854);  "Money, or
the  Ainsworths,"  a  prize-book  (1860) ;  "  Bessie
Lane's  Mistake  "  (1865) ;  "Flora  Morris's  Choice"
(1867) ;  "  The  Craythorns  of  Stony  Hollow  "  (1869) ;
and  "  Gaffeney's  Tavern  "  (1872).  She  also  pub-
lished poems  in  several  magazines  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Marie  Roseau."

HILDRETH,  Eugenius  Augustus,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  13  Sept.,  1821 ;  d.
there  31  Aug.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Kenyon
college  in  1840,  and  at  the  Medical  college  of  Ohio
in  Cincinnati  in  1844.  After  serving  as  resident
physician  of  the  commercial  hospital  and  lunatic
asylum  of  Ohio  for  one  year,  he  settled  in  Wheel-
ing. He  was  president  of  the  Wheeling  board  of
education,  also  Medical  society  of  West  Virginia
in  1876-'7,  and  served  on  important  committees  of
the  American  medical  association.  Dr.  Hildreth
was  a  member  of  the  State  board  of  examiners  for
surgeons  in  the  army,  and  from  1873  till  1885
member  of  the  U.  S.  board  of  surgeons  for  pensions.
He  was  the  inventor  of  surgical  appliances,  and
published  articles  upon  "  Medical  Botany  of  West
Virginia,"  "  Meteorology  and  Epidemic  Diseases  of
Ohio  County,"  and  "  Biographies  of  Physicians  of
Wheeling  for  the  Last  Hundred  Years."


HILDRETH

HILDRETH,  Ezekiel,  educator,  b.  in  Westford,
Mass.,  18  July,  1784;  d.  in  Wheeling,  Va.,  15
March,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1814,  and  taught  for  forty-two  years  in  Ohio,
Tennessee,  Kentucky,  and  Virginia.  He  published
a  grammatical  work,  entitled  •'  Logopolis,  or  City
of  Words,"  a  "  Key  to  Knowledge,"  an  essay  on  the
"  Mortality  of  the  Soul,"  and  an  address  on  "  Edu-
cation," delivered  before  an  educational  convention
in  Clarksburg,  Va.,  in  1836.

HILDRETH,  Hosea,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chelms-
ford, Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Sterling.  Vt.,  10
July,  1835.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Richard
Hildreth,  who  emigrated  from  England  in  1643.
His  father  removed  to  Sterling,  Vt.,  where  he  pur-
chased a  farm.  Hosea  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1805,  and  studied  theology.  He  engaged  in
teaching  until  1811,  when  he  became  professor  of
mathematics  in  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  where  he
remained  till  1825.  In  that  year  he  was  ordained
pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Gloucester
Mass.,  which  was  afterward  divided  by  the  Uni-
tarian controversy.  An  orthodox  church  was  then
established  in  his  parish,  of  which  he  held  charge
until  he  resigned  in  1833.  In  1834  he  became  pas-
tor of  a  small  church  in  Westborough.  He  was  an
advocate  of  the  temperance  reform,  and  was  agent
of  the  Massachusetts  temperance  society.  He  de-
livered a  Dudleian  lecture  at  Harvard  in  1829.  and
published  various  sermons.  —  His  son,  Richard,
author,  b.  in  Deerfield,  Mass.,  22  June,  1807;  d.  in
Florence,  Italy,  11  July,  1865,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1826.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1830,  and  practised  law  in  Newburyport  and  Boston
until  1832,  when  he  became  co-editor  of  the  "  Bos-
ton Atlas,"  a  daily  newspaper.  This  was  the  ex-
ponent or  organ  of  Rufus  Choate,  Caleb  Cushing,
and  other  rising  politicians,  who  were  then  associ-
ated together,  and  for  several  years  Mr.  Hildreth's
connection  with  the  new  paper  gave  it  a  decided
pre-eminence  among  the  political  journals  of  New
England.  His  articles  were  remarkable  for  the
vehemence  of  their  tone,  the  closeness  of  their  rea-
soning, and  their  elaborate  historical  illustrations.
In  1837  he  wrote  a  series  of  articles  for  the  "Atlas  "
against  the  annexation  of  Texas,  and  spent  the
winter  of  1837-8  in  Washington  as  correspondent
of  that  journal.  He  then  resumed  his  editorial
post,  advocated  Gen.  Harrison's  election  to  the
presidency,  and  wrote  a  biography  of  his  candidate.
In  1840  he  went  to  Demerara,  British  Guiana,
where  he  edited  successively  "  The  Guiana  Chroni-
cle." and  "  The  Royal  Gazette,"  which  supported
the  policy  of  the  British  government  in  the  aboli-
tion of  slavery.  He  also  edited  a  compilation  of
the  colonial  laws  of  British  Guiana,  with  an  histori-
cal introduction.  For  several  years  he  was  con-
nected with  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  and  also
contributed  articles  to  the  "American  Cyclopaedia."
In  1861  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Trieste,
where  he  remained  until  ill  health  compelled  him
to  relinquish  his  post.  His  publications  are  "  The
Slave,  or  Memoir  of  Archy  Moore."  an  anti-slaverv
novel  (1836 ;  new  ed.,  entitled  "  The  White  Slave,"
1852);  "History  of  Banks"  (Boston,  1857);  a
translation  of  Bentham's  "  Theory  of  Legislation,"
from  the  French  of  Dumont  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1840);
"  Theory  of  Morals  "  (Boston,  1844) ;  "  Theory  of
Politics  "  (New  York,  1853) ;  "  Despotism  in  Amer-
ica "  (Boston,  1854) ;  "  Japan  as  it  Was  and  Is "
(Boston,  1855) ;  "  History  of  the  United  States "
(6  vols.,  New  York,  1849-56) ;  and  a  compilation
from  Lord  Campbell's  "  Lives  of  Atrocious  Judges  "
(Philadelphia,  1857).  Among  his  pamphlets  was  a
letter  to  Prof.  Andrews  Norton  on  "  Miracles."


HILDRETH


HILGARD


201


HILDRETH,  Samuel  Prescott,  physician,  b.
in  Methuen,  Mass.,  30  Sept.,  1783  ;  d.  in  Marietta,
Ohio,  24  July.  1863.  He  was  descended  from
Richard  Hildreth,  of  Cambridge,  England.  He
labored  on  a  farm,  and  after  receiving  an  academic
education  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Kittridge  of
Andover,  and  received  his  medical  degree  in  1805.
He  began  to  practise  in  New  Hampshire,  but  re-
moved to  Ohio  in  1806,  and  settled  at  Bel  pre.  In
1808  he  went  to  Marietta,  where  he  practised  with
success,  also  serving  in  the  legislature  in  1810— '11.
In  1837  he  was  a  member  of  the  geological  survey.
He  presented  his  valuable  scientific  library  and
collections  in  natural  histoiy  and  conchology  to
Marietta  college.  For  nearly  forty  years  he  con-
tributed to  "  Silliman's  Journal "  on  meteorology,
geology,  and  paleontology.  His  publications  are
"History  of  the  Diseases  and  Climate  of  South-
eastern Ohio,"  printed  in  1837  by  the  Cleveland
medical  society,  of  which  he  was  president ;  "  Pio-
neer History "  (Cincinnati,  1848) ;  "  Lives  of  the
Earlv  Settlers  of  Ohio  "  (1852) ;  "  Contributions  to
the  Early  History  of  the  North- West "  (1864) ;  and
"  Results  of  Meteorological  Observations  made  at
Marietta  in  1826-'59,"  reduced  and  discussed  by
Charles  A.  Schott  (in  "Smithsonian  Institution
Contributions  to  Knowledge,"  1870).

HILGARD,  Theodore  Erasmus,  lawyer,  b.  in
Mannheim,  Germany,  7  July,  1790 ;  d.  in  Heidelberg,
Germany,  14  Feb.,  1873.  He  studied  at  the  Uni-
versities of  Heidelberg  and  Paris,  and  took  a  legal
course  in  Coblentz.  During  the  time  of  the  French
rule  he  followed  his  profession  in  Treves,  and,  on
the  restoration  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  to  Ger-
many, settled  in  Zweibrilcken,  where  he  held  the
appointment  of  associate  justice  of  the  court  of  ap-
peals from  1821  till  1835.  He  was  also  a  member
of  the  provincial  assembly  from  1821  till  1826.
In  1835  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  settled
in  St.  Clair  county,  111.  He  purchased  a  farm  near
Belleville,  and  besides  its  general  management  gave
much  attention  to  viticulture,  being  the  first  to
introduce  it  in  Illinois.  At  first  he  tried  to  dis-
cover which  of  the  Rhenish  or  French  vines  were
best  adapted  to  the  climate,  but  soon  found  the
indigenous  Catawba  grape  most  suitable,  and  he
produced  a  wine  that  acquired  a  high  local  reputa-
tion. The  town  of  West  Belleville,  which  has  gradu-
ally surrounded  the  original  homestead,  was  laid
out  on  his  property  and  under  his  direction.  Mean-
while he  gave  special  attention  to  the  education  of
his  children,  whom  he  instructed  personally  in  lan-

guages  and  philosophy.  In  1851  he  returned  to
ermany,  having  been  invited  by  the  Bavarian
government  to  take  part  in  recasting  the  law  of
mortgages  of  that  country  into  a  more  modern
form.  Subsequently  he  came  back  to  the  United
States,  but,  finding  his  family  dispersed,  he  again
returned  to  Germany,  and  passed  the  remainder  of
his  life  quietly  in  Heidelberg.  While  on  his  farm
in  the  United  States  he  revived  an  early  taste  for
poetry,  and  devoted  a  portion  of  his  leisure  to
making  translations  of  ancient  and  modern  poems
into  German,  some  of  which  were  published  and
received  with  high  commendation,  notably  Ovid's
I  Metamorphoses,"  and  •'  The  Fire- Worshipers  "
from  Moore's  "  Lalla  Rookh."  Besides  numerous
legal  and  historical  articles  and  minor  poems  con-
tributed to  American  and  European  periodicals,
he  published  "  Twelve  Paragraphs  on  Pauperism  "
(Heidelberg,  1847);  "Ten  Paragraphs  on  Consti-
tutional Monarchy,  and  Republics  (1849) ;  "  My
Recollections,"  an  autobiography  (1858) ;  and  "  The
Hundred  Days,  an  Epic  Poem  "  (1859). — His  son,
Julius  Erasmus,  scientist,  b.  in  Zweibriicken,  Ba-


varia, 7  Jan.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  8  May,
1891,  with  his  father  he  settled  in  Belleville,  111.,
where  he  obtained  his  education  under  the  guid-
ance of  the  elder  Hilgard.  In  1843  he  removed  to
Philadelphia,  began  the  study  of  civil  engineering,
and  in  1845  was  invited  by  Alexander  D.  Bache  to
become  one  of  his  assistants  on  the  coast  survey.
He  soon  became  recognized  among  the  leading
spirits  in  the  work,  and  rose  to  the  office  of  assist-
ant in  charge  of  the  bureau  in  Washington.  This
place  he  held  until  the  death  of  the  superintendent
in  1881,  when  he  was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy.
Mr.  Hilgard  also  had  charge  of  the  construction
and  verification  of  the  standards  of  weights  and
measures,  and  was  for  some  time  engaged  in  pre-
paring metric  standards  of  great  precision  for  dis-
tribution to  the  several  states.  In  this  connection
he  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the  International
metric  commission  which  met  in  Paris  in  1872,  and
a  member  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  inter-
national bureau  of  weights  and  measures.  At  the
time  of  its  organization,  Mr.  Hilgard  was  invited
to  become  director  of  this  bureau,  but  declined.  In
1885,  on  the  advent  of  a  new  administration,  Mr.
Hilgard.  after  spending  two  thirds  of  his  life  in
the  service  of  the  government,  was  suspended,  and
then  permitted  to  resign.  Prof.  Alexander  Agassiz,
who  declined  to  succeed  him,  in  commenting  on
the  behavior  of  the  committee  of  investigation,
says :  "  Their  dictum  upon  the  late  superintendent
(Mr.  Hilgard),  at  least  as  far  as  his  professional
career  is  concerned,  is  answered  by  his  position
as  an  investigator  in  the  scientific  world."  Prof.
Hilgard's  scientific  work  was  chiefly  in  connec-
tion with  his  practical  labors,  consisting  of  re-
searches and  the  discussion  of  results  in  geodesy
and  terrestrial  physics,  and  in  perfecting  methods
and  instrumental  means  connected  with  the  same.
In  1872  he  executed  a  telegraphic  determination
of  the  longitude  between  Paris  and  Greenwich,
which  supersedes  the  value  previously  admitted,
correcting  it  by  nearly  half  a  second  of  time.  The
magnetic  survey  of  the  United  States,  prosecuted
at  the  expense  of  the  Bache  fund,  arising  from  a
bequest  of  Supt.  Bache  to  the  National  academy
of  sciences,  was  placed  by  the  academy  under  the
direction  of  Supt.  Hilgard,  and  he  also  rendered
great  service  to  scientists  throughout  the  United
States  by  lending  to  them  valuable  instruments
for  original  research.  He  was  one  of  the  origi-
nal members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences,
and  for  some  years  its  home  secretary.  In  1874
he  was  elected  president  of  the  American  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  he
was  also  an  honorary  member  of  other  scientific
bodies.  His  publications  include  papers,  lectures,
and  addresses,  which  have  appeared  principally  in
the  annual  reports  of  the  coast  survey.  His  lec-
ture on  "  Tides  and  Tidal  Action  in  Harbors,"
delivered  before  the  American  institute,  New  York,
is  remarkable  for  its  lucid  and  terse  exposition  of
principles  without  the  aid  of  mathematical  sym-
bols.— Another  son,  Theodore  Charles,  physician,
b.  in  Zweibriicken,  Germany,  28  Feb.,  1828 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  5  March,  1875,  came  to  the  United
States  with  his  father,  when  he  was  seven  years  old,
and  received  his  education  from  the  members  of
his  family.  He  early  developed  a  fondness  for  the
study  of  nature,  and  made  collections  of  western
flora  for  the  distinguished  botanist,  Dr.  George
Engelmann.  Subsequently  he  studied  medicine  at
the  Universities  of  Heidelberg,  Zurich,  Vienna,  and
Berlin,  and,  on  his  return  to  the  United  States,  be-
gan the  practice  of  his  profession  in  St.  Louis.  In
1854  he  published  "  Experimental  Observations  on


202


HILL


HILL


Taste  and  Smell,"  being  the  result  of  physiological
researches  in  which  he  was  the  first  to  distinguish
in  the  sense  of  taste  those  perceptions  which  prop-
erly belong  to  the  tongue — the  savors  of  sweet,
bitter,  salt,  sour,  and  alkaline — from  the  flavors
which  are  perceived  in  the  same  manner  as  odors,
through  the  nose.  Later  he  published  an  "  Exposi-
tion of  Natural  Series  in  the  Vegetable  Kingdom  "
(1858),  which  he  followed  with  "  Phyllotaxis :  its
Numeric  and  Divergential  Law,  Explicable  under
a  Simple  Organological  Idea"  (1859),  explaining
the  cause  of  the  observed  order  of  development  of
leaves.  His  health  failing,  the  result  of  an  acci-
dent, he  occupied  himself  with  the  microscopic
study  of  the  beginnings  of  organic  life.  His  pub-
lished papers  on  the  subject  were  the  fruits  of
many  years'  patient  experiment  and  observation.
Finally  compelled  to  abandon  the  practice  of  medi-
cine, he  gave  part  of  his  time  to  observations  of
terrestrial  magnetism,  under  the  direction  of  his
brother  Julius.  He  then  settled  in  New  York,  and
the  remaining  years  of  his  life  were  occupied  in
this  work.  His  papers  are  published  in  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  and  in  those  of  the  St.  Louis
academy  of  science. — Another  son,  Eugene  Wol-
demar,  chemist,  b.  in  Zweibriicken,  Bavaria,  5
Jan.,  1833,  came  to  the  United  States  with  his  par-
ents and  settled  in  Belleville,  111.,  where  his  early
life  was  spent.  He  went  to  Germany  for  his  edu-
cation, and  studied  at  the  Royal  mining-school,
Freiberg,  and  at  the  Universities  of  Zurich  and
Heidelberg,  receiving  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  at  the
latter  institution  in  1853.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States  in  1855,  he  became  assistant  state
geologist  of  Mississippi,  which  place  he  held  until
March,  1857,  when  he  was  appointed  chemist  in
charge  of  the  laboratory  of  the  Smithsonian  insti-
tution, also  filling  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the
National  medical  college  in  Washington.  He  re-
turned to  Mississippi  in  1858  as  state  geologist,
which  office  he  held  until  1866,  and  was  professor
of  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Mississippi  till
1871,  where  for  the  following  two  years  he  held  the
combined  appointment  of  state  geologist  and  pro-
fessor of  agricultural  chemistry.  Pie  was  called  in
1873  to  the  chair  of  geology  and  natural  history  in
the  University  of  Michigan,  and  in  1875  accepted
the  professorship  of  agricultural  chemistry  and
botany  in  the  University  of  California,  where  he
has  since  remained.  During  1881-'3  he  had  charge
of  the  agricultural  division  of  the  northern  trans-
continental survey.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  in  1872  was  elected  to  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  In  1887  he  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia.  Prof.  Hilgard  has
made  a  specialty  of  the  study  of  soils  in  their  re-
lation to  geology,  to  their  chemical  and  physical
composition,  to  their  native  flora,  and  to  their  agri-
cultural qualities.  In  this  connection  he  has  ex-
amined the  soils  of  the  southwestern  states  and  of
the  Pacific  slope.  He  has  contributed  many  papers
on  these  and  geological  subjects  to  the  scientific
journals,  and  has  published  "  Report  on  the  Agricul-
ture and  Geology  of  Mississippi  "  (Jackson,  1860) ;
"  On  the  Geology  of  Louisiana  and  the  Rock-Salt
Deposit  of  Petit  Anse Island"  (Washington,  1869) ;
"  Reports  on  the  Experimental  Work  of  the  College
of  Agriculture,  University  of  California"  (Sacra-
mento, 1877-'86) ;  "  Report  on  the  Arid  Regions  of
the  Pacific  Coast "  (1887)  for  the  U.  S.  department
of  agriculture,  and  has  edited  vols.  v.  and  vi.  on
"  Cotton  Production,"  of  the  "  U.  S.  Census  Re-
ports for  1880,"  to  which  he  contributed  the  mono-
graphs on  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  and  California.


HILL,  Ambrose  Powell,  soldier,  b.  in  Cul-
peper  county,  Va.,  9  Nov.,  1825 ;  d.  near  Peters-
burg, Va„  2  April,  1865.  His  father,  Maj.  Thomas
Hill,  was  a  politician  and  merchant  for  many  yean.
The  son  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acade-
my in  1847,  and,  entering  the  1st  artillery,  was
made  a  2d  lieutenant,  22  Aug.,  1847.  He  served
in  Mexico  during  the  war,  and  was  engaged  in
Florida  against  the  Seminoles  in  1849- '50.  On  4
Sept.,  1851,  he  was
promoted  to  1st  lieu-
tenant of  the  1st  ar-
tillery, and  afterward
to  a  captaincy.  In
November,  1855,  he
was  made  an  assistant
on  the  coast  survey,
and  was  stationed  in
Washington  until  1
March,  1861,  when  he
resigned.  When  Vir-
ginia seceded  he  was
appointed  colonel  of
the  13th  regiment  of
Virginia  volunteers,
and  was  ordered  to
Harper's  Ferry.  At
the  first  battle  of  Bull
Run  he  arrived  with

his  regiment  among  those  of  Gen.  Johnston's  com-
mand, in  time  to  share  in  the  last  of  the  fight.  He
was  promoted  to  brigadier-general,  and  fought  at
the  battle  of  Williamsburg  in  May,  1862,  with  such
spirit  and  determination  that  he  was  made  a  major-
general.  On  25  June,  1862,  he  was  one  of  the  coun-
cil of  war  held  in  Richmond,  at  which  were  pres-
ent Gens.  Lee,  Jackson,  Longstreet,  D.  H.  Hill,  and
others.  In  the  seven  days'  battles  around  Rich-
mond he  opened  the  series  of  engagements  by  driv-
ing  McClellan's  forces  from  Meadow  bridge,  thus
clearing  a  way  for  Longstreet  and  D.  H.  Hill  to
advance.  He  occupied  the  centre  of  Lee's  army  in
the  attacks  against  McClellan,  and  gained  a  repu-
tation for  bravery  and  skill  in  the  handling  of  his
troops.  He  was  active  in  the  succeeding  campaign
against  Gen.  Pope,  and  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull
Run,  29  and  30  July,  1862.  He  received  the  sur-
render of  the  National  troops  at  Harper's  Ferry  on
17  Sept.,  1862,  and,  making  a  forced  march,  arrived
at  Antietam  in  time  to  enable  Gen.  Lee  to  main-
tain his  ground.  At  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,
13  Dec,  1862,  his  division  formed  the  right  of
Jackson's  corps ;  at  Chancellorsville,  5  and  6  May,
1863,  it  formed  the  centre,  and  participated  in  the
flank  movement  that  crushed  Hooker's  right.  In
the  assault  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  had  to
retire  from  the  field.  For  his  gallantry  in  this
battle  he  was  promoted,  20  May,  1863,  to  lieuten-
ant-general, and  given  command  of  one  of  the
three  grand  corps  into  which  the  army  was  di-
vided. He  led  his  corps  at  Gettysburg,  and  in  the
affair  at  Bristow  Station,  October,  1863,  while  in
command  of  two  brigades,  was  repelled  with  se-
vere loss.  On  22  June,  1864,  his  corps,  with  Long-
street's,  repelled  the  attack  on  the  Weldon  rail-
road. A  few  weeks  before  the  final  attack  on  the
Southside  railroad  and  the  defences  of  Petersburg,
Gen.  Hill  was  taken  ill  and  granted  leave  of  ab-
sence, but  he  returned  before  his  leave  expired,
31  March.  On  Sunday  morning,  2  April,  1865,  in
the  struggle  for  the  possession  of  the  works  in
front  of  Petersburg,  he  attempted,  contrary  to  the
wishes  of  Gen.  Lee,  to  reach  Heth's  division,  and
was  shot  from  his  horse  by  stragglers  from  the
National  army. By  Gen.  Lee's  orders  a  charge


HILL


HILL


203


-was  made,  and  his  body  recovered  and  buried  in
Chesterfield  county.  Afterward  it  was  removed  to
Hollywood  cemetery,  Richmond,  Va.  Gen.  Hill
married  a  sister  of  Gen.  John  Morgan,  the  Confed-
erate cavalry  leader,  and  left  two  daughters.

HILL,  Benjamin  Dionysius,  clergyman,  b.  at
Watton  Underwood,  Bucks,  England,  4  Nov.,  1842.
His  father  was  chaplain  to  the  Duke  of  Bucking-
hamshire, and  Vicar  of  Watton.  The  son  received
his  education  at  the  grammar-schools  of  Tunbridge
and  Shrewsbury,  at  Lincoln  college,  Oxford,  and
afterward  at  St.  John's  college,  Cambridge,  where
he  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  1866.
He  then  studied  medicine  for  a  year  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  and,  coming  thence
to  New  York,  entered  the  Paulist  order  in  January,
1868.  Here  he  studied  for  the  priesthood,  and  was
ordained,  25  March,  1871.  He  continued  with  the
Paulists  until  1879,  when  he  entered  the  Passion-
Ate  novitiate  and  received  the  habit  of  St.  Paul  of
the  Cross  on  31  May  of  that  year,  making  his  pro-
fession in  June,  1880.  He  is  at  present  (1887)  sta-
tioned at  Notre  Dame  university,  Ind.  While
with  the  Paulist  fathers  he  acted  as  assistant  editor
of  the  "  Catholic  World."  Father  Hill  published  a
volume  of  poems  (New  York,  1877),  and  is  prepar-
ing a  second  volume  for  the  press.  He  is  a  fre-
Suent  contributor  to  the  "Ave  Maria,"  a  Roman
atholic  magazine,  published  at  Notre  Dame,  Ind.
HILL,  Benjamin  Harvey,  statesman,  b.  in  Jas-
per county,  Ga.,  14  Sept..  1823 ;  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
19  Aug.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Georgia  in  1844  with  the  first  honors,  stud-
ied law,  and  within  a  twelvemonth  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  beginning  to  practise  at  La  Grange,
Ga.  He  advanced  rapidly  in  his  profession,  and
early  took  an  active
part  in  politics.  In
1851  he  was  elected  to
the  legislature,  and
from  that  time  was  a
recognized  leader  of
the  Whig  party.  In
1856  he  was  nomi-
nated an  elector  for
the  state  at  large
on  the  American  or
Know-Nothing  tick-
et, and  in  his  support
of  Millard  Fillmore
his  reputation  as  an
orator  was  greatly  en-
hanced. In  1859  Mr.
Hill  was  elected  to
the  state  senate  as  a
Unionist.  In  1860  his  name  was  on  the  Bell  and
Everett  electoral  ticket.  He  was  a  Unionist  mem-
ber of  the  State  secession  convention,  which  met  at
Milledgeville,  16  Jan.,  1861,  and  made  a  speech  of
great  power  against  the  secession  ordinance,  but
afterward,  with  many  other  friends  of  the  Union,
thinking  it  best  to  avoid  a  division  at  home,  voted
for  it.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Confederate  pro-
visional congress  of  1861,  and  shortly  afterward
was  elected  to  the  Confederate  senate,  in  which  he
continued  to  serve  until  the  close  of  the  civil  war.
He  was  arrested  in  May,  1865,  and  confined  in
Fort  Lafayette,  New  York  harbor,  but  was  re-
need  on  parole  in  July,  and  returned  to  his
home.  For  some  years  afterward  he  held  no
Pfijce,  but  took  an  active  part  in  politics,  denounc-
ing the  reconstruction  acts  of  congress,  especially
in  a  speech  that  he  delivered  at  a  mass  meeting  in
Atlanta,  and  that  became  famous  in  the  state.
His  "  Notes  on  the  Situation,"  opposing  the  recon-


^Ly. /f  A£t&.


struction  measures,  attracted  wide  attention.  Mr.
Hill  supported  Horace  Greeley  for  the  presidency
in  1872,  and  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
was  held  at  the  Fifth  Avenue  hotel,  New  York,  by
the  friends  of  that  gentleman.  In  1875  he  was
elected  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  by  his  speech  in  the  debate  on  the  am-
nesty bill  made  a  great  impression.  Mr.  Hill  was
re-elected  in  1876,  and  made  a  speech  on  17  Jan.,
1877,  in  support  of  the  electoral  commission  bill,
insisting  that  it  was  wholly  constitutional,  wise  in
its  provisions,  and  patriotic  in  its  purpose.  Be-
fore the  close  of  his  term  in  the  house  he  was
elected  by  the  legislature  of  Georgia  to  a  seat  in
the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  served  till  his  death.
In  the  senate  he  made  some  of  his  finest  speeches,
among  them  that  in  denunciation  of  Mr.  Mahone's
coalition  with  the  Republican  party.  In  the  midst
of  his  career  Mr.  Hill's  health  gave  way.  In
1878-'9  a  slight  pimple  on  the  left  side  of  his
tongue  developed  into  a  cancer,  and  he  was  oper-
ated upon  three  times  from  21  July,  1881,  till  20
March,  1882.  For  a  month  before  his  death  his
power  of  articulation  was  almost  gone,  and  he  used
a  writing-pad  to  make  knowrn  his  wishes.  His
funeral  in  Atlanta  was  attended  by  an  immense
concourse  of  people,  by  the  state  officials,  a  dele-
gation from  both  houses  of  congress,  and  by  the
chancellor  and  faculty  of  the  University  of  Geor-
gia. Since  Mr.  Hill's  death,  a  monument  has  been
erected  to  him  in  Atlanta ;  it  is  a  life-size  statue
of  white  marble,  representing  him  as  looking  down
from  the  pedestal  on  which  he  stands,  and  is
placed  at  the  junction  of  two  of  the  finest  streets
of  the  city,  in  full  view  of  his  former  residence.

HILL,  Daniel  Harvey,  soldier,  b.  at  Hill's
Iron- Works,  York  district,  S.  C,  12  Julv,  1821  ;  d.
in  Charlotte,  N.  C,  25  Sept.,  1889.  His  ancestor
came  from  Ireland  and  settled  in  York,  Pa. ;  his
grandfather  removed  to  South  Carolina,  and  es-
tablished " Hill's  Iron-Works "  in  connection  with
his  friend,  Col.  Isaac  Hayne.  Solomon  Hill,  Gen.
Hill's  father,  joined  with  Edmund  Hayne,  son  of
Col.  Isaac  Hayne,  in  reviving  the  iron-works  (de-
stroyed during  the  Revolutionary  war),  which  they
conducted  for  some  years,  until  Mr.  Hill's  death.
The  son  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acade-
my in  1842,  and  went  immediately  to  Maine  to
serve  on  the  frontier  during  the  troubles  with
England  in  reference  to  the  boundary-line.  He
was  in  nearly  every  important  battle  in  the  Mexi-
can war,  and  was  a  member  of  the  storming  party
at  Chapultepec,  where  he  and  Lieut.  James  Stewart
had  a  foot-race  for  the  honor  of  being  the  first  to
enter  a  strongly  occupied  Mexican  fort.  For  ser-
vice in  this  battle,  Capt.  Hill  was  brevetted  major,
as  he  had  been  previously  brevetted  captain  for
"  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct "  at  Contreras
and  Churubusco.  Just  after  the  Mexican  war  he
resigned  his  commission,  and  was  elected  professor
of  mathematics  in  Washington  college,  Lexing-
ton, Va.  He  held  this  place  for  six  years,  and  for
five  years  filled  the  same  chair  in  Davidson  college,
N.  C,  and  went  thence  to  be  superintendent  of  the
North  Carolina  military  institute  at  Charlotte.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  made
colonel  of  the  1st  North  Carolina  regiment,  in
command  of  which  he  fought  and  won  the  battle
of  Big  Bethel,  10  June,  1861,  soon  after  which  he
was  made  brigadier-general  and  sent  to  command
the  extreme  left  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston's
armv  at  Leesburg,  Va.  He  was  promoted  to  major-
general,  26  March,  1862,  and  distinguished  himself
in  the  seven  days'  battles  on  the  peninsula.  Dur-
ing the  first  Maryland  campaign  Gen.  Hill  made


204


HILL


HILL


a  stubborn  fight  at  Boonesboro.  He  also  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.  During
the  Chancellorsville  campaign  he  was  in  command
in  North  Carolina,  and  during  the  Gettysburg
campaign  he  commanded  the  defences  of  Rich-
mond and  Petersburg.  On  11  July,  1863,  he  was
commissioned  lieutenant-general  and  placed  at  the
head  of  a  corps  in  Bragg's  army.  He  was  at
Chickamauga,  and  shared  the  fortunes  of  the  Army
of  Tennessee,  until  he  surrendered  with  Gen.
Joseph  E.  Johnston  in  North  Carolina  in  April,
1865.  For  some  years  after  the  war  he  edited
"  The  Land  We  Love,"  a  monthly  magazine,  which
he  founded  at  Charlotte,  N.  C.  In  1877  he  was
elected  president  of  the  University  of  Arkansas,
and  afterward  president  of  the  Military  and  agri-
cultural college  of  Georgia  at  Milledgeville.  Gen.
Hill  was  a  contributor  to  current  literature,  and
published  an  algebra,  "A  Consideration  of  the
Sermon  on  the  Mount"  (Philadelphia,  1858),  and
"  The  Crucifixion  of  Christ "  (1860).

HILL,  David  Bennett,  governor  of  New  York,
b.  in  Havana,  Chemung  (now  Schuyler)  co.,  N.  Y.,
29  Aug.,  1843.  He  was  educated  in  the  common
schools  and  at  the  academy  of  his  native  place,
and  became  a  clerk  in  a  lawyer's  office  in  Havana,
but  in  1863  went  to  Elmira,  where  he  studied  law
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1864.  He  was  ap-
pointed in  that  year  city  attorney,  and  became  ac-
tively interested  in  politics.  He  has  been  many
times  a  delegate  to  Democratic  state  conventions
since  1868,  was  president  of  those  that  were  held
in  1877  and  1881,  and  was  also  a  delegate  to  the
National  conventions  of  1876  and  1884.  In  1870
and  1871  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature.  In
1882  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Elmira.  In  Novem-
ber of  the  same  year  he  was  elected  lieutenant-
governor  of  New  York.  On  the  resignation  of
Gov.  Cleveland  in  1884,  Mr.  Hill  became  governor
of  the  state.  In  1885  he  was  elected  governor,  and
21  Jan.,  1891,  U.  S.  senator.

HILL,  David  Jayne,  educator,  b.  in  Plainfield,
N.  J„  10  June,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  in  1874,  was  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  there  in  1877-'9,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  chosen  president  of  the  institution.
Madison  university  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1884.  He  has  published  "  Science  of  Rhetoric  "
(New  York,  1877) :  "  Elements  of  Rhetoric  and
Composition "  (1879) ;  "  Life  of  Washington  Ir-
ving "  (1879) ;  "  Life  of  William  Cullen  Bryant "
(1880) ;  and  "  Principles  and  Fallacies  of  Social-
ism "  (1885).  He  has  also  edited  Jevons's  "  Ele-
ments of  Logic"  (1884),  and  has  in  preparation
(1887)  "  The  Relation  of  Christianity  to  the  Social
Problems  of  our  Time."

HILL,  Frances  Mulligan,  missionary,  b.  in
New  York  city  about  1807;  d.  in  Athens,  Greece,
5  Aug.,  1884.  She  was  the  daughter  of  John  W.
Mulligan,  and  married  Dr.  John  H.  Hill,  with
whom  she  went  to  Athens  in  1831  to  superintend
schools  for  the  Greeks.  She  established  a  mission-
school  for  girls,  in  which  she  also  educated  teach-
ers from  1834  till  1842.  The  school  was  superin-
tended by  a  society  of  ladies  under  the  direction  of
Mrs.  Emma  Willard,  of  Troy,  N.  Y.  Mrs.  Hill  re-
ceived in  it  pupils  from  families  connected  with  the
government  at  Athens,  and  also  from  the  wealthy
Greeks  in  Smyrna,  Constantinople,  and  the  Ionian
islands.  Many  of  the  pupils  that  were  appointed
by  the  government  to  be  educated  in  this  normal
school  afterward  opened  schools  in  their  respective
districts  as  government  teachers.  She  also  founded
another  school,  which  is  now  in  existence.  The
house  in  which  Mrs.  Hill  resided  was  built  for  her


by  Mr.  Bracebridge  of  England,  and  after  her
death  it  was  purchased  for  the  Hill  memorial  school.
HILL,  George,  poet,  b.  in  Guilford,  Conn.,  in
1796;  d.  in  New  York,  15  Dec,  1871.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1816,  and,  after  being  em-
ployed in  a  public  office  in  Washington,  D.  C,  en-
tered the  U.  S.  navy  in  1827  as  a  teacher  of  mathe-
matics, in  which  capacity  he  made  a  cruise  in  the
Mediterranean.  In  1831  he  resigned  and  became
librarian  in  the  state  department  in  Washington,
which  office  he  held  until  1839,  when  he  was  ap-

Sointed  U.  S.  consul  for  the  southern  part  of  Asia
linor.  He  resigned  this  post,  owing  to  his  health,
and  again  accepted  an  office  in  the  state  depart-
ment, but  in  1855  returned  to  Guilford,  Conn.  He
was  the  author  of  "Ruins  of  Athens  and  Other
Poems,"  published  anonymously  (1834;  2d  ed.,
with  additions,  Boston,  1839;  3d  ed.,  entitled
"  Titania's  Banquet,  Pictures  of  Women,  and  Other
Poems,"  New  York,  1870).  His  latest  poem  was
written  for  the  dedication  of  the  monument  to  his
friend,  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  at  Guilford,  and  his
last  composition  was  a  scholarly  essay  on  Sappho.

HILL,  George  W.,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  9  Nov.,  1824.  He  was  or-
dained priest  in  the  Episcopal  church  in  1848,  and
became  professor  of  pastoral  theology  in  King's
college,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1854.  He  was  rector  of
St.  Paul's  church,  Halifax,  from  1865  till  1885,
chaplain  to  the  legislative  council  during  the  same
period,  and  chancellor  of  the  University  of  Halifax
in  1876-85.  He  is  the  author  of  " Memoir  of  Sir
B.  Haliburton  "  (1864),  and  other  works.

HILL,  George  William,  astronomer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  3  March,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at
Rutgers  college  in  1859,  and  has  since  received  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  that  institution.  In  1861  he
became  assistant  in  the  office  of  the  "  American
Ephemeris  and  Nautical  Almanac,"  which  office
he  continues  to  fill.  He  made  a  canoe  voyage  in
1880  from  Lake  Superior  to  Moose  Factory,  Hud-
son bay,  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  map  of  the
route  and  photographs  of  the  scenery.  His  re-
searches on  the  lunar  theory  have  attracted  atten-
tion, and  in  1887  he  was  awarded  the  gold  medal
of  the  Royal  astronomical  society  of  London  for
his  investigations.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  in  1874  received  an  election  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  Dr.  Hill  is  the  au-
thor of  upward  of  forty  articles  and  memoirs,  in
mathematical  and  astronomical  journals  or  in
transactions  of  scientific  societies,  having  reference
chiefly  to  mathematical  astronomy.

HILL,  Isaac,  senator,  b.  in  Charlestown  (now
Somerville),  Mass.,  6  April,  1788 ;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  22  March,  1851.  He  was  seventh  in  de-
scent from  Abraham  Hill,  who  came  from  England
in  1636.  His  parents  removed  to  Ashburnham,
Mass.,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  placed
in  the  printing-office  of  the  Amherst,  N.  H.,  "  Cabi-
net." In  1809  he  went  to  Concord,  N.  H.,  pur-
chased the  "American  Patriot,"  whose  name  he
changed  to  "  New  Hampshire  Patriot,"  and  made
it  an  organ  of  the  Republican  (afterward  Demo-
cratic) party.  The  ablest  men  of  the  party  con-
tributed to  its  columns,  and  it  had  great  influence
for  twenty  years.  He  labored  in  behalf  of  the
manufactures  of  New  England,  and  later  favored
the  building  of  railroads,  taking  issue  with  one
branch  of  his  party  on  questions  arising  from  their
extension.  After  serving  in  both  branches  of  the
New  Hampshire  legislature  he  was  an  unsuccessful
candidate  for  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1828,  and  was
second  comptroller  of  the  treasury,  from  1829  till
1830,  when  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator. He  re-


HILL


HILL


205


signed  this  office  in  1836  to  become  governor  of  his
state,  and  served  till  1839.  He  was  U.  S.  sub-
treasurer  at  Boston  in  1840-'l,  and  in  the  former
year,  with  his  two  oldest  sons,  established  "  Hill's
Sew  Hampshire  Patriot,"  which  they  published
and  edited  till  1847.  He  also  issued  the  "  Farmer's
Monthly  Visitor"  for  the  last  fifteen  years  of  his  life.
His  biography,  with  a  collection  of  his  speeches
and  miscellaneous  writings,  was  published  (Con-
cord, N.  H.,  1835). — His  son,  John  McClary,  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  5  Nov.,  1821,  aided  his
father  in  the  publication  of  "  Hill's  New  Hamp-
shire Patriot "  till  1847,  when  it  was  merged  in  the
"  New  Hampshire  Patriot,"  with  which  journal  he
was  also  connected  till  1853.  and  again  in  1868-'73.
In  1884  he  was  the  unsuccessful  Democratic  candi-
date for  governor  of  New  Hampshire.

HILL,  John,  congressman,  b.  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.,
10  June,  1821 ;  d.  in  Boonton,  N.  J.,  24  July,  1884.
He  was  educated  at  private  schools,  and  at  an
early  age  was  clerk  in  the  bank  of  which  his  father
was  cashier.  In  1845  he  became  paymaster  of  the
New  Jersey  iron  company  at  Boonton,  N.  J.,  and
afterward  engaged  in  business  there.  He  was  post-
master of  the  town  in  1849-'53,  justice  of  the  peace
in  1856-'61,  and  was  elected  to  the  New  Jersey  as-
sembly in  1861,  1862,  and  1866,  serving  as  speaker
during  his  last  term.  He  was  active  in  raising
troops  during  the  civil  war,  and  at  its  close  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving  from
1867  till  1873,  and  again  from  1881  till  1883.  Mr.
Hill  was  an  active  member  of  the  house  committee
on  post-offices  and  post-roads,  and  was  earnest  in
promoting  postal  reform.  When  he  first  entered
congress  he  introduced  a  bill  to  abolish  the  frank-
ing privilege,  and  he  was  also  the  author  of  the
bill  providing  for  the  issue  of  postal-cards.  In
December,  1881,  he  introduced  a  bill  reducing
letter  postage  to  two  cents  a  half  an  ounce,  which
was  finally  passed  on  2  March,  1883^  owing  largely
to  his  persistent  efforts.  Mr.  Hill  received  many
resolutions  of  thanks  from  various  public  bodies
for  his  interest  in  the  matter.  He  was  an  elder  of
the  Presbyterian  church  at  Boonton,  and  was  ac-
tive in  religious  affairs.

HILL,  Joshua,  statesman,  b.  in  Abbeville  dis-
trict, S.  C,  10  Jan.,  1812;  d.  in  Madison,  Ga.,  6
March,  1891.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Geor-
gia, early  beginning  to  practise  at  Madison.  He
was  afterward  chosen  to  congress  as  an  American,
and  served  from  1857  till  23  Jan.,  1861,  when  he
resigned  his  seat,  in  obedience  to  the  wishes  of  the
Georgia  convention,  though  he  was  strongly  op-
posed to  secession.  He  had  a  few  days  previously
made  a  conciliatory  speech,  which  had  been  well
received.  During  the  civil  war  he  remained  quietly
on  his  plantation,  and  took  no  part  in  public  affairs,
save  that  he  was  a  candidate  for  governor  of  his
state  in  1863,  and  was  defeated  by  Joseph  E.  Brown.
He  took  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Constitu-
tional convention  called  in  pursuance  of  President
Johnson's  proclamation  in  1866,  and  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  the  U.  S.  senate  in  the
same  year.  He  then  removed  to  Washington,  but
in  1868,  after  the  organization  of  a  state  govern-
ment in  Georgia,  under  the  reconstruction  acts  of
congress,  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  that
state,  and  served  till  1873.  In  1872  he  took  an
active  part  in  the  discussion  with  Charles  Sumner
on  the  civil  rights  bill.

HILL,  Mark  Langdon,  congressman,  b.  in
Biddeford,  Me.,  30  June  1772 ;  d.  in  Phippsburg,
Me.,  26  Nov.,  1842.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  and  early  entered  public  life.  After
serving  several  times  in  each  house  of  the  Massa-


chusetts legislature  he  became  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  in  1810,  was  a  member  of  con-
gress from  Massachusetts  in  1819-'21,  and  from
Maine  in  1821-'3.  He  was  afterward  postmaster
at  Phippsburg,  and  collector  of  the  port  of  Bath.
Judge  Hill  was  an  overseer  of  Bowdoin  from  its
foundation  in  1795  till  1821,  and  a  trustee  from
that  time  till  his  death.

HILL,  Nathaniel  Parker,  senator,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery, N.  Y.,  18  Feb.,  1832.  He  entered  Brown
in  1853  as  a  student,  became  tutor  in  chemistry  in
1858,  and  was  professor  of  chemistry  applied  to
the  arts  from  1859  till  1864.  In  the  latter  year  he
visited  Colorado  to  examine  an  extensive  tract  of
mining  and  agricultural  lands  in  the  interest  of
Providence  and  Boston  capitalists.  The  imperfect
methods  of  treating  ores  at  that  time  led  him  into
a  thorough  investigation  of  the  subject,  and  he
spent  a  part  of  1865-'6  in  Swansea,  Wales,  and
Freiberg,  Germany.  Having  become  satisfied  that
the  refractory  ores  of  Colorado  could  be  treated
successfully  and  economically,  in  1867  he  organized
the  Boston  and  Colorado  smelting  company,  and
has  been  its  manager  to  the  present  time  (1887).
Through  the  success  of  that  enterprise  he  has
acquired  a  fortune,  and,  by  showing  that  the  gold
and  silver  could  be  profitably  extracted  from  the
ores,  he  gave  a  great  impetus  to  the  development
of  the  mining  industry  of  Colorado,  which  at  the
time  of  the  erection  of  his  works  had  been  nearly
abandoned.  He  was  a  member  of  the  territorial
counsel  in  1872-'3,  and  in  1879  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  serving  until  1885.
He  was  an  active  member  of  that  body,  and  in  the
first  years  of  his  term  secured  the  passage  of  many
bills  of  a  local  character  affecting  the  interests  of
his  state.  Later  he  devoted  himself  earnestly  to
the  task  of  obtaining  legislation  for  a  postal  tele-
graph service.  During  his  term  he  was  the  chief
advocate  of  silver  coinage,  and  his  speeches  and
magazine  articles  on  bi-metalism  attracted  atten-
tion both  in  this  country  and  Europe.  His  influ-
ence has  been  felt  in  a  marked  degree  on  the
interests  of  Colorado,  and  much  of  its  present
prosperity  is  due  to  his  exertions.

HILL,  Nicholas,  lawver,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  N.  Y,  16  Oct.,  1806 ;  d.  1  May,  1859.  His
father  was  a  Revolutionary  soldier  who,  on  leaving
the  army,  had  become  a  clergyman.  The  son
received  a  good  education,  studied  law,  and  began
practice  at  Amsterdam,  N.  Y.  He  was  appointed
state  law  reporter  in  1841.  and  became  one  of  the
best  special  pleaders  in  the  state,  taking  part  in
over  three  fourths  of  the  cases  on  the  docket  of  the
court  of  appeals  during  his  active  practice.  He
prepared  with  Sidney  Cowen  "  Notes  to  Phillips
on  Evidence,"  and  published  "  New  York  Reports,
1841-4"  (7  vols.,  Albany  and  New  York,  1842-5).

HILL,  Richard,  merchant,  b.  in  Maryland  ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Sept.,  1729.  In  early  life
he  followed  the  sea,  and  up  to  1704  was  known  as
"Capt.  Hill."  He  was  in  Philadelphia  during
William  Penn's  second  visit  to  this  country,  where
he  formed  the  proprietor's  acquaintance  and  came
to  enjoy  his  personal  friendship.  He  finally  set-
tled as  a  merchant  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  governor's  council  in  February,
1704,  retaining  the  place  up  to  the  time  of  his
death.  In  1707  he  was  unanimously  elected  alder-
man of  the  city,  and  in  1709  was  chosen  mayor,  to
which  office  he  was  many  times  re-elected.  He
was  elected  to  the  assembly  in  1710,  and  served  in
this  body  continuously  until  1721,  being  three
times  speaker.  In  1720,  as  one  of  the  six  oldest
councillors,  he  was  appointed  a  master  in  the  court


206


HILL


hill


of  chancery,  just  organized,  and  was  also  for  sev-
eral years  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
province.  In  the  quarrels  that  arose  between
the  assembly  and  William  Penn  he  sided  with  the
latter,  and  is  recognized  as  the  leader  that  did
most  to  preserve  Quaker  and  proprietary  ascend-
ency. Penn  made  him  a  trustee  under  his  will.

HILL,  Theophilus  Hunter,  poet,  b.  near  Ra-
leigh, N.  C,  31  Oct.,  1836.  After  receiving  an  aca-
demic education  he  became  a  lawyer  in  Raleigh,
where  he  at  one  time  edited  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Age."
In  1871-'2  he  was  librarian  of  North  Carolina.  He
has  published  "  Hesper  and  other  Poems "  (Ra-
leigh. 1861) ;  "  Poems  h  (New  York,  1869) ;  and  "  Pas-
sion Flower  and  other  Poems  "  (Raleigh,  1883).

HILL,  Thomas,  president  of  Harvard  college,  b.
in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  7  Jan.,  1818;  d.  in  Wal-
tham,  Mass.,  21  Nov.,  1891.  His  father  served  as
judge  of  the  superior  court  of  common  pleas.  The
son  was  left  an  orphan  at  an  early  age,  and  was  ap-
prenticed to  a  printer  in  1830  for  three  years.  lie
then  went  to  the  Lower  Dublin  academy  near
Philadelphia  for  one  year,  and  was  apprenticed  to
an  apothecary  in  New  Brunswick,  but  afterward
entered  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1843,
and  at  the  divinity-school  in  1845.  He  settled  in
Waltham,  Mass.,  in  1845,  in  charge  of  a  Unitarian
congregation,  and  preached  there  for  fourteen
years.  In  1859  he  succeeded  Horace  Mann  in  the
presidency  of  Antioch  college,  Ohio,  and  during
his  service  there  was  also  pastor  of  the  Church  of
the  Redeemer  in  Cincinnati.  He  became  presi-
dent of  Harvard  in  1862,  and  held  this  office  until
1868,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  impaired
health.  He  retired  to  Waltham,  and  in  1871  he
served  in  the  legislature,  after  which  he  accom-
panied Louis  Agassiz  on  the  coast-survey  expedi-
tion to  South  America.  On  his  return  he  accepted
a  call  to  the  Unitarian  church  in  Portland,  Me.,  and
removed  there.  His  mathematical  genius  showed
itself  early  in  life,  and  he  has  displayed  great
originality  and  fertility  in  the  investigation  of
curves,  adding  to  their  known  number  and  simpli-
fying their  expression.  He  has  invented  several
mathematical  machines,  the  principal  one  being
an  occultator,  by  which  occultations  visible  west
of  the  Mississippi  in  the  years  1865-'9  were  calcu-
lated for  publication  in  the  "American  Nautical
Almanac."  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  Harvard  in  1860,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
by  Yale  in  1863.  He  has  delivered  addresses  be-
fore the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Harvard  on
"  Liberal  Education  "  (1858),  and  on  the  "  Opportu-
nities of  Life"  at  Antioch  (1860).  He  has  edited
Eberty's  "  The  Stars  and  the  Earth  "  (1849 ;  new
eds..  Boston,  1874  and  1882) ;  and  has  published
"  Christmas,  and  Poems  on  Slavery  "  (Boston,  1843);
"Geometry  and  Faith"  (New  York,  1849;  revised
eds.,  New  York,  1874,  and  Boston,  1882) ;  "  First
Lessons  in  Geometry  "  (Boston,  1854) ;  "  Second
Book  in  Geometry  "  (Boston,  1862) :  "  Jesus,  the
Interpreter  of  Nature,  and  Other  Sermons  "  (1859) ;
"Practical  Arithmetic "  (1881) ;  and  contributions
to  numerous  periodicals,  mathematical  and  astro-
nomical journals,  and  religious  newspapers. — His
son,  Henry  Barker,  chemist,  b.  in  Waltham,
Mass.,  27  April,  1849,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1869,  after  which  he  studied  chemistry  at  the
University  of  Berlin,  Prussia.  In  1870  he  was
appointed  assistant  in  the  laboratory  of  Harvard,
and  was  assistant  professor  of  chemistry  from  1874
till  1884,  when  he  became  full  professor.  He  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  both  in  the  United
States  and  Europe,  and  in  1883  was  elected  to  the
National academy of sciences. Prof. Hill has


published  the  results  of  his  chemical  researches  in
the  "Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of
Arts  and  Sciences,"  and  is  the  author  of  "  Notes-
on  Qualitative  Analysis  "  (New  York,  1874).

HILL,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Birmingham,  Eng-
land, 11  Sept.,  1829.  He  came  to  the  United  States.
in  1840,  and  settled  in  Taunton,  Mass.  His  earliest
paintings  were  made  in  Boston,  where  he  followed
the  profession  of  ornamental  painting  until  1853,
when  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  stud-
ied in  the  life-class  at  the  academy.  In  1861  he-
went  to  California  in  impaired  health,  and  painted
portraits,  also  occasional  figure-pieces.  One  of  the
latter,  the  trial  scene  in  the  "  Merchant  of  Venice,""
gained  for  him  the  first  prize  in  the  Art  union  of
San  Francisco  in  1865.  During  1866  he  studied
art  in  Paris  for  six  months  under  Paul  Meyerheim,.
and  thenceforth  determined  to  follow  landscape-
instead  of  figure  painting.  He  opened  a  studio  in
Boston  in  1867,  but  returned  soon  to  San  Fran-
cisco, where  he  now  resides  (1887),  although  spend-
ing a  portion  of  each  year  in  the  Yosemite  valley
and  at  his  studio  in  Mariposa  county.  His  prin-
cipal works  are  "The  Yosemite  Valley"  (1867);
"  The  White  Mountain  Notch,"  "  Donner  Lake,""
"  The  Great  Cafion  of  the  Sierras,"  "  The  Heart  of
the  Sierras,"  "The  Driving  of  the  Last  Spike,""
and  "  The  Yellowstone  Canon."

HILL,  Uriah  C,  musician,  b.  in  New  York-
city  about  1802 ;  d.  in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  in  Sep-
tember, 1875.  In  early  life  he  played  the  violin  in
different  bands  in  New  York.  Having  been  en-
gaged as  leader  of  the  Sacred  music  society,  he-
brought  out  Handel's  "  Messiah "  in  St.  Paul's-
chapel,  18  Nov.,  1831.  This  was  the  first  per-
formance of  an  entire  oratorio  in  New  York.  The
"  Messiah  "  was  repeated  on  31  Jan.  and  2  Feb.,
1832.  With  the  same  society  he  brought  out  Neu-
komm's  "  David  "  and  Mendelssohn's  "  St.  Paul.""
Meanwhile,  in  1836,  he  had  been  abroad  studying
the  violin  under  Spohr  at  Cassel.  In  1842  he  began
energetically  to  form  an  orchestral  society  in  New
York.  He  enlisted  several  musicians  in  the  pro-
ject, and  with  others  called  a  meeting  for  2  April,.
1842,  when  the  New  York  philharmonic  society
was  formed.  Hill  was  one  of  its  alternate  con-
ductors during  its  first  seven  seasons.  He  in-
vented a  piano  in  which  he  substituted  tuning-
forks  for  wire  strings,  and  which  he  claimed  would
never  get  out  of  tune.  He  exhibited  it,  but  with-
out success,  in  New  York  and  London.  Later  he
passed  several  years  in  Cincinnati,  and  afterward
removed  to  Paterson,  N.  J.  Through  unfortunate-
domestic  relations  and  bad  speculations  he  became-
financially  embarrassed  and  despondent,  and  com-
mitted suicide. — His  brother,  George  Handel,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1809  ;  d.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.r
27  Sept.,  1849,  was  educated  in  Taunton,  Ma.*.,
and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  found  employment  with
a  watchmaker  and  jeweller  in  New  York  city.  He
occasionally  volunteered  as  a  supernumerary  in  tin'
Chatham  street  theatre,  joined  a  travelling  com-
pany of  comedians,  gave  entertainments  as  a  flute-
player,  comic  singer,  and  story-teller,  and  subse-
quently as  a  lecturer.  His  earliest  engagement  as
a  stock  actor  was  at  the  Arch  street  theatre,  Phila-
delphia. In  1828  Hill  married,  and  for  a  year  or
two  kept  a  country  store  in  Leroy,  N.  Y.  But  beinj;
unsuccessful  he  joined  the  company  in  the  Al-
bany theatre,  and  then  lectured  in  the  middle  ami
southern  states.  The  small  Yankee  part  in  Samuel
Wood  worth's  drama  of  "  The  Forest  Rose  "  ar-
rested his  attention,  and  determined  him  to  make
that  specialty  his  particular  study.  He  appeared
in  this  play  for  the  first  time  at  the  Arch  street.


I


HILL


HILLARD


207


theatre.  The  character  of  Jonathan  was  by  him
amplified  and  enlivened  with  comic  stories  to
make  it  prominent.  Hill's  debut  at  the  Park
theatre,  New  York,  raised  him  at  once  to  the  dig-
nity of  a  star  performer,  and  secured  him  engage-
ments throughout  the  Union.  Among  his  dramas
were  "  Caspar  Hauser,"  "  The  Green  Mountain
Boys,"  "A  Wife  for  a  Day,"  "  The  Yankee  Pedler,"
and  "  The  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,"  all
ephemeral,  but  skilfully  measured  to  the  artist's
capability.  In  1836  "  Yankee  "  Hill,  as  he  was
called,  performed  at  Drury  Lane  and  the  Olympic
theatres,  London,  and  in  other  large  cities  of  Eng-
land, Edinburgh,  and  Glasgow,  returning  home  in
the  year  following.  His  second  visit  to  Europe
was  "in  1838,  when  he  appeared  at  the  Adelphi
theatre,  London,  and  gave  entertainments  in  Paris.
In  1839  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  soon
found  that  his  attraction  was  on  the  wane,  the
old  plays  worn  out,  and  he  had  nothing  new  to
offer.  In  this  manner  Hill  was  retired  to  second-
class  play-houses  and  less  profitable  engagements.
He  began  the  study  of  dentistry,  but  lacked  the
nerve  and  endurance,  and  abandoned  the  effort  to
make  that  his  profession.  In  1847  Hill  retired  to
Batavia,  N.  Y.,  playing  only  occasionally  in  mono-
logue entertainments.  Hill's  down-east  stories
were  exceedingly  droll,  and  were  recited  in  a  man-
ner highly  original.  In  the  delineation  of  the
typical,  artificial  stage- Yankee,  who  talks  through
his  nose,  drives  sharp  bargains,  and  slyly  outwits
his  fellow-man,  this  actor  was  unequalled.  His
range  was  narrow,  but  the  ease,  quaintness,  and
finish  of  his  manner  disarmed  criticism.

HILL,  Walter  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  near
Lebanon,  Marion  co.,  Ky.,  21  Jan.,  1822.  He  was
graduated  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Ky.,  in  1843.  After
studying  medicine  in  the  St.  Louis  university  he
entered  the  Jesuit  order  in  1847,  and  in  1848
became  professor  of  mathematics,  physics,  and
rhetoric  in  St.  Joseph's  college,  Bardstown.  Ky.,
where  he  remained  seven  years.  He  taught  in  the
St.  Louis  university  in  1855,  but  afterward  com-
pleted his  higher  studies  at  Boston,  was  ordained
friest,  and  removed  to  the  Jesuit  novitiate  in
'rederick,  Md.  In  1864  he  returned  to  St.  Louis,
and  became  professor  of  logic  and  metaphysics  in
the  university.  In  1865  he  was  made  president  of
St.  Xavier's  college,  Cincinnati,  which  office  he
held  till  1869.  Although  opposed  by  the  state
legislature,  he  obtained  a  new  charter  during  his
service,  and  rebuilt  the  college,  making  it  one  of
the  most  prosperous  Roman  Catholic  institutions
in  this  country.  He  went  to  Topeka,  Kan.,  in
1869,  and  he  obtained  a  charter  under  a  law  of  the
state  to  incorporate  St.  Mary's  college  in  St.  Mary's
mission.  From  1871  till  1884  he  again  taught  in
St.  Louis  university,  and  is  now  (1887)  attached  to
the  Church  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  Chicago.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Elements  of  Philosophy,  compris-
ing Logic  and  General  and  Special  Metaphysics "
(Baltimore,  1873 ;  8th  ed.,  1887).  This  was  violently
attacked  by  Dr.  Orestes  A.  Brownson,  and  gave
rise  to  numerous  controversies.  It  is  now  largely
used  as  a  text-book  in  Roman  Catholic  institu-
tions. His  other  publications  are  "  Ethics,  or  Moral
Philosophy"  (Baltimore,  1878;  4th  ed.,  1885);
"Historical  Sketch  of  St.  Louis  University"  (St.
Louis.  1879);  and  various  articles  in  the  "Ameri-
can Catholic  Quarterly,"  including  one  on  "  Mental
Insanity"  (1880).  which  attracted  much  attention.
HILL,  Whitmill,  statesman,  b.  in  Bertie
county,  N.  C,  12  Feb.,  1743;  d.  in  Hill's  Ferry,
Martin  co.,  N.  C,  12  Sept.,  1797.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1760,  and


entered  the  Revolutionary  struggle  with  much  zeal.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  congresses  that
met  at  Hillsboro.  20  Aug.,  1775,  and  at  Halifax,
4  April,  1776,  and  was  elected  to  the  house  of
commons  from  Martin  county  in  1777.  He  was
a  member  of  the  state  senate  from  1778  till  1780,
and  its  speaker  in  1778.  In  that  year  he  was
elected  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,
serving  till  1781.  He  was  one  of  the  ablest  advo-
cates of  the  national  constitution  in  the  conven-
tion for  its  ratification  that  met  at  Hillsboro  in
July,  1788.  He  was  also  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
North  Carolina  militia.  He  possessed  fine  literary
attainments,  and  wrote  spirited  letters  in  1780  to
Gov.  Burke,  which  were  published  in  the  North
Carolina  "  University  Magazine"  in  March,  1861.

HILL,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cumberland
county,  Va.,  3  March,  1769 ;  d.  in  Winchester,  Va.,
16  Nov..  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Hampden
Sidney  in  1788,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
presbytery  of  Hanover,  10  July,  1790.  After  spend-
ing two  years  as  a  missionary  in  Virginia  he  settled
in  Berkeley  (now  Jefferson)  county,  and  in  1800
accepted  the  pastorate  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  Winchester.  In  1834  he  removed  to  Prince
Edward  county,  where  he  remained  two  years,
and  then  became  pastor  of  the  2d  Presbyterian
church  in  Alexandria.  In  1838  he  returned  to
Winchester.  Mr.  Hill  delivered  an  oration  at
Harper's  Ferry  in  commemoration  of  Gen.  Wash-
ington, and  published  several  sermons.  He  was
also  engaged  on  a  "  History  of  the  Presbyterian
Church  in  the  United  States,"  which  he  intended
to  issue  in  numbers,  but  onlv  the  first  appeared.

HILLARD,  George  Stillman,  lawver,  b.  in
Machias,  Me.,  22  Sept.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
21  Jan.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1828,  and,  after  studying  in  the  law-school  and  in
the  office  of  Charles  P.  Curtis,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  and  acquired  an  extensive  practice.  He
taught  for  a  time  in  the  Round  Hill  school  in
Northampton,  Mass.  Mr.  Hillard  served  in  the
state  senate  in  1850,  and  in  1853  was  a  delegate  to
the  State  constitutional  convention.  He  held  the
office  of  city  solicitor  from  1854  till  1856,  and  that
of  U  S.  district  attorney  for  Massachusetts  from
1866  till  1870.  As  a  legislator  he  won  the  warm
commendation  of  Daniel  Webster.  In  1833  he
edited  with  George  Ripley  a  weekly  Unitarian  pa-
per, entitled  "The  Christian  Register."  Subse-
quently he  became  associated  with  Charles  Sumner
in  the  publication  of  "The  Jurist."  In  1856  he
bought  an  interest  in  the  "  Boston  Courier,"  of
which  he  was  associate  editor  until  he  retired  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  In  1847  Mr.
Hillard  delivered  a  course  of  twelve  lectures  before
the  Lowell  institute.  Trinity  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1857.  His  addresses  include  a
Fourth  of  July  oration  (Boston,  1835) ;  "  Dangers
and  Duties  of  the  Mercantile  Profession,"  delivered
before  the  Mercantile  library  association  (1850) ;
an  oration  before  the  New  York  Pilgrim  society
(1851) ;  and  a  eulogy  on  Daniel  Webster  (1852).
He  was  the  author  of  privately  printed  memoirs
of  James  Brown  and  Jeremiah  Mason,  and  a  life
of  Capt.  John  Smith  for  Sparks's  "American
Biography,"  and  published  "The  Poetical  Works
of  Edmund  Spenser,"  with  a  critical  introduction
(5  vols.,  Boston,  1839);  a  translation  of  Guizot's
"  Essay  on  the  Character  and  Influence  of  George
Washington "  (1840) ;  a  "  Memorial  of  Daniel
Webster"  and  "Six  Months  in  Italy "  (1853);  a
series  of  "  Readers "  and  "  Selections  from  the
Works  of  Walter  Savage  Landor"  (1856);  "Life
and  Campaigns  of  George  B.  McClellan  "  (Philadel-


208


HILLEGAS


HILLHOUSE


phia,  1864);  "Political  Duties  of  the  Educated
Classes."  a  pamphlet  (Boston,  1866) ;  and  "  Life  of
George  Ticknor,"  with  Mrs.  Ticknor  (Boston,  1873).

HILLEGAS,  Michael,  merchant,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1729 ;  d.  there,  29  Sept.,  1804.  His
father,  Michael  Hillegas,  was  an  early  German
emigrant.  The  son  engaged  in  sugar-refining,  pos-
sessed means  and  was  active  in  municipal  and
national  affairs.  In  June,  1774,  he  became  treas-
urer of  the  committee  of  safety,  of  which  Dr.
Franklin  was  president.  In  1775  he  was  appointed
by  the  Continental  congress  treasurer  of  the
United  States,  with  George  Clymer  as  his  assistant,
and  held  this  office  until  1789.  On  2  April,  1781,
the  general  assembly  of  Pennsylvania  passed  the
following  resolution  :  "  Resolved,  That  Michael
Hillegas  be  requested  and  empowered  to  revise,
compare,  correct,  and  publish  in  one  volume  the
resolves  of  the  committee  of  the  late  province  of
Pennsylvania,  with  their  instructions  to  their
representatives  in  assembly  held  at  Philadelphia,
July  15,  1774 ;  the  proceedings  of  the  provincial
conference  of  committees  held  at  Carpenter's  Hall,
June  18,  1776;  the  Declaration  of  Independence,
made  July  4,  1776;  minutes  of  the  proceedings  of
the  convention  of  the  state  of  Pennsylvania,  July
15, 1776,  with  the  constitution;  the  minutes  of  the
assemblies  of  the  commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania
to  the  end  of  1781.  and  the  articles  of  confedera-
tion." The  volume  was  published  in  1782.

HILLER,  Alfred,  clergyman,  b.  near  Sharon
Springs,  Schoharie  CO.,  N.  Y,  22  April,  1831.  He
received  his  preparatory  training  in  academies  at
Ames  and  Canajoharie,  N.  Y.,  and  was  graduated
at  Hartwick  theological  seminary,  in  Otsego  county,
N.  Y.,  in  1857.  In  the  same  year  he  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Lutheran  church,  and  was  pastor
of  congregations  at  Fayette,  N.  Y..  in  1857-'8,  and
German  Valley,  N.  Y.,  in  1858-'81.  During  a  two-
months'  service  in  the  civil  war,  in  the  spring  of
1865,  he  was  in  the  employ  of  the  U.  S.  Christian
commission,  and  organized  an  army  church  of
seventy-seven  members  at  Edyfield,  near  Nashville,
Tenn.  In  1881  he  was  elected  president  of  Hart-
wick theological  seminary  and  professor  of  syste-
matic theology.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Wittenberg  college  in  1882.

HILLHOUSE,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1687 ;  d.  in  Montville,  Conn.,  in  1740.  He
was  educated  at  the  University  of  Glasgow,  studied
theology  there,  and  was  ordained  by  the  presbytery
of  Londonderry,  Ireland.  It  is  supposed  that  he
joined  the  Presbyterian  emigrants  who  established
themselves  in  New  Hampshire  in  1719.  In  1720
he  published  a  sermon  in  Boston,  and  was  spoken
of  by  Cotton  Mather  as  a  "  worthy  hopeful  young
minister  lately  arrived  in  America."  In  1722  he
was  installed  pastor  in  the  newly  instituted  parish
of  New  London,  Conn. — His  son,  William,  jurist,
b.  in  Montville,  Conn.,  25  Aug.,  1728 ;  d.  there,  12
Jan.,  1816,  received  a  good  education,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  represented  New
London  in  the  legislature  from  1755  till  1785,  and
was  also  made  "  assistant,"  or  member  of  the  coun-
cil, serving  altogether  in  106  semi-annual  legisla-
tures. He  was  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
for  about  forty  years,  a  major  in  the  2d  regiment
of  Connecticut  cavalry  in  the  Revolution,  and  from
1783  till  1786  a  member  of  the  Continental  congress.
At  the  age  of  eighty  he  declined  a  re-election  to
the  council,  and  retired  from  public  life. — Another
son,  James  Abraham,  lawyer,  b.  in  Montville,
Conn.,  in  1730;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1775,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1749,  and  in  1750  was
appointed  tutor  there,  which  post  he  held  till  1756.


He  then  practised  law  successfully  in  New  Haven,
and  in  1772  was  elected  one  of  the  twelve  ••assist-
ants.''— William's  son,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mont-
ville. Conn.,  21  Oct.,  1754 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
29 Dec, 1832, was
graduated  at  Yale  in
1778. He  served  in
the Revolutionary
war,  and  in  1779  was
captain  of  the  Gov-
ernor's  foot  -  guards
when  New  Haven  was
invaded  by  the  Brit-
ish under  Tryon. He
was  a  representative
in the legislature
from  1780  till  1789,
when  he  was  called
to  a  seat  in  the  coun-
cil. He was then
elected  as  a  Federal-
ist to  congress,  where
he  took  an  active  part
in  debates  and  served
in  1791-'5. In  1796
he  entered  the  U.  S.  senate,  having  been  chosen
for  the  unexpired  term  of  Oliver  Ellsworth,  who
had  resigned  his  seat  to  become  chief  justice  in
the  U.  S.  supreme  court. He  was  elected  for  a
full  term  in  1797,  and  again  in  1803  and  1809.
When  Thomas  Jefferson  withdrew  from  the  sen-
ate after  his  election  to  the  presidency,  Mr.  Hill-
house  was appointed president  pro tempore  of
that  body. Although  he  was  a  strong  Federalist,
he  proposed  amendments  to  the  constitution,  in
1808, to  correct  what he  considered  dangerous
tendencies  in  the  system  of  Federal  government.
In  1810  he  resigned  his  seat  to  become  commis-
sioner of  the  school  fund  of  Connecticut,  which
office  he  held  till  1825,  rescuing  the  fund  from
gradual  destruction  and  adding  by  judicious  invest-
ments the  sum  of  $500,000. From  1782  till  his
death  he  was  treasurer  of  Yale,  from  which  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1823. He  published
numerous  speeches. See  "  Sketch  of  the  Life  and
Character  of  Hon.  James  Hillhouse"  (New  Haven,
1860).^James  Abraham,  son  of  the  second  James,
poet,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn.,  26  Sept.,  1789 ;  d.
there,  5  Jan.,  1841,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,
after  which  he  spent  three  years  in  Boston,  prepar-
ing for  a  mercantile  career. He  engaged  in  busi-
ness in  New  York,  and  in  1819  went  to  Europe,
where  he  met  many  distinguished  men. Zachary
Macaulay,  father  of  the  historian,  spoke  of  him
"as  the  most  accomplished  young  man  with  whom
he  was  acquainted." In  1822  he  married  Cornelia,
daughter  of  Isaac  Lawrence,  of  New  York,  and
retired  to  his  country-seat,  "  Sachem's  Wood,"  near
New  Haven,  where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his
life,  devoting  his  attention  to  literature. He  pub-
lished "  The  Judgment,  a  Vision,"  a  poem  delivered
before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Yale  (New
York,  1812) ;  "  Percy's  Masque,"  a  drama  (London,
1819 ;  reprinted,  with  additions,  New  York,  1820) ;
"  Hadad,"  a  sacred  drama  (New  York,  1825);  and
a  collected  edition  of  his  writings,  containing  the
additions  of  "Demetria,"  a  domestic  Italian  tragedy,
written  in  1813 ;  "  Sachem's  Wood,"  a  poem ;  and
several  discourses,  under  the  title  of  "Dramas,
Discourses,  and  other  Pieces  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1839).
— Augustus  Lucas,  another  son  of  the  second
James,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  9  Dec,  1791 ;  d.
in  Paris,  France,  14  March,  1859,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1810. He  was  the  author  of  the  hymr
"  Trembling  before  thine  Awful  Throne."


HILLIARD


HILLS


209


HILLIARD,  Francis,  jurist,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  about  1808 ;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  9  Oct..
1878.  He  was  the  son  of  William  Hilliard,  a  pub-
lisher of  Boston.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1823,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He
became  judge  of  Roxbury  police-court,  commis-
sioner of  insolvency  for  Norfolk  county,  and  served
in  the  state  legislature,  but  abandoned  his  practice,
and  devoted  his  attention  to  preparing  legal  works.
He  published  "  Digest  of  Pickering's  Reports "
(vols.  viii.  to  xiv.,  inclusive,  Boston,  1837 ;  supple-
ment, 1843);  "Law  of  Sales  of  Personal  Property"
(New  York,  1841) ;  "  American  Law  of  Real  Prop-
erty," containing  part  of  Cruise's  digest  (2  vols.,
2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1846;  3d  ed..  New  York,
1841 ;  4th  ed.,  Albany,  1869) ;  "  American  Juris-
prudence "  (2d  ed.,  1848) ;  "  Law  of  Mortgages  of
Real  and  Personal  Property"  (Boston,  1853;  3d
ed.,  1864);  "Treatise  on  the'  Law  of  Vendors  and
Purchasers  of  Real  Property"  (2  vols..  1858;  2d
ed.,  1869);  "Treatise  on  Torts"  (2  vols.,  1859;  2d
ed.!  revised,  1867) ;  "  The  Law  of  Injunctions "
(Philadelphia,  1864;  2d  ed.,  revised,  1869);  and
I  Law  of  New  Trials  and  other  Rehearings  "  (1866).
HILLIARD,  Henry  Washington,  lawyer,  b.
in  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  4  Aug.,  1808.  He  removed
with  his  parents  to  Columbia,  S.  C,  at  an  early
age,  and  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina  college
in  1826.  He  studied  law  and  removed  to  Athens,
Ga.,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829,

and  practised  two
years.  In  1831  he
was  elected  to  a
professorship  in
Alabama  univer-
sity, Tuscaloosa,
but  resigned  in
1834  and  prac-
tised law  success-
fully in  Mont-
gomery. Mean-
while he  was  also
a  lay  preacher
in  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.
In  1838  he  was
elected  to  the  Ala-
bama legislature,
// j, ,f •  and in 1840 he

J77" /r. yy<-^^»~^.  *?&^ was a member

of  the  Harrisburg
Whig  convention.  In  answer  to  a  series  of  articles
upon  the  question  of  the  sub-treasury,  by  Dixon
H.  Lewis,  under  the  signature  of  "  A  Nullifier,"  Mr.
Hilliard  wrote  six  papers  signed  "Junius  Brutus,"
which  were  published  in  a  Whig  journal  of  Mont-
gomery county.  From  1842  till  1844  he  was  charge
d'affaires  in  Belgium.  On  his  return  he  was  elected
to  congress  from  Alabama,  and  served  from  1845
till  1851.  In  1846  he  was  a  regent  of  the  Smith-
sonian institution.  In  congress  he  opposed  the
Wilmot  proviso,  and  advocated  the  compromise
measures  of  1850.  He  was  a  candidate  for  elector
on  the  Fillmore  ticket  in  1856,  and  in  1860  on  the
Bell-andrEverett  ticket,  visiting  Mr.  Everett  in
Boston,  where  he  delivered  an  address  in  Faneuil
hall.  He  opposed  secession  in  1861,  but  after  the
convention  of  Alabama  had  passed  the  ordinance
he  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Confederacy.  He  was
appointed  by  Jefferson  Davis  commissioner  to  Ten-
nessee, and  also  accepted  the  commission  of  briga-
dier-general in  the  provisional  Confederate  army,
for  which  he  raised  3,000  men.  After  the  civil  war
he  resumed  his  law  practice  in  Augusta,  and  sub-
sequently removed  to  Atlanta,  where  he  now  (1887)
vol.  hi. — 14


resides.  In  1876  he  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate
for  congress,  and  he  took  an  active  part  in  the
presidential  canvass  of  1872,  advocating  the  elec-
tion of  Horace  Greeley.  In  1877  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  minister  to  Brazil,  where  he  remained  till
1881.  He  has  given  much  of  his  attention  to  litera-
ture, and  has  published  "  Roman  Nights,"  trans-
lated from  the  Italian  (Philadelphia,  1848) ;
"  Speeches  and  Addresses  "  (New  York,  1855) ;  and
"  De  Vane,  a  Story  of  Plebeians  and  Patricians  "
(New  York,  1865 ;  2d  ed.,  Nashville,  1886).

HILLIARD,  William  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Au-
burn, N.  Y.,  in  1836.  He  studied  art  in  New  York
city,  and,  after  attaining  considerable  proficiency,
painted  landscapes  in  the  west  until  he  was  able  to
go  to  Europe.  He  sketched  in  England  and  Scot-
land for  a  time,  and  then  went  to  Paris,  where  he
studied  with  Lambinet.  After  opening  a  studio
in  New  York  he  removed  to  Boston,  where  he  es-
tablished himself  permanently.  Landscapes  and
marine  views  are  his  specialty.  He  has  exhibited
in  many  of  the  principal  cities  of  the  United  States,
and  has  received  several  medals.  Among  his  best-
known  works  are  views  of  Maine,  of  the  White  and
Franconia  mountains,  and  of  the  Atlantic  coast,
including  "  Campton  Meadows,"  "  Castle  Rock,"
and  "Wind  against  Tide"  (1878):  "Battle-Field
of  Lookout  Mountain  "  and  "  Allatoona  Pass,  Ga."
The  two  last  named  were  especially  popular.

HILLIARD  D'AUBERTEUIL,  Michel  Rene\
French  author,  b.  in  Rennes,  France,  31  Jan.,
1751;  d.  in  Santo  Domingo,  W.  I.,  in  1785.  He
practised  law  in  Santo  Domingo,  and  visited  the
United  States  during  the  Revolutionary  war.  On
his  return  to  France  he  published  "  Considerations
sur  l'etat  present  de  la  colonie  francaise  de  Saint
Domingue,"  which  exposed  official  abuses  and  was
suppressed  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1776).  He  is  said  to
have  been  assassinated  or  executed.  His  principal
works  are :  "  Nouvelles  considerations  sur  Saint
Domingue"  (Paris,  1780);  "  Essais  historiques  et
politiques  sur  les  Anglo-Americains "  (Brussels,
1782);  and  "  Histoire  de  l'administration  du  lord
North,  depuis  1770  jusqu'en  1782,  de  la  guerre  de
l'Amerique  septentrionale  "  (Paris,  1784).

HILLIS,  Darid,  lieutenant-governor  of  Indiana,
b.  in  Washington  county,  Pa.,  in  1789;  d.  in  Jeffer-
son county,  Ind.,  8  July,  1845.  He  went  with  his
parents  to  Bourbon  county,  Ky.,  in  1791,  was  self-
educated,  and  in  1808  removed  to  the  new  settle-
ments in  Jefferson  county,  Ind.,  where  he  engaged
in  farming  and  surveying,  and  served  for  several
years  as  government  surveyor.  Early  in  1812  he
was  active  in  raising  a  company  of  100  men,  and
was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant.  He  was  made
captain  in  1814,  and  in  1815  became  colonel  of
militia.  Soon  after  the  organization  of  the  state
government  in  1816,  he  was  elected  an  associate
judge  of  the  circuit  court,  and  in  1818  was  chosen
to  the  legislature,  serving  by  successive  annual  re-
elections,  with  one  exception,  till  1830.  In  1831
and  1835  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  in
1836-'40  was  lieutenant-governor.  In  1840  he  was
a  commissioner  to  treat  with  the  Indians,  and  from
1841  till  his  death  served  again  in  the  legislature.
Gov.  Hillis  was  one  of  the  most  energetic  and  in-
fluential men  in  Indiana,  and  did  much  to  develop
internal  improvements  in  that  state. —  His  son,
David  B..  was  colonel  of  the  17th  Iowa  regiment
in  the  civil  war,  and  received  the  brevet  of  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.

HILLS,  George,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,  b.
in  Egthorne,  England,  in  1816.  His  father  was  a
rear-admiral  in  the  British  navy.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Durham  university,  ordained  a  priest  in


210


HILLS


HILSON


1840,  and  was  successively  cm-ate  of  North  Shields,
lecturer  and  curate  at  Leeds  parish  church,  and
incumbent  of  Great  Yarmouth.  He  became  canon
of  Norwich  cathedral  in  1850.  and  in  1859  was
made  bishop  of  British  Columbia.

HILLS,  George  Morgan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Auburn,  N.  Y„  10  Oct.,  1825.  In  1839  he  removed
with  his  parents  to  New  York,  and  was  graduated
at  Trinity  in  1847.  He  was  ordained  deacon  by
Bishop  De  Lancey,  became  rector  of  Grace  church,
Lyons,  N.  Y.,  in  1850,  and  next  year  was  ordained
priest.  After  holding  pastorates  in  Watertown
and  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  he  became  in  1870  rector  of
St.  Mary's  church,  Burlington,  N.  J.,  where  he  has
since  remained.  In  1867  he  established  a  mission
among  the  Onondaga  Indians.  In  November,  1870,
he  became  lecturer  on  homiletics  and  pastoral
theology  in  Burlington  college.  The  degree  of
D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Trinity  in  1871.
In  1880  he  founded  the  church  of  St.  Mary-by-the-
Sea,  Point  Pleasant,  N.  J.  He  published  "  Letters
from  Europe  "  (1861) ;  "  The  Wise  Master-Builder,"
commemorative  of  Bishop  De  Lancey  (1865) :  "  A
Step  Between  Us  and  Death " ;  "A  Mother  In
Israel " ;  "  The  Record  of  the  Past  an  Incentive
for  the  Future  "  (1868) ;  "  An  Historical  Sketch  of
St.  Paul's  Church,  Syracuse"  (1870);  "History
of  the  Church  in  Burlington,  N.  J."  (1st  ed.,  1876 ;
2d  ed.,  1885);  "The  Transfer  of  the  Church  from
Colonial  Dependence  to  the  Freedom  of  the  Re-
public" (1876);  "John  Talbot,  the  First  Bishop  in
North  America  "  (1878) ;  "  A  Form  for  the  Admis-
sion of  Choristers  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Missions  of  the
Church  of  England  in  New  Jersey  "  (1882) ;  "  Office
for  Opening  the  Lych-Gate  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Memo-
rial of  Rev.  N.  Pettit "  (1885).

HILLSBOROUGH,  Wills  Hill,  Earl  of,  Brit-
ish statesman,  b.  in  Fairford,  Gloucestershire,
England,  30  May,  1718 ;  d.  7  Oct.,  1793.  He  took
his  seat  in  the  Irish  house  of  peers  in  1743,  in  the
privy  council  in  1754,  was  constituted  first  com-
missioner of  trade  and  plantations  in  1763,  in
1766  joint  postmaster-general,  and  in  1768  nomi-
nated secretary  of  state  for  the  colonies,  which
post  he  resigned  in  1772.  He  was  principal  secre-
tary of  state  for  the  American  department  during
the  Revolution,  and  bore  his  share  of  the  unpopu-
larity that  was  visited  upon  the  administration
on  account  of  the  war.  He  was  made  a  viscount,
and  Earl  of  Harwick  in  1772,  and  was  also  regis-
ter of  the  high  court  of  chancery  in  Ireland.

HILLYER,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sheffield,
Mass.,  6  April,  1763 ;  d.  in  New  York,  28  Aug.,
1840.  He  accompanied  his  father,  who  was  a  sur-
geon in  the  Continental  army  during  most  of  the
Revolutionary  war,  and  was  afterward  graduated
at  Yale  in  1786.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by
the  old  presbytery  of  Suffolk,  L.  I.,  in  1786,  or-
dained pastor  at  Madison,  N.  J.,  in  1789,  and  in
the  summer  of  1801  was  installed  as  pastor  in
Orange,  N.  J.,  where  he  labored  successfully  for
more  than  thirty  years.  He  was  one  of  the  found-
ers and  a  director  of  the  United  foreign  mission-
ary society.  In  the  disruption  of  the  Presbyte-
rian church  in  1837  he  adhered  to  the  new  school.
He  was  a  trustee  of  Princeton  from  1811  till  his
death,  and  from  1812  until  the  division  of  the
general  assembly  one  of  the  directors  of  its  theo-
logical seminary.  In  1818  Alleghany  college  con-
ferred upon  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.

HILLYER,  Junius,  jurist,  b.  in  Wilkes  countv,
Ga.,  23  April,  1807 ;  d.  in  Decatur,  Ga.,  21  June,
1886.  He  was  graduated  at  the  state  university
at  Athens  in  1828,  studied  law  while  in  college,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  a  few  days  after


his  graduation.  He  began  practice  at  Athens.
and  in  1834  was  elected  by  the  legislature  solicitor-
general  of  the  western  judicial  circuit  of  his  state.
In  1841  he  was  elected  judge  of  that  circuit,  which
office  he  retained  for  four  years.  He  was  then
elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  1  Dec,  1851,
till  3  March,  1855.  He  was  solicitor  of  the  U.  S.
treasury  from  1  Dec,  1857,  till  13  Feb.,  1861,  when
he  resigned  on  the  passage  by  Georgia  of  an  ordi-
nance of  secession.  After  this  he  took  no  active
part  in  public  affairs. — His  brother,  John  F.,  b.  25
May.  1805,  organized  Gonzales  (Texas)  college,  of
which  he  was  the  first  president. — Another  brother,
Shaler  Granby,  clergyman,  b.  20  June,  1809,  was
president  and  professor  of  Monroe  (Georgia)  female
college  from  1867  till  1881.

HILLYER,  William  Silliman,  soldier,  b.  in
Henderson,  Ky.,  2  April,  1831 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  12  July,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Ander-
son college,  Ind.,  in  1847,  studied  law,  and  began
practice  at  New  Albany,  Ind.,  afterward  attaining
note  at  the  bar.  In  1855  he  removed  to  St.  Louis,
where  he  became  acquainted  with  Ulysses  S.
Grant,  and  recommended  him  for  the  office  of
county  engineer  of  St.  Louis  county.  In  1861  he
served  for  some  time  in  the  National  army  as  a
private,  and  then  removed  to  New  York,  where  he
practised  law.  Soon  after  Gen.  Grant  was  com-
missioned as  brigadier-general  he  offered  Mr.  Hill-
yer  a  place  on  his  staff,  and  he  served  during  the
Tennessee  and  Vicksburg  campaigns.  On  15  May,
1863,  he  resigned,  owing  to  failing  health,  and  re-
turned to  New  York.  He  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general in  1865,  and  after  the  close  of  the  war
was  appointed  a  revenue-agent  by  President  Grant. J
In  1874  he  was  nominated  as  general  appraiser  in
the  custom-house,  but  after  much  opposition  his
name  was  withdrawn.  Gen.  Hillyer  was  the  last
surviving  member  of  Grant's  original  staff.

HILPRECHT,  Hermann  Vollrat,  Assyri-
ologist,  b.  in  Hohenerxleben,  Anhalt,  Germany,
28  July,  1859.  He  studied  theology,  oriental  lan-
guages, and  law  in  the  University  of  Leipsic,  and
received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  there  in  1883.  After
spending  two  years  in  Switzerland  for  his  health
he  was  appointed  by  the  Bavarian  government  ad-  .
junct  professor  of  Old  Testament  theology  in  the
University  of  Erlangen  in  1885,  and  in  1886  came
to  Philadelphia  as  linguistic  editor  of  the  "  Sun-
day-School Times."  Shortly  after  his  arrival  he
was  also  elected  professor  of  Assyrian  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania.  In  1882  he  spent  two
months  in  the  British  museum  studying  cuneiform
literature.  He  is  known  among  Assyriologists  by
his  "  Freibrief  Nebukadnezars  I."  (Leipsic,  1883).
In  the  spring  of  1887  he  delivered,  in  the  chapel  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  a  course  of  lec-
tures on  "  The  Family  and  Civil  Life  of  the  Egyp-
tians," "  The  Most  Flourishing  Period  of  Egyptian
Literature,"  and  "  Egypt  in  the  Time  of  Israel's
Sojourn."  His  other  literary  works  consist  of  con-
tributions to  Luthardt's  "  Theologisches  Literatur-
blatt  "  (Leipsic),  and  to  other  periodicals.

HILSON,  Thomas,  actor,  b.  in  England  in
1784  :  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  23  July,  1834.  All  we
know  of  his  early  life  is  that  he  had  been  a  stu-
dent of  painting  in  water-colors,  and  that  his  true
name  was  Hill.  Hilson  first  appeared  in  this
country  at  the  Park  theatre  in  New  York  city,  in
1809,  as  Walter  in  "  The  Children  of  the  Wood."
He  continued  a  member  of  the  company,  with
brief  interruptions,  until  August,  1833,  perform-
ing a  wide  range  of  characters  in  comedy,  tragedy,
and  opera-bouffe.  Paul  Pry,  Touchstone,  and
Tony  Lumpkin  were  among  his  most  successful


I


HIMES


HINCKS


211


renderings.  Dunlap  says  "  his  forte  was  low  com-
edy," but  he  sometimes  lowered  it  to  vulgarity. —
His  wife,  Ellen  Augusta,  actress,  b.  in  England
in  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  2  April,  1837,  was  the
daughter  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  John  Johnson,  who  for
many  years  performed  in  the  New  York  theatres.
At  five  years  of  age  she  first  appeared  on  the
stage,  reciting  in  costume  the  ballad  of  "  Little
ped  Kiding-Hood,"and  in  1817  she  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  company  of  the  Park  theatre.  In  Au-
*gust,  1825,  she  was  married.  Mrs.  Hilson  remained
at  the  Park  theatre  until  the  death  of  her  mother
in  1830,  when  she  suffered  from  melancholy,  and
for  a  time  entirely  withdrew  from  public  notice.
During  the  four  years  succeeding  she  made  occa-
sional appearances  in  company  with  her  husband.
A  year  after  the  death  of  the  latter,  Mrs.  Hil-
son renewed  her  connection  with  the  Park  thea-
tre ;  but  she  was  so  greatly  shattered  in  health
and  broken  in  spirits  as  to  have  lost  all  attraction.
In  her  best  days  she  was  an  accomplished  singer
and  harpist. Her  dramatic  ability  was  moderate.

HIMES,  Charles  Francis,  educator,  b.  in  Lan-
caster county,  Pa.,  2  June.  1838.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dickinson  college  in  1855,  and  subsequently
studied  chemistry  under  Liebig  in  the  University  of
Giessen,  Germany.  Later  he  taught  in  the  Wyoming
conference  academy,  and  then  in  the  Baltimore  fe-
male college.  In  1865  he  was  appointed  professor
of  chemistry  and  physics  in  Dickinson,  which  chair
he  held  for  twenty  years,  when  he  ceased  to  teach
chemistry,  but  continued  to  give  instruction  in
physics.  He  has  also  been  secretary  of  the  board
of  trustees  and  of  the  college  faculty  since  1868.
Prof.  Himes  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and
has  published  "Tables  for  Qualitative  Analysis,"
translated  and  edited  (Philadelphia,  1866) ;  "  Leaf-
Prints,  or  Glimpses  at  Photographv"  (1868);
"Flame  Reactions,"  translated  (1868");  "Total
Eclipse  of  the  Sun.  7  August,  1869  "  (Gettysburg.
1869);  "The  Stereoscope"  (Philadelphia,"  1872) ;
"  Stereograph- Book  "  (1876);  "  Historical  Sketch
of  Dickinson  College"  (Harrisburg,  1879);  and
"  Lecture  on  Actinism,"  which  was  read  at  the
International  electrical  exhibition  held  in  Phila-
delphia during  1884  (1884),  and  he  has  also  con-
tributed papers  to  scientific  publications.

HINCKLEY,  Isabella,  singer,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  4  Sept.,  1840 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  July,
1862.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  she  sang  in  the  choir
of  the  church  of  "  The  Holy  Innocents."  She
studied  vocal  music  under  George  William  War-
ren, and  in  Florence,  Italy,  in  1857-60,  under
Romani.  She  made  her  first  appearance  in  "  Nor-
ma" on  24  Dec,  1859,  at  the  Grand  opera-house  in
Amsterdam,  where  she  became  a  favorite.  She
then  went  to  Brussels  and  Frankfort,  and  in  No-
vember, 1860,  returned  to  the  United  States,  where
she  appeared  on  26  Jan.,  1861,  in  "  Lucia  di  Lam-
mermoor,"  supported  by  Brignoli  and  Susini.  She
appeared  in  Boston  and  Philadelphia  until  the
civil  war  checked  all  interest  in  opera,  and  in  the
autumn  of  1861  made  a  concert  tour  in  the  west,
also  appearing  in  "  La  Juive  "  in  New  York  in  the
following  spring.  In  1861  she  married  Augustino
Susini.  Her  repertory  consisted  of  thirty-two
operas,  including  "  Le  Prophete,"  "Don  Giovanni,"
"  Lucretia  Borgia,"  etc.,  and  several  oratorios.

HINCKLEY,  Thomas,  governor  of  Plymouth,
b._in  England  about  1618 ;  d.  in  Barnstable,  Mass.,
28  April,  1706.  He  came  to  Scituate  with  his  par-
ents in  1635,  and  in  1639  removed  to  Barnstable,
where  he  soon  took  an  active  part  in  the  affairs  of
Plymouth  colony.  He  was  a  deputy  in  1645,  a
representative  in  1647,  and  a  magistrate  and  as-


sistant from  1658  till  1680.  He  was  deputy  gov-
ernor in  1680,  and  governor  from  1681,  except
during  the  administration  of  Edmund  Andros,  un-
til the  union  with  the  Massachusetts  colony  in
1692.  He  was  also  a  commissioner  on  the  central
board  of  the  two  colonies  from  1673  till  1692,  when
he  became  a  councillor.  Among  the  manuscripts
of  the  old  South  church  library,  which  in  1866  were
deposited  in  the  Boston  public  library,  are  three
volumes  of  papers  collected  by  Gov.  Hincklev.

HINCKLEY,  Thomas  Hewes,  artist,  b.  in  Mil-
ton, Mass.,  in  1813.  He  was  apprenticed  while  a
lad  to  a  trade  in  Philadelphia,  but  obtained  some
little  instruction  in  art  at  an  evening-school,  dur-
ing one  winter,  which  was  the  only  training  he
ever  received.  At  eighteen  years  of  age  he  went
to  Boston,  and  two  years  later  associated  himself
with  a  sign  and  fancy  painter,  in  order  to  learn  the
use  of  colors.  He  then  attempted  portraits  and
landscapes,  and,  having  in  1843  made  a  successful
painting  of  dogs,  determined  to  devote  himself  to
animal  painting,  and  returned  in  1845  to  Milton,
Mass.,  where  he  opened  a  studio.  In  1851  he  went
to  Europe,  studied  the  works  of  Sir  Edward  Land-
seer  and  other  English  and  Flemish  masters  of
animal  painting,  and  in  1858  painted  two  pictures
of  dogs  and  game,  which  were  exhibited  at  the
Royal  academy  of  that  year,  and  excited  favorable
comment.  Hinckley  rarely  exhibits  his  works  in
public,  but  his  pictures  are  popular  and  numerous.

HINCKS,  Edward  Winslow,  soldier,  b.  in
Bucksport,  Hancock  co.,  Me.,  30  May,  1830.  He
is  descended  from  Chief-Justice  John  Hincks,  of
New  Hampshire,  who  was  the  first  of  the  name  to
arrive  in  this  country.  Edward  was  educated  in
the  common  schools  of  his  native  town,  removed
to  Bangor  in  1845.  and  from  then  till  1849  was  a
printer  in  the  Bangor  "  Whig  and  Courier  "  office.
In  the  latter  year  lie  removed  to  Boston,  and  was  a
member  of  the  state  legislature  in  1855.  On  18
Dec,  1860,  he  wrote  to  Maj.  Robert  Anderson,
tendering  a  volunteer  force  to  aid  in  the  defence
of  Fort  Moultrie.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  8th  Massachusetts  regiment  on  17  April,
1861,  and  while  on  the  march  to  Washington  com-
manded a  party,  on  21  April,  1860,  that  saved  the
frigate  "  Constitution  "  at  Annapolis,  and  repaired
the  bridge  and  railway  at  Annapolis  junction.  He
was  commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  2d  regular
cavalry  on  26  April,  promoted  colonel  of  volunteers,
16  May,  1861,  and  commanded  the  19th  Massa-
chusetts regiment  and  a  brigade  in  Sedgwick's
division  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  from  Septem-
ber, 1861,  till  September,  1862,  when  he  was  disabled
for  six  months  by  wounds.  He  became  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  was  on
court-martial  and  recruiting  duty  in  1863-'4,  com-
manded the  camp  of  prisoners-of-war  at  Point
Lookout,  Md.,  in  March  and  April,  1864,  and  a
division  of  the  Army  of  the  James  during  the  field
operations  of  that  year.  He  commanded  the  draft
rendezvous  on  Hart's  island,  N.  Y.,  from  October,
1864,  till  January,  1865,  and  from  that  time  till  the
close  of  the  war  was  chief  mustering-officer  for  the
United  States  in  New  York  city.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,
made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  40th  U.  S.  infantry
on  28  July,  1866,  and  in  1866-7  was  governor  of
the  National  soldiers'  home.  He  was  retired  with
the  rank  of  colonel  on  15  Dec,  1870,  on  account  of
wounds.  From  1872  till  1880  he  was  deputy  gov-
ernor and  treasurer  of  the  National  soldiers'  homes
at  Hampton,  Va.,  and  Milwaukee,  Wis.

HINCKS,  William,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Cork, Ireland,  in 1801 ; d.  in  Toronto in  July,


212


HINCKS


HINDMAN


1871.  His  father,  Dr.  Thomas  D.  Hincks,  was  pro-
fessor of  oriental  languages  in  the  Royal  Belfast
institution.  William  was  the  first  professor  of
natural  history  in  Queen's  college,  Cork,  and  from
1853  till  his  death  held  the  same  professorship
in  the  University  of  Toronto. — His  brother,  Sir
Francis,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Cork,  Ireland,
14  Dec,  1807;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  18  Aug.,
1885,  was  educated  at  Fermoy  and  at  the  Royal
Belfast  institution,  and  after  serving  an  appren-
ticeship of  seven  years
to  a  Belfast  firm  of
shippers,  became  jun-
ior partner  in  a  Liv-
erpool firm,  and  in
1830  sailed  as  super-
cargo to  the  West  In-
dies. He  returned  to
Belfast  in  1831,  and  in
the  year  following  set-
tled in  Canada  and
opened  a  warehouse  in
York  (now  Toronto).
He  soon  afterward  be-
came secretary  of  a
mutual  insurance  com-
pany, and  cashier  in  a
bank,  and  was  also  an
accountant  of  the  com-
mission that  was  ap-
pointed to  investigate
the  charges  of  fraud
preferred  by  William  Lyon  Mackenzie  in  connection
with  the  Welland  canal.  He  founded  the  Toronto
"  Examiner,"  a  reform  journal,  in  1839.  edited  it  for
several  years,  and  in  1844  established  the  Montreal
"  Pilot,"  also  a  Liberal  newspaper,  and  was  its  prin-
cipal political  writer  for  many  years.  In  March,
1841,  he  was  elected  for  Oxford  to  the  Canada  assem-
bly, and  represented  it  until  the  general  election  of
1844,  when  he  was  defeated.  He  was  returned  for
the  same  constituency  in  1851,  and  on  his  election
for  South  Oxford  and  Renfrew,  in  1854,  decided  to
represent  the  latter  county,  and  served  until  1855.
In  October,  1809,  he  was  elected  for  North  Renfrew
in  the  commons,  and  at  the  close  of  parliament
was  returned  for  Vancouver,  which  he  represented
until  his  retirement  from  political  life  in  1874.  He
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  and  in-
spector-general of  Canada  from  June,  1842,  to
November,  1843,  when  he  retired  from  the  govern-
ment, with  Messrs.  Lafontaine  and  Baldwin,  his
political  chiefs.  He  again  held  the  same  office
in  the  Lafontaine  -  Baldwin  cabinet  from  March,
1848,  till  October,  1851,  and  from  the  latter  date
till  September,  1854,  in  the  Hincks-Morin  admin-
istration, of  which  he  was  premier.  He  visited
Washington  on  several  occasions  to  confer  with
the  British  minister  on  the  subject  of  commercial
intercourse  between  Canada  and  the  United  States.
The  Earl  of  Elgin,  governor-general  of  Canada,
selected  Mr.  Hincks  to  accompany  him  as  a  repre-
sentative of  Canada  when  he  negotiated  the  reci-
procity treaty  in  1854.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
maritime  provinces  in  1852.  in  relation  to  the
intercolonial  railway,  and  the  same  year  was  a
delegate  to  Great  Britain  to  urge  the  repeal  of  the
clergy  reserve  act,  and  to  secure  from  the  imperial
government  a  guarantee  for  the  construction  of
the  intercolonial  railway.  During  his  visit  he  made
arrangements  that  resulted  in  the  construction  of
the  Grand  Trunk  railway  of  Canada.  In  1855  he
was  appointed  governor  of  Barbadoes  and  the
Windward  islands,  which  office  he  held  till  1862,
being  the  first  colonial  statesman  to  receive  a  colo-


nial governorship.  Gov.  Hincks  provoked  angr*
controversy  by  his  maintaining  that  free  labor  was
cheaper  than  slave  labor,  and  that  the  value  of
Barbadian  property  had  been  increased  by  the
abolition  of  slavery.  In  1862  he  became  governor
of  British  Guiana,  and  so  continued  till  186!).  He
was  created  a  companion  of  the  order  of  the  Bath
in  1862  and  a  knight-commander  of  the  order  of
St.  Michael  and  St.  George  in  1869.  Sir  Ennuis
was  pensioned  by  the  imperial  government,  and,
upon  returning  to  Canada  in  1869,  entered  Sir
John  A.  Macdonald's  cabinet  as  minister  of  finance,
which  office  he  resigned  in  1873.  In  1874  he  be-
came president  of  the  City  bank  of  Montreal,  whieh,
under  its  changed  name  of  the  Consolidated  bank,
failed  and  involved  him  in  serious  pecuniary  loss
and  a  legal  prosecution,  which,  however,  resulted
in  his  complete  vindication.  In  1878  he  repre-
sented the  Dominion  on  the  joint  commission,
composed  of  Chief-Justice  Harrison,  Sir  Edward
Thornton,  and  himself,  which  determined  the
northwestern  boundary  of  Ontario.  For  some
years  before  his  death  he  was  editor-in-chief  of
the  "  Journal  of  Commerce  "  in  Montreal.  In  ad-
dition to  various  pamphlets,  Sir  Francis  wrote
"  Reminiscences  of  My  Public  Life  "  (1884).

HIND,  Henry  Youle,  Canadian  geologist,  b.
in  Nottingham,  England,  in  June,  1823.  He  was
educated  at  Leipsic  and  at  Cambridge,  came  to
this  country  in  1846,  and  after  travelling  through
Mexico  and  the  southern  states  went  to  Canada  in
1847.  He  was  appointed  mathematical  master  and
lecturer  on  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy  at
the  provincial  normal  school  for  Upper  Canada
and  in  1851  became  professor  of  chemistry  and
geology  in  Trinity  college,  Toronto.  In  1857  he
received  the  appointment  of  geologist  to  the
River  exploring  expedition,  and  in  1858  the  charg
of  the  exploration  of  the  country  between  the  Red
river  and  the  Saskatchewan  was  entrusted  to  hit
by  the  Canadian  government.  The  publication
his  reports  on  these  expeditions  was  ordered  by  ft
Canadian  legislature  and  also  by  the  British  par-
liament. In  1861  he  had  charge  of  an  expedition
for  the  exploration  of  Labrador,  in  1864  he  wa
appointed  director  of  the  geological  survey  of  New
Brunswick,  and  he  afterward  became  professor  of
chemistry  and  natural  history  in  King's  college,
Nova  Scotia.  He  edited  the  "  Canadian  Journal "
in  1852-5,  and  in  1862  the  "  Journal  of  the  Board
of  Arts  and  Manufactures  for  Upper  Canada."
In  1860  he  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  geo-
graphical society.  In  addition  to  numerous  essi
and  articles  he  is  the  author  of  "  Northwest  Terri-
tory; Reports  of  Progress,  with  a  Report  on  t  lie
Assiniboine  and  Saskatchewan  Exploring  Ex-
pedition" (Toronto,  1859);  "Explorations  in  the
Interior  of  the  Labrador  Peninsula"  (Londor
1863) ;  and  "  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Geolog
of  New  Brunswick  "  (Fredericton,  1865).

HINDMAN,  Thomas  Carmichael,  soldier
b.  in  Tennessee  in  November,  1818 ;  d.  in  Helena,
Ark.,  28  Sept.,  1868.  After  receiving  a  common-
school  education,  he  studied  law,  and  removed  to
Mississippi,  where  he  practised  his  profession.  He
served  throughout  the  Mexican  war  as  lieutenant
in  a  Mississippi  regiment,  and  in  1858  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  till  1861.  Up
had  been  re-elected  as  a  Secessionist,  but  entered
the  Confederate  army  with  the  appointment  of
brigadier  -  general.  He  first  served  under  Gen.
Simon  Buckner  in  Kentucky,  was  in  command  at
Memphis,  lost  the  battle  of  Newtonia,  and  having
collected  his  forces  at  Van  Buren,  Ark.,  crosses
Arkansas  river  with  2,500  men  and  was  defeated


.Oil,

agy

i.T.


HINDMAN


HINMAN


213


at  Prairie  Grove  by  Gen.  James  G.  Blunt  and  Gen.
Francis  J.  Herron.  After  the  battle  of  Shiloh,
where  he  was  promoted  major-general,  he  was
transferred  to  Arkansas,  and  commanded  a  brigade
under  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk.  After  the  war  he  re-
moved to  the  city  of  Mexico,  but  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1867,  and  settled  in  Helena,  Ark.
Gen.  Hindman's  military  career  had  been  criticised
for  its  severity  in  enforcing  conscription  and
maintaining  discipline,  and  he  was  assassinated  by
one  of  his  former  soldiers  in  revenge  for  some  act
of  discipline  during  the  war.

HINDMAN,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Dor-
chester county,  Md.,  1  April,  1743:  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  19  Jan.,  1822.  His  father,  Jacob,  a
wealthy  landholder  of  English  descent,  was  high
sheriff  of  Talbot  county,  Md.,  and  a  vestryman  of
the  parish.  William  was  designed  for  the  bar.  en-
tered at  the  Inns  of  Court,  London,  where  he  com-
pleted his  legal  studies,  and,  returning  to  the
United  States,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1765.
The  next  year,  on  the  death  of  his  father,  he  inher-
ited a  large  landed  property,  and  from  the  begin-
ning of  the  Revolutionary  struggle  threw  his
means  and  influence  on  the  patriot  side.  In  1775
he  was  secretary  of  the  Talbot  county  "  committee
of  observation,"  and  was  selected  to  carry  out  the
resolves  of  the  council  of  safety,  which  was  then
the  supreme  power  in  Maryland.  He  was  also  a
member  of  the  State  convention  of  that  year,  and
treasurer  of  the  eastern  shore  of  Maryland  in
1775-'7.  He  was  elected  to  the  first  senate  of
Maryland  in  1777,  re-elected  in  1781,  and  served
until  1784,  when  he  became  a  member  of  the  Con-
tinental congress  till  1788.  In  1789-'92  he  was
one  of  the  executive  council.  On  the  resignation
of  Joshua  Seney,  Mr.  Hindman  was  elected  to
complete  his  unexpired  term  in  the  second  con-
gress. He  served  from  1793  till  1799,  was  defeat-
ed as  a  Federalist  in  the  canvass  for  the  next  ses-
sion, and  returned  to  the  state  legislature.  In  De-
cember, 1800,  he  was  elected  by  that  body  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  James
Lloyd,  who  had  resigned.  He  served  until  Novem-
ber, 1801,  and  then,  retiring  from  public  life,  en-
gttged  in  agricultural  pursuits.  A  memoir  of  his
fe  and  services  was  published  bv  Samuel  A.  Harri-
son. M.  D.  (Baltimore,  1880).

HINDS,  James,  congressman,  b.  in  Hebron,
N.  Y.,  5  Dec.,  1833 :  d.  in  Monroe,  Ark.,  22  Oct.,
1868.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Cincinnati  law-
college  in  1856,  and  then  removed  to  Minnesota,
where  he  practised  his  profession.  He  was  district
attorney  and  a  presiding  judge  till  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  when  he  enlisted  on  the  U.  S.
government  expedition  against  the  Indian  tribes
on  the  western  frontier.  After  the  war  he  settled
in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  was  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention,  and  a  commissioner  to
codify  the  laws  of  the  state.  He  was  elected  to
fongress  and  served  from  June,  1868,  till  he  was
inated  by  a  political  opponent  while  can-
vassing the  state  for  re-election.

HINKLEY,  Holmes,  inventor,  b.  in  Hallowell,
Me.,  24  June,  1793;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  Feb.,
1866.  His  parents  were  poor,  and  at  fourteen
fears  of  age  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  carpenter.
He  went  to  Boston  in  1815.  became  a  maker  of
patterns  for  machinery  in  1823,  and  in  1826  estab-
lished a  machine-shop  on  Boston  Neck,  where.
Without  instruction,  he  began  to  build  steam-en-
gines. He  built  the  third  stationary  engine  that
was  produced  in  Massachusetts,  and  in  1840  began
to  construct  locomotives  on  a  new  and  ingenious
plan,  that  soon  made  his  name  favorably  known.


He  established  in  1848  the  Boston  locomotive-
works,  which  failed  after  his  retirement  from  active
control  of  them  in  1857,  but  during  the  civil  war  he
retrieved  his  fortune  by  making  shot  and  shell  for
the  government,  and  in  1864  was  made  president
of  a  new  company,  the  "  Hinkley  and  Williams
works."  Among  Mr.  Hinkley's  inventions  is  a
locomotive  boiler,  which  is  favorably  mentioned
for  its  economy  of  fuel.  He  was  probably  the  first
man  in  New  England  to  build  a  locomotive.

HINMAN,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Woodbury,
Conn.,  in  1720;  d.  in  Southbury,  Conn.,  22  March,
1810.  He  served  in  the  French  war  in  1751  as
quartermaster  of  a  troop  of  horse  in  Gen.  Roger
Wolcott's  command,  was  commissioned  captain  in
1755  in  Col.  Elizur  Goodrich's  regiment,  defended
Crown  Point  and  its  vicinity,  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  1767,  and  in  1771  colonel  of  the
13th  regiment  of  horse.  He  was  commissioned
captain  of  the  4th  continental  regiment  in  May,
1775,  and  served  at  Ticonderoga  and  various  other
engagements  until  failing  health  compelled  his
retirement  in  1777.  He  represented  Woodbury,
Conn.,  in  the  legislature  during  twenty  sessions,
and  after  the  incorporation  of  Southbury  was  its
delegate  for  eight  sessions.  He  was  also  a  member
of  the  State  convention  that  ratified  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States. — His  nephew,  Royal
Ralph,  scholar,  b.  in  Southbury,  Conn.,  5  June,
1785;  d.  in  New  York  city.  15  Oct.,  1868,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1820,  settled  in  Southbury  in
the  practice  of  law,  served  four  sessions  in  the
legislature,  and  was  secretary  of  state  from  1835
till  1842.  During  this  period  he  was  twice  chair-
man of  the  committee  to  revise  the  laws  of  Con-
necticut, and  in  1844  he  was  appointed  collector  of
customs  at  New  Haven.  His  latter  years  were
spent  in  New  York  city,  in  the  study  of  the  history
and  antiquities  of  Connecticut,  especially  in  tracing
the  genealogies  of  the  original  and  early  settlers
in  Hartford,  New  Haven,  and  Saybrook  colonies.
He  published  '*  Official  Letters  between  the  Kings
and  Queens  of  England  and  the  Earlv  Governors
of  Connecticut  in  1635-'79"  (Hartford,  1836):
"  Historical  Recollections  of  Connecticut  in  the
American  Revolution  *'  (New  York.  1842) ;  "  Cata-
logue of  the  First  Puritan  Settlers  of  the  Colonv
of  Connecticut"  (Hartford,  1852-8);  "A  Family
Record  of  the  Descendants  of  Sergeant  Edward
Hinman"  (1856);  and  several  volumes  of  statutes
and  public  and  private  acts. — Benjamin's  grandson,
Joel,  jurist,  b.  in  Southbury,  Conn.,  in  1802 ;  d.  in
Cheshire,  Conn.,  21  Feb.,  1870,  received  an  aca-
demic education,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  New
Haven  in  1821,  and  for  several  years  practised  law,
attaining  to  no  special  eminence  until  his  election
in  1842  to  the  bench  of  the  superior  court.  From
this  event  he  steadily  rose  in  public  esteem,  and
his  opinions  were  regarded  as  models  of  clearness
and  common  sense.  From  1851  till  1861  he  was
an  associate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
state,  becoming  chief  justice  at  the  latter  date.
His  judicial  opinions  extend  through  twenty  vol-
umes of  Connecticut  reports.

HINMAN,  Clarke  Titns,  educator,  b.  in  Kort-
right,  Delaware  co.,  N.  Y.,  3  Aug.,  1817:  d.  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  21  Oct.,  1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan
university  in  1840,  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  from
1839  till  1846  was  principal  of  Newbury  seminary,
Vt.  He  then  removed  to  Albion,  Mich.,  became
principal  of  the  Wesleyan  seminary,  procured  an
endowment  for  this  institution,  and  left  it  in  1853
in  a  prosperous  condition.  From  this  time  until
his  death  he  was  president  of  the  Northwestern
Wesleyan  university  at  Evansville,  111.


214


HINMAN


HINOYOSSA


HINMAN,  Klishii.  naval  officer,  b.  in  Stoning-
ton,  Conn.,  9  March,  1734;  d.  there,  29  Aug.,  1807.
He  went  to  sea  at  fourteen  years  of  age,  was  a  cap-
tain at  nineteen/and  for  many  years  voyaged  to
Europe  and  the  West  Indies.  In  the  naval  engage-
ment of  6  April,  1776,  with  the  British  ship  "  Glas-
gow," 20  guns,  he  commanded  the  "  Cabot,"  under
Com.  EseK  Hopkins,  and  was  severely  wounded.
In  August,  1776,  he  abandoned  the  merchant  ser-
vice and  was  appointed  one  of  the  first  captains  in
the  U.  S.  navy,  successively  commanding  the
"Marquis  de  La  Fayette,"  20  guns;  the  "Dean,"
30  guns ;  the  sloop  "  Providence  " ;  and  the  "  Al-
fred," 32  guns.  In  March,  1778,  the  latter  was
captured,  and  Hinman  taken  to  England  and  im-
prisoned. He  escaped  to  Prance,  returned  to
America,  and  was  honorably  acquitted  for  the  loss
of  his  ship.  In  1794  President  Adams  tendered
him  the  command  of  the  "  Constitution,"  but  his
advanced  age  compelled  him  to  decline.  From
1798  till  1802  he  was  engaged  in  the  revenue  ser-
vice. In  the  destruction  of  New  London,  Conn.,
in  September,  1781,  by  the  British,  under  Benedict
Arnold,  he  lost  all  his  property.

HINOJOSA,  Pedro  de  (e-no-cho'-sah),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Trujillo  late  in  the  15th  century;  d.
in  Chuquisaca,  Bolivia,  6  May,  1553.  He  came  to
Peru  with  Hernando  Pizarro  on  the  latter's  return
from  Spain  in  1534,  and  in  the  following  year  was
sent  to  Cuzco  as  lieutenant-governor.  When  Alma-
gro,  on  his  return  from  Chili,  took  Cuzco,  Hino-
josa was  made  prisoner,  together  with  Gonzalo  Pi-
zarro, but  managed  to  escape  and  fought  under
Pizarro's  banner  in  the  battle  of  Salinas,  where
Almagro  was  vanquished,  26  April,  1538.  Li  recom-
pense he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  new  city
of  La  Plata  or  Chuquisaca,  and  after  the  assassina-
tion of  Francisco  Pizarro  he  sided  with  the  royal
president,  Vaca  de  Castro,  against  Almagro's  son,
and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Chupas,  16  Sept.,
1542,  where  young  Almagro's  power  was  finally
destroyed.  When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  prepared  to  re-
sist the  authority  of  the  viceroy,  Nunez  Vela,  Hino-
josa  was  appointed  captain  of  his  guard,  and  in
1545  admiral  of  his  fleet.  With  eleven  vessels  he
appeared  before  Panama  and  by  skilful  negotia-
tions obtained  possession  of  the  city,  occupying
also  in  1546  Nombre  de  Dios,  on  the  other  side  of
the  isthmus,  thus  making  Gonzalo  master  of  the
road  to  the  South  sea.  When  the  royal  commis-
sioner, Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  arrived  in  Panama  in
August,  1546,  he  won  over  Hinojosa  by  the  prom-
ise of  rich  rewards  and  by  exciting  his  fears,  and
when  Gonzalo  obstinately  refused  any  pacific  ar-
rangement, the  former  went  over  to  the  royal
cause  with  the  whole  fleet  on  19  Nov.,  1546.  He
accompanied  Gasca  to  Peru  in  his  campaign  against
Pizarro,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Sacsahuana,
9  April,  1548,  where  the  latter  was  defeated  and
taken  prisoner.  In  recompense,  Hinojosa  received
the  Indian  commandery  that  had  formerly  belonged
to  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  the  grant  of  a  silver-mine,
thus  having  a  revenue  of  nearly  $200,000.  After
the  departure  of  Gasca,  Hinojosa  was  appointed  in
1551  by  the  new  viceroy,  Antonio  de  Mendoza,
governor  and  chief  justice  of  the  province  of  Char-
cas,  and  when  a  revolution  began  in  upper  Peru
he  did  his  best  to  quell  it,  although  the  insurgents
had  secretly  counted  upon  him,  on  account  of  his
expressions  of  discontent  with  some  measures  that
had  been  enacted  by  the  viceroy.  Exasperated  by
what  they  considered  his  treachery,  Sebastian  del
Castillo,  with  seven  other  conspirators,  entered  his
house  early  on  6  May  and  murdered  him.  Not-
withstanding his  greed  for  riches,  Hinojosa  was  of


a  kind  and  just  temperament,  but  weak  in  charac-
ter, and  allowed  himself  to  be  guided  by  traitors.

HINOYOSSA,  Alexander  d'  (e-no-yo'-sah),
director  of  a  Dutch  colony,  lived  in  the  17th  cen-
tury; d.  in  Holland.  On  16  Aug.,  1656,  the  sale
of  a  tract  of  land  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Dela-
ware was  ratified  by  the  states-general,  and  desig-
nated Nieuer  Amstel.  The  government  was  in-
trusted to  forty  commissioners,  who  were  to  reside
in  New  Amsterdam,  and  Jacob  Aldrichs  was  ap-
pointed director.  In  that  year  three  small  vessels
were  sent  from  Holland,  with  40  soldiers  and  150
emigrants,  under  command  of  Capt.  Martin  Kry-
gier  and  Lieut.  Alexander  d'Hinoyossa,  to  establish
a  settlement.  The  governors  of  the  city  and  com-
pany were  under  the  general  supervision  of  Direct-
or Stuyvesant.  In  1658  great  distress  prevailed,
and,  in  addition  to  the  unsettled  state  of  affairs,
Aldrichs  says :  "  Continued  sickness  curbed  us  so
far  down  that  all  labor  in  the  fields  and  agriculture
were  abandoned."  Emigrants  also  arrived  without
supplies,  which  increased  the  trouble.  Not  satisfied
with  the  profits  of  its  investment,  the  Amsterdam
company  made  exacting  demands  upon  the  settlers,
who,  being  oppressed  by  sickness  and  various  afflic-
tions, became  discontented,  and  many  fled  to  the
English  colonies  of  Maryland.  Toward  the  end  of
1659  Aldrichs  died,  having  had  the  administration  of
the  government  for  more  than  two  years.  It  appears
from  the  complaints  made  against  him  that  he  was
much  to  blame  for  the  many  evils  that  the  colonists
suffered.  Before  his  death  he  recommended  the
appointment  of  Alexander  D'Hinoyossa  as  his  suc-
cessor, which  was  approved  and  confirmed  by  the
commissioners.  Hinoyossa's  administration  was
less  turbulent  than  that  of  his  predecessor,  but
conflicts  on  the  question  of  authority  arose  between
himself,  who  represented  the  city  colony,  and  Beek-
man,  who  had  charge  of  the  revenues  of  the  West
India  company  from  the  settlements  in  Delaware.
They  made  many  complaints  to  Holland,  for
Hinoyossa  refused  to  recognize  the  authority  of
Stuyvesant,  asserting  that  he  was  only  accountable
to  the  commissioners  of  the  city  of  Amsterdam.
The  West  India  company  insisted  upon  a  collection
of  the  revenues,  while  the  city  colony  endeavored
to  evade  all  taxation.  After  negotiating  to  transfer
the  Nieuer  Amstel  colony  to  the  West  India  com-
pany, without  success,  the  commissioners  of  the
city  obtained  a  loan  which  gave  a  new  aspect  to
affairs.  Hinoyossa  was  successful  in  maintain-
ing peace  in  his  little  state,  and  made  such  regula-
tions with  regard  to  settlement  and  trade  that
many  of  the  emigrants  who  had  gone  to  Maryland
returned.  Negro  slaves  had  been  introduced  in
the  Dutch  colonies  at  the  time  of  their  establish-
ment, and  Hinoyossa  addressed  to  the  commis-
sioners a  request  that  a  large  number  of  slave!
should  be  sent  to  till  the  valley  of  the  Delaware.
Wearied  with  the  constant  disputes  regarding  au-
thority, and  in  the  interest  of  the  colonial  pros-
perity, Hinoyossa  visited  Holland  in  1663  and
petitioned  for  the  entire  government  of  the  settle-
ments of  the  Delaware.  He  was  successful  in  this,
and  on  his  return  Stuyvesant  presented  him  with  a
formal  transfer  of  his  authority.  The  Swedish  West
India  company  was  not  satisfied  to  surrender  its  pos-
sessions on  the  Delaware,  and  demanded  restoration ;
but  the  Dutch  company  would  not  yield,  and  in
1664  the  Swedes  took  measures  to  recover  their
lands.  An  expedition  was  fitted  out  and  set  sail.
but  it  was  obliged  to  return,  and  the  project  was
abandoned.  Hinoyossa  held  undivided  authority
from  the  time  of  the  transfer  of  the  Delaware
colony  until  the  conquest  of  the  New  Netherlands


HINRICHS


HITCHCOCK


215


by  the  English,  when  he  returned  to  Holland  and
entered  the  army  of  the  States.  He  served  in  the
war  between  the  republic  and  Louis  XIV.

HINRICHS,  Gustavns  Detlef,  chemist,  b.  in
Lunden,  Holstein,  Germany,  2  Dec,  1836.  He
was  educated  at  the  polytechnic  school  and  at  the
university  in  Copenhagen,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1860.  Soon  after  the  completion  of  his  stud-
ies he  came  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in
Iowa  City,  Iowa.  In  1863  he  was  made  professor
of  physical  sciences  in  the  Iowa  state  university,
and  professor  of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in  the
medical  department,  and  in  1868  he  became  chem-
ist to  the  geological  survey  of  the  state.  The
Iowa  weather  service  was  organized  by  Prof.  Hin-
richs  in  1875,  and  was  the  first  state  weather  ser-
vice in  the  United  States.  These  college  appoint-
ments he  held  until  1885,  when  by  a  combination
of  religious  and  political  influences  he  was  driven
from  his  chairs.  He  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  the  Missouri  medical  college  in  1872,  and  is
a  member  of  scientific  societies  both  in  the  United
States  and  Europe.  Prof.  Hinrichs  has  contrib-
uted a  large  number  of  papers  in  various  branches
of  physics  which  have  appeared  in  the  scientific
journals.  During  1870  he  edited  "  The  American
Scientific  Mont  hly,"  and  he  has  published  in  book-
form  "  The  Elements  of  Physics "  (Davenport,
1870) ;  "  The  Principles  of  Pure  Crvstallographv  "
(1871) ;  "  The  Elements  of  Chemistry  and  Miner-
alogy demonstrated  by  the  Student's  own  Experi-
ments "  (1871) ;  "  The  Principles  of  Chemistry  and
Molecular  Mechanics"  (1874);  and  "First  Course
in  Qualitative  Analysis  "  (1874).

HINSDALE,  Burke  Aaron,  educator,  b.  in
Wadsworth,  Ohio,  31  March.  1837.  He  was  educated
at  Hiram  college,  where  he  was  a  pupil  of  James
A.  Garfield,  and  entering  the  ministry  of  the
Christian  church,  was  pastor  successively  in  Solon
and  Cleveland,  Ohio.  In  1869-'70  he  was  profes-
sor of  history  and  English  literature  in  Hiram  col-
lege, succeeding  to  its  presidency  in  1870,  and
holding  office  until  1882.  He  was  then  superin-
tendent of  public  schools  in  Cleveland  until  1886.
He  has  published  "  Genuineness  and  Authenticity
of  the  Gospels  "(Cincinnati,  1870);  "Jewish  Chris-
tian Church  "  (1878) :  "  Ecclesiastical  Traditions  "
(1870);  "Republican  Text  -  Book  "  (New  York.
1880);  "Garfield  and  Education  "  (Boston,  1881);

I  Schools  and  Studies  "  (1884) ;  and  edited  "  The
Life  and  Works  of  James  A.  Garfield  "  (1882-'5).

HINTON,  John  Howard,  author,  b.  in  Oxford,
England,  23  March,  1791 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  England,

II  Dec.  1873.  He  first  preached  in  Reading,  after-
ward became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in  Lon-
don, and  was  distinguished  as  an  independent  and
original  preacher,  and  a  zealous  advocate  for  lib-
erty in  religion  and  politics.  Besides  several  theo-
logical works,  he  published  with  his  brother,  Isaac
Taylor,  "  History  and  Topographv  of  the  United
States"  (Boston,  1834:  2d  ed.,  edited  bv  Rev.  John
O.  Choules,  2  vols.,  New  York,  1853).— His  brother,
Isaac  Taylor,  clergyman,  b.  in  Oxford,  England,
4  July,  1799;  d.  in' New  Orleans,  La.,  28  Aug.,
1847,  was  educated  by  his  father,  who  was  a  teacher
in  a  boys'  school,  in  1814  he  was  apprenticed  to
the  "  Clarendon  Press  "as  a  printer,  and  in  1820
established  himself  in  business  in  London  on  his
own  account,  editing  and  publishing  the  "  Sun-
day-School Magazine."  He  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1821,  removed  to  London,  and,  while  continuing
his  business,  became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church.
While  engaged  with  his  brother  in  preparing
"The  History  and  Topography  of  the  United
States," he  decided to emigrate  to the  United


States,  and  arrived  in  Philadelphia  in  1822.  He
accepted  a  call  to  the  1st  Baptist  church  of  Rich-
mond, Va.,  where  his  views  on  slavery  made  him
unpopular,  and  he  therefore  resigned  and  removed
to  Chicago  in  1835,  where  he  supplemented  his
small  salary  by  teaching.  While  officiating  there
as  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church,  he  delivered
a  course  of  lectures  on  the  prophecies,  which  ex-
cited favorable  comment.  The  slavery  question
again  divided  his  congregation,  and  he  went  to
St.  Louis  in  1841,  spent  three  years  there,  and  in
1844  accepted  a  call  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  died
in  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  of  1847.  He  pub-
lished "'History  of  Baptism"  (1841).  and  "Lec-
tures on  the  Prophecies''  (Philadelphia.  1843).

HIRSCH,  Samnel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Thalfin-
gen,  Prussia,  8  June,  1815 ;  d.  in  Chicago.  111.,  14
May,  1889.  He  received  his  training  at  Metz,  and
attended  the  universities  of  Berlin  and  Leipsic
He  was  appointed  chief  rabbi  of  Luxemburg  in
1843,  and  in  1866  was  called  to  Philadelphia  as
rabbi  of  the  Congregation  Kenesseth  Israel.  He
was  a  very  active  promoter  of  radical  reform  among
American  Jews,  and  took  a  chief  part  in  rabbinical
conferences.  He  was  an  industrious  contributor  to
the  early  volumes  of  the  "Jewish  Times"  (1869-
'78),  but  published  nothing  in  book-form  after  he
came  to  the  United  States.  His  principal  works
were  issued  in  Germany,  among  them  his  "  What
is  Judaism  ?  "  (1838) ;  a  collection  of  sermons  (1841) ;
and  "  Religious  Philosophv  of  the  Jews  "  (1843).

HIRST.  Henrv  Beck," poet,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  23  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  there.  30  March,  1874.  He
studied  law.  but  was  not  admitted  to  the  bar  till
1843.  his  studies  having  been  interrupted  by  mer-
cantile pursuits.  His  first  poems  were  published
in  "  Graham's  Magazine."  He  afterward  wrote  "  A
Poetical  Dictionary,  or  Popular  Terms  illustrated
in  Rhyme"  (Lenox,  Mass.);  "The  Coming  of  the
Mammoth,  and  other  Poems  "  (Boston.  1845) ;  "  En-
dvmion,  a  Tale  of  Greece  "  (1848) ;  and  "  The  Pen-
ance of  Roland  "  (1849).

HISCOCK,  Frank,  senator,  b.  in  Pompey,  N.  Y.,
6  Sept.,  1834.  He  received  an  academic  education,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855.
He  began  practice  in  Onondaga  county,  N.  Y.,  was
district  attorney  in  18C0-'3,  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1867,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  in  1878,  serv-
ing from  1879  till  1886.  when  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  New  York.  While  a  member  of
congress  he  served  on  many  important  commit-
tees, was  the  last  Republican  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  appropriations,  and  a  minority  member
of  the  committee  on  wavs  and  means.

HITCHCOCK,  Alfred,  surgeon,  b.  in  West-
minster. Vt.,  17  Oct.,  1813;  d.  in  Fitchburg,  Mass..
30  March,  1874.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips  Ando-
ver  academy,  was  graduated  in  the  medical  depart-
ment at  Dartmouth  in  1838.  and  at  that  of  Jefferson
college,  Pa.,  in  1845,  settling  first  in  Ashley  and
afterward  in  Fitchburg,  Mass..  in  the  practice  of  his
profession.  He  was  frequently  a  member  of  the  leg-
islature between  1847  and  1855.  was  one  of  the  ex-
ecutive council  of  Massachusetts  in  1862-'4,  special
agent  of  the  state  to  superintend  the  care  of  the
wounded  during  the  civil  war.  and  in  1862  super-
intendent of  the  transportation  of  the  wounded.
Dr.  Hitchcock  was  the  second  surgeon  on  record
to  perform  the  operation  of  cesophagotomy,  and
was  one  of  the  first  to  operate  for  strangulated
hernia.  He  designed  a  stretcher,  a  surgical  chair,
and  a  splint,  made  two  important  changes  in  sur-
gical instruments,  and  discovered  two  medical
preparations. Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of


216


HITCHCOCK


HITCHCOCK


A.  M.  in  1844.  Besides  several  monographs  and
addresses,  he  published  "Christianity  and  Medical
Science"  (Boston,  1867). — His  son,  James  Ripley
Wellinan,  author,  b.  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.,  3  July,
1857,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1877,  was  after-
ward a  special  student  there  in  fine  arts  and  phi-
losophy, and  for  one  year  attended  lectures  at  the
New  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons.
Having  adopted  literature  as  a  profession,  he
settled  in  New  York,  and  is  a  constant  contributor
to  magazines  and  newspapers,  especially  as  an  art
critic.  His  writings  include  "  The  Western  Art
Movement "  (New  York,  1885) :  "A  Study  of  George
Jenness,"  with  a  catalogue  of  the  Jenness  exhibi-
tion (1885);  "Etching  in  America"  (1887);  and
the  text  accompanying  "  Some  Modern  Etchings  "
(1884);  "Recent  American  Etchings"  (1885);
"Notable  American  Etchings"  (1886);  and  "Rep-
resentative American  Etchings  "  (1887).

HITCHCOCK,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Rhode
Island  in  1741 ;  d.  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,  in  Janu-
ary, 1777.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1761,
practised  law  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  was  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  militia.  In  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  enlisted  in  the  Continental  army,
and  commanded  a  Rhode  Island  regiment  at  the
siege  of  Boston,  and  a  brigade  at  Princeton,  al-
though he  was  far  advanced  in  the  disease  from
which  he  afterward  died.  On  the  battle-field  of
the  latter  engagement  Gen.  Washington  took  him
by  the  hand,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  army
thanked  him  for  his  gallant  service.

HITCHCOCK,  David,  poet.  b.  in  Bethlehem,
Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  in  1773 ;  d.  after  1832.  His
father  was  a  shoemaker,  and  his  education  was
limited.  After  his  father's  death,  David  worked
at  farming  with  one  of  the  select-men  of  his  town,
and  was  then  apprenticed  to  a  shoemaker.  At
twenty-six  years  of  age  he  married,  settled  at  West
Stockbridge,  Mass.,  and  reported  himself  as  "  poor
and  laborious,  but  enjoying  peace  and  content-
ment." The  last  accounts  of  him  are  that  he  was
living  in  Great  Barrington,  Mass.,  in  1832.  His
principal  poem,  "  The  Shade  of  Plato  "  (Boston,
1806),  is  written  with  ease  and  smoothness,  and
closes  with  expostulations  on  the  revolutionary
principles  in  vogue  at  the  beginning  of  the  cen-
tury. His  other  writings  are  "  The  Social  Moni-
tor "  (Stockbridge,  1812),  and  "  Christ  not  the  Min-
ister of  Sin,"  a  controversy  (Hartford,  1832).

HITCHCOCK,  Edward,  geologist,  b.  in  Deer-
field,  Mass.,  24  May,  1793 ;  d.  in  Amherst,  27  Feb.,
1864.  He  spent  his  boyhood  in  working  on  a  farm,
with  an  occasional  turn  at  carpentry  and  survey-
ing, acquiring  such  education  as  he  could  by  study
at  night.  It  was  his  intention  to  enter  Harvard,
but  impaired  eyesight  and  illness  prevented.  In
1815  he  became  principal  of  the  Deerfield  academy,
where  he  remained  for  three  years,  and  during  this
period  published  a  poem  of  five  hundred  lines  en-
titled "  The  Downfall  of  Buonaparte  "  (1815).  He
also  acquired  some  reputation  by  a  controversy
with  Edmund  M.  Blunt,  the  publisher  of  the
"  American  Nautical  Almanac."  A  reward  of  ten
dollars  was  offered  for  the  discovery  of  an  error  in
the  work,  and  Mr.  Hitchcock  responded  with  a  list
of  fifty-seven.  As  the  publisher  ignored  this  com-
munication, the  list  was  published  in  the  "  Ameri-
can Monthly  Magazine."  A  year  later  the  "  Alma-
nac "  appeared  somewhat  revised,  but,  as  no  allu-
sion was  made  to  Mr.  Hitchcock's  corrections,  he
called  the  attention  of  the  editor  to  about  thirty-
five  errors  in  the  improved  edition.  From  1814
till  1818  he  calculated  and  published  the  "  Coun-
try Almanac." Meanwhile  he  had  chosen  his  wife


PtU^$?&U<^£.


from  among  his  assistant  teachers,  and  it  was
largely  through  her  influence  that  his  thoughts
were  turned  to  religion.  In  1818  he  determined
to  become  a  minister,  and  entered  Yale  theologi-
cal seminary,  where
he  was  graduated  in
1820.  He  was  or-
dained in  1821  as
pastor  of  the  Con-
gregational church
in  Conway,  Mass.,
where  he  continued
till  October,  1825.
While  holding  this
pastorate  he  made  a
scientific  survey  of
the  western  counties
of  Massachusetts,  and
later  studied  chemis-
try and  kindred  top-
ics under  the  elder
Silliman,  in  his  la-
boratory at  Yale.  In
1825  he  became  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  and  natural  history  at  Amherst,
continuing  as  such  for  twenty  years,  giving  lec-
tures and  instruction  in  chemistry,  botany,  miner-
alogy, geology,  zoology,  anatomy,  physiology,  natu-
ral theology,  and  sometimes  natural  philosophy
and  asti'onomy.  In  1845  he  was  elevated  to  the
presidency  of  the  college  with  the  professorship  of
natural  theology  and  geology.  These  offices  he
filled  till  1854,  when  he  resigned  the  former,  but
retained  his  chair  until  his  death.  The  college  at
the  time  of  his  accession  to  the  presidency  was
struggling  for  existence,  but  Dr.  Hitchcock  pro-
cured new  buildings,  apparatus,  and  funds,  to  the
amount  of  $100,000,  doubled  the  number  of  stu-
dents, and  established  th*e  institution  on  a  solid
pecuniary  as  well  as  literary  and  scientific  basis.
He  also  conducted  the  worship  in  the  Amher-i  col-
lege church  during  his  presidency.  In  1830  he  was
appointed  state  geologist  of  Massachusetts,  and  he
held  this  place  until  1844,  when  he  completed  the
first  survey  of  an  entire  state  that  was  ever  con-
ducted under  the  authority  of  a  government.  In
this  connection  he  published  a  report  on  the  "  Eco-
nomic Geology  "  (Amherst,  1832),  and  later,  in  four
parts,  a  "  Report  on  the  Geology,  Mineralogy,  Bot-
any, and  Zo51ogy  of  Massachusetts "  (Amherst,
1833).  He  was  commissioned  to  re-examine  the
geology  of  the  state  in  1837,  and  subsequently
issued  his  "  Re-Examination  of  the  Economical
Geology  of  Massachusetts  "(Boston,  1838),  followed
by  a  final  report  on  the  "  Geology  of  Massachu-
setts," in  four  parts  (Amherst,  1841).  President
Hitchcock  was  among  the  first  to  study  the  fossil
footprints  of  the  Connecticut  valley,  and  to  pub-
lish a  scientific  explanation  of  them.  Specimens
of  nearly  all  of  the  known  varieties  were  collected
by  him,  and  subsequently  presented  to  Amherst  col-
lege. He  prepared  the  "  Ichnology  of  New  Eng-
land "  (Boston,  1858),  and  "  Supplement  to  the  "  Ich-
nology of  New  England  "  (1865),  which  were  pub-
lished by  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  In  1836
he  was  appointed  geologist  of  New  York,  and  was
assigned  to  the  work  of  the  first  district,  but  he
soon  resigned.  From  1857  till  1861  he  was  state
geologist  of  Vermont,  publishing  annual  reports  in
1857-9,  and  "  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Vermont,
Descriptive,  Theoretical,  Economical,  and  Sctno-
graphical  "  (2  vols.,  Claremont,  1861),  in  the  prepa-
ration of  which  he  was  assisted  by  his  two  sons  and
Albert  D.  Hager.  For  several  years  he  was  a
member  of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  agricul


HITCHCOCK


HITCHCOCK


217


ture,  in  1850  was  commissioned  by  the  state  of
Massachusetts  to  examine  the  agricultural  schools
of  Europe,  and  in  1851  published  his  report  on
that  subject.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Yale  in  1818,  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in
1840.  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Middlebury  in  1846.
President  Hitchcock  was  active  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  American  association  of  geologists  and
naturalists,  was  its  first  president  in  1840,  and  in
1863  was  named  by  congress  as  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  His
literary  work  was  very  great.  Of  his  larger  works
besides  those  previously  mentioned,  the  most  im-
portant are  "  Dyspepsia  Forestalled  and  Resisted  "
(Amherst,  1830) :  "  Elementary  Geologv  "  (New
York,  1840 ;  London,  1854) ;  "  History  of  a  Zoo-
logical Temperance  Convention,  held  in  Central
Africa  in  1847  "  (Northampton,  1850) ;  "  Religious
Lectures  on  Peculiar  Phenomena  of  the  Four  Sea-
sons "  (Amherst,  1850) :  "  Religion  of  Geology  and
its  Connected  Sciences "  (Boston,  1851) ;  "  The
Power  of  Christian  Benevolence  illustrated  in  the
Life  and  Labors  of  Mary  Lyon "  (Northampton,
1852) ;  "  Religious  Truth  illustrated  from  Science "
(Boston,  1857);  and  "Reminiscences  of  Amherst
College "  (Northampton,  1863),  which  is  largely
autobiographical,  and  gives  a  complete  bibliog-
raphy of  his  works,  including  the  titles  of  some
26  volumes,  35  pamphlets  of  sermons  and  addresses.
94  papers  in  scientific  and  literary  journals,  and  80
newspaper  articles,  making  in  all  over  8,500  pages.
— His  son.  Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Amherst,
Mass.,  23  May,  1828,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in
1849,  and  at  the  Harvard  medical  school  in  1853.
Afterward,  until  1861.  he  taught  chemistry  and
natural  history  in  Williston  seminary,  where  he
had  been  fitted  for  college.  He  then  became  pro-
fessor of  hygiene  and  physical  education  in  Am-
herst, which  chair  he  still  (1887)  retains.  Dr.
Hitchcock  was  associated  with  his  father  in  the
geological  work  connected  with  the  state  survey  of
Vermont,  and  aided  in  the  preparation  of  the  "  Re-
port on  the  Geology  of  Vermont "  (Claremont,
1861).  For  some  time  he  has  been  connected  with
the  Massachusetts  state  board  of  health,  lunacy.
and  charity.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies.
and  has  contributed  papers  to  their  proceedings.
Besides  various  pamphlets,  he  is  the  principal  au-
thor of  "  Anatomy  and  Physiology  "  (New  York,
1852). — Another  son,  Charles  Henry,  geologist,  b.
in  Amherst,  Mass.,  23  Aug..  1836,  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1856,  after  which  he  spent  a  year  in
the  Yale  theological  seminary,  and  then  from  1859
till  1861  in  the  Andover  "theological  seminary,
being  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Norfolk  associ-
ation in  1861.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  assistant
geologist  on  the  survey  of  Vermont,  and,  in  connec-
tion with  other  members  of  the  survey,  prepared  a
"  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Vermont "  (2  vols.,
Claremont,  1861).  He  then  became  director  of  the
Maine  geological  survey,  and  published  two  re-
ports on  the  "  Natural  History  and  Geology  of  the
State  of  Maine  "  (Augusta,  1861  and  1862).  Mean-
while he  delivered  the  lectures  on  zoology  in  Am-
herst from  1858  till  1864,  after  which  he  estab-
lished himself  as  a  mining  geologist  in  New  York,
and  then  spent  a  year  in  study  in  the  Royal  school
of  mines  in  London.  In  1866  he  became  a  non-
resident professor  of  mineralogy  and  geology  in  La-
fayette, holding  that  office  until  1870,  andin  1869
was  called  to  the  chair  of  geology  and  mineralogy
in  Dartmouth.  He  became  state  geologist  of  New
Hampshire  in  1868,  and  ten  years  later  brought
the  geological  survey  to  a  successful  termination.
During his  administration he published  annual


reports  of  progress  from  1869  till  1872,  and  also
four  magnificent  royal  octavo  volumes  of  "  The
Geology  of  New  Hampshire  "  (Concord,  1874,  1877,
and  1878),  with  an  "  Atlas "  of  seventeen  sheets
(1878).  During  the  winter  of  1870-1  he  estab-
lished a  meteorological  station  on  Mount  Washing-
ton, which  has  since  been  used  by  the  U.  S.  signal-
service  officials.  He  has  paid  special  attention  to
the  study  of  the  fossil  tracks  in  the  Connecticut
valley,  and  has  published  several  valuable  memoirs
on  the  subject.  In  1869  he  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  from  Lafayette  college,  and  he  is  a  member
of  several  scientific  societies,  both  in  the  United
States  and  Europe.  In  1883  he  was  vice-president
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  and  delivered  his  address  before  the  sec-
tion on  geology  and  geography.  Prof.  Hitchcock
has  prepared  important  geological  maps  of  the
United  States,  which  are  accepted  as  authoritative
and  have  appeared  in  the  government  publica-
tions, notably  in  the  "  Report  of  the  Ninth  Census  "
and  in  Dr.  Rossiter  W.  Raymond's  "  Mineral  Re-
sources of  the  United  States"  (1873).  and  in  1881
he  published  an  improved  map  based  on  the  1879
edition  of  the  centennial  map  of  the  U.  S.  land-
office.  Prof.  Hitchcock  has  been  a  large  contribu-
tor to  scientific  literature,  and  the  titles  of  his
papers  number  about  one  hundred  and  fifty.  Be-
sides the  reports  mentioned,  he  has  published,  with
Edward  Hitchcock,  "  Elementary  Geology  "  (New
York,  1860) ;  "  Mount  Washington  in  Winter  "  (in
part.  Boston.  1871) :  and  articles  in  cvclopanlias.

HITCHCOCK,  Enos,  clergyman,  'b.  in  Spring-
field, Mass.,  7  March.  1744;  d.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  27  Feb..  1803.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1767,  and  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Congregational  church,  1  May,  1771,  as  colleague
pastor  of  the  2d  church  of  Beverly,  Mass.  He
became  a  chaplain  in  the  Revolutionary  army  in
1780,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  in  1783  took
a  charge  in  Providence,  R.  I.  He  bequeathed
$2,500  to  the  support  of  the  ministry  of  his  soci-
ety, and  was  distinguished  as  a  preacher  and  a
promoter  of  education.  He  published  "A  Trea-
tise on  Education"  (Boston,  1790);  "Catechetical
Instructions  and  Forms  of  Devotion  for  Children
and  Youth"  (1798);  and  "Sermons,  with  an  Es-
sav  on  the  Lord's  Supper  "(1793-1800).

HITCHCOCK,  Ethan  Allen,  soldier,  b.  in
Vergennes,  Vt,  18  May,  1798;  d.  in  Hancock,
Ga..  5  Aug.,  1870.  His  father  was  a  circuit  judge
during  Washington's  administration,  and  his
mother  was  a  daughter  of  Gen.  Ethan  Allen.
The  son  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1817,  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  in  1818.
adjutant  in  1819,  and  captain  in  1824.  In  1824-7
he  was  assistant  instructor  of  military  tactics,  and
in  1829-'33  commandant  of  cadets  at  West  Point.
For  the  next  ten  years  he  was  on  frontier  duty,
served  in  the  Seminole  war,  was  acting  inspector-
general  in  Gen.  Edmund  P.  Gaines's  campaign  of
1836,  was  transferred  to  recruiting  service,  and
afterward  to  Indian  duty,  where  his  administra-
tion as  disbursing  agent  was  of  great  value  in
protecting  the  Indians  against  swindlers.  He  was
promoted  major  of  the  8th  infantry  in  1838,  be-
came lieutenant-colonel  in  1842,  and  during  the
Mexican  war  was  engaged  in  all  the  important
battles,  serving  a  part  of  the  time  as  inspector-
general  on  Gen.  Winfield  Scott's  staff,  and  re-
ceiving the  brevet  of  colonel  for  gallantry  at
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  that  of  brigadier-
general  for  Molino  del  Rey.  In  1851  he  was
promoted  colonel  of  the  2d  infantry,  and  in
1851 -'4  commanded  the Pacific military divis-


218


HITCHCOCK


HITCHCOCK


ion.  In  October,  1855,  he  resigned  his  commission
in  consequence  of  the  refusal  of  Jefferson  Davis,
secretary  of  war,  to  confirm  a  leave  of  absence
that  had  been  granted  him  by  Gen.  Scott,  and  re-
sided in  St.  Louis  until  1861,  devoting  himself  to
literary  pursuits.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  re-entered  the  army,  was  made  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  and  stationed  in  Washington,
serving  on  the  commission  for  exchange  of  pris-
oners and  that  for  revising  the  military  code.  He
was  the  warm  personal  friend  and  the  military
adviser  of  President  Lincoln.  Gen.  Hitchcock
was  a  disciple  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  and  at-
tempted to  prove  in  his  works  that  a  subtle  and
elevated  theology  is  taught  in  the  hermetical  sys-
tem of  philosophy.  He  published  "  Remarks  on
Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists "  (Boston,  1857) ;
" Swedenborg  a  Hermetic  Philosopher"  (New
York,  1858) ;  "  Christ  the  Spirit,"  in  which  he  at-
tempted to  show  that  the  gospels  were  symbolic
books,  written  by  members  of  a  Jewish  secret
society  (1860) ;  "  The  Sonnets  of  Shakespeare "
(1865) ;  "  Spenser's '  Colin  Clout '  Explained  "  (1865) ;
and  "  Notes  on  the  Vita  Nuova  of  Dante  "  (1866).

HITCHCOCK,  Peter,  jurist,  b.  in  Cheshire,
Conn.,  19  Oct.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Painesville,  Ohio,  11
May,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1801,
admitted  to  the  bar  at  Cheshire,  Conn.,  in  1804,
and  in  the  spring  of  1806  removed  to  Geauga
county,  Ohio,  settled  on  a  farm,  and  for  several
years  divided  his  time  between  clearing  the  wil-
derness, teaching,  and  practising  his  profession.
He  was  elected  to  the  Ohio  legislature  in  1810,
served  in  the  state  senate  in  1812— '16,  and  was  its
president  for  one  term.  In  1816  he  was  elected
to  congress,  and  before  the  expiration  of  his  term
was  appointed  by  the  legislature  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Ohio,  was  re-elected  for  three  suc-
cessive terms,  and  retired  in  1852,  after  a  judicial
service  of  twenty-eight  years,  during  part  of
which  he  had  been  chief  justice.  In  1850  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention.
Throughout  his  career  he  was  a  generous  bene-
factor of  benevolent  enterprises.

HITCHCOCK,  Phineas  Warrener,  senator,
b.  in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1831 ;  d.  in
Omaha,  Neb.,  10  July,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at
Williams  in  1855,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  settled  in  Omaha,  Neb.,  in  1857.  He
was  a  member  of  the  National  Republican  conven-
tion that  nominated  Lincoln  for  president  in  1860.
In  1861  lie  was  appointed  marshal  of  the  terri-
tory, holding  office  until  his  election  as  delegate
to  congress,  as  a  Republican,  in  1864.  He  was  a
member  of  the  national  committee  appointed  to
accompany  the  remains  of  President  Lincoln  to
Illinois.  On  the  organization  of  Nebraska  as  a
state  in  March,  1867,  he  was  appointed  surveyor-
general,  held  office  two  years,  and  in  1870  was
elected  to  the  United  States  senate,  serving  till
1877,  and,  failing  of  re-election,  retired  to  private
life.  Mr.  Hitchcock  was  the  author  of  the  timber-,
culture  laws,  which  have  done  so  much  to  put
forest-trees  on  western  prairies.

HITCHCOCK,  Robert  Bradley,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Cheshire,  Conn.,  25  Sept.,  1803;  d.  in  New
York  city,  24  March,  1888.  He  was  appointed
midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1825,  promoted
lieutenant  in  1835,  commander  in  1855,  captain  in
1861,  and  commodore  in  1862.  He  commanded
the  steam  sloop  "Susquehanna"  in  1862-'3,  and
was  senior  officer  of  the  blockading  fleet  off  Mobile.
He  was  on  ordnance  duty  in  1864-'5,  was  com-
mandant of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in  1866,  and
was  retired  from  the  service  in  1867.


$.M/c~4,.


HITCHCOCK,  Roswell  D wight,  educator,  b.
in  East  Machias,  Me.,  15  Aug.,  1817;  d.  in  Som-
erset, Mass.,  16  June,  1887.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1836,  and,  after  a  year  or  more  spent
in  teaching,  entered  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1838.  He  was  a
tutor  at  Amherst
from  1839  till  1842,
preached  for  a  year
at  Waterville,  Me.,
and  on  19  Nov.,
1845,  was  ordained
pastorofthe  1st  Con-
gregational church
of  Exeter,  N.  II.
Soon  after  this  he
spent  a  year  in  Ger-
many, studying  at
the  universities  of
Halle  and  Berlin.
In  1852  Dr.  Hitch-
cock resigned  his
pastorate  to  accept
the  Collins  profes-
sorship of  natural
and  revealed  relig-
ion in  Bowdoin,  and  three  years  plater  he  was
called  to  the  professorship  of  church  history  in
Union  theological  seminary,  New  York  city.  He
visited  Italy  and  Greece  in  1866,  and  Egypt,  Sinai,
and  Palestine  in  1869.  In  1871  he  was  elected
president  of  the  American  Palestine  exploration
society,  and  in  1880  president  of  Union  theological
seminary,  still  continuing  his  lectures.  Those  on
the  "  Life  of  Christ "  and  on  "  Apostolic  Church
History  "  were  made  extremely  interesting  from  his
personal  acquaintance  with  the  Holy  Land.  He  also
proved  himself,  while  president,  to  be  an  efficient
man  of  business,  and  assured  the  success  of  the
seminary  from  a  financial  point  of  view.  Undi
his  administration  land  was  purchased  in  the  upper
part  of  New  York  city,  and  through  his  efforts
new  buildings  were  erected  which  were  dedicated
on  9  Dec,  1884.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Bowdoin,  and  from  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh in  1885,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams
in  1873,  and  from  Harvard  in  1886.  In  1880  Dr.
Hitchcock  was  elected  vice-president  of  the  Ameri-
can geographical  society.  He  was  also  a  trustee
of  Amherst  college  from  1869  until  his  death.  He
published  numerous  orations,  addresses,  and  ser-
mons, and  contributed  many  articles  to  the  relig-
ious press.  From  1863  till  1870  he  was  one  of  the
editors  of  the  "American  Theological  Review."
He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Edward  Robinson  "
(New  York,  1863) ;  "  Complete  Analysis  of  the  Bi-
ble "  (1869) ;  "  Hymns  and  Songs  of  Praise,"  with
Dr.  Philip  Scha'ff  and  Dr.  Zachary  Eddy  (1874);
"  Hymns  and  Songs  for  Social  and  Sabbath  Wor-
ship" (1875);  "Socialism"  (1879);  and  "Carmina
Sanctorum,"  with  Dr.  Zachary  Eddy  and  Rev.
Lewis  W.  Mudge  (1885).  He  translated  and  edited,
with  Dr.  Francis  Brown,  "The  Teaching  of  the
Twelve  Apostles"  (1884;  revised  ed.,  1885);  and
soon  after  the  publication  of  the  revised  New  T
tament,  in  1881,  he  prepared  a  volume  giving  th
American  revisers'  preferences  in  the  text  and
those  of  the  English  committee  in  an  appendix.

HITCHCOCK,  Samuel  Austin,  benefactor,
b.  in  Brimfield,  Mass.,  in  1784 ;  d.  there,  24  Nov.,
1873.  He  was  a  poor  boy,  and  from  small  begin-
nings amassed  a  fortune  of  $3,000,000.  Through-
out his  career  he  was  a  generous  contributor  to
public  enterprises  and  charities,  his  benefactions
reaching  the  amount of $650,000. His  gifts  to


the
,nd

es-
;he


HITZ


HOADLEY


219


benevolent  enterprises  include  an  endowment  of
$80,000  to  the  Hitchcock  free  high-school  of  Brim-
field,  Mass.,  $175,000  to  Amherst  college,  $120,000
to  Andover,  Mass.,  theological  seminary,  $50,000
to  Illinois  college,  Jacksonville.  111..  $8,000  to  Ta-
bor college,  Iowa,  $40,000  to  the  Congregational
Home  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  $5,000  as  a  fund  to
the  Congregational  church  in  Brimfield.

HITZ,  John,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Switzerland  about
1820 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  27  Jan.,  1864.  He
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1831,  and  repre-
sented Switzerland  as  consul-general  from  1853  till
his  death.  At  one  time  he  held  an  important  place
in  the  IT.  S.  arsenal,  where  he  made  the  composi-
tion for  the  national  standard  of  weights  and
measures.  He  was  also  employed  by  different
mining  companies  as  a  mineralogist.  He  was  a
member  of  the  German  relief  association,  and
spent  much  of  his  time  in  the  hospitals.

H  JORN,  Oscar  (yorn),  Swedish  naturalist,  b.  in
Bagnildstorp,  Sweden,  in  1741 :  d.  in  Paris  in
1792.  He  was  a  preceptor  in  the  family  of  the
Duke  of  Mirepois,  and,  owing  to  the  protection  of
that  nobleman,  obtained  from  Louis  XVI.  in  1776
a  mission  to  South  America  to  study  the  flora  of
that  country.  He  explored  for  ten  years  the  vast
regions  included  between  the  river  Amazon  and
the  river  Plate  amid  dangers  of  all  kinds,  suffer-
ing great  hardships  and  sometimes  persecution
from  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  authorities.  Al-
though he  was  kept  a  prisoner  during  1 780-'2  by
the  Guarani  Indians,  he  formed  an  herbarium  of
1,100  specimens,  and,  returning  to  Paris  in  1776,

{aiblished  "  Les  legumineuses  arborescentes  de
'Amerique  du  Sud,"  a  work  which  caused  a  sensa-
tion in  scientific  circles  as  the  first  of  that  kind
ever  published  in  Europe  (Paris,  1787);  a  "  Dic-
tionnaire  raisonne  de  l'histoire  naturelle  de  l'Ame-
rique  du  Sud  "(1789);  "Choix  de  memoires  pre-
sentes  a  l'Academie  des  sciences  sur  divers  objets
de  l'histoire  naturelle  "  (Paris,  1791) ;  and  "  Dix  ans
dans  1' Amerique  du  Sud  "  (3  vols..  1790).  The  her-
barium of  Hjorn  forms  a  part  of  the  collection  of
the  Museum  of  natural  history  of  Paris.

HOADLEY,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  31  July,  1826.  His  father  was  at  one  time
mayor  of  New  Haven,  and  at  another  of  Cleve-
land, Ohio ;  and  his  grandfather,  who  was  a  cap-
tain in  the  Revolutionary  war,  was  afterward  elect-
ed twenty-six  times  to  the  Connecticut  legislature.
He  was  educated  in  Cleveland,  whither  the  family
had  removed  in  1830,  and  at  Western  Reserve  col-
lege, where  he  was  graduated  in  1844.  He  studied
at  Harvard  law-school,  and  in  August,  1847,  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1849  he  became  a  partner
in  the  law-firm  of  Chase  and  Ball,  and  in  1851
was  elected  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Cin-
sinnati,  and  was  city  solicitor  in  1855.  In  1858
he  succeeded  Judge  Gholson  on  the  bench  of  the
new  superior  court.  His  friend  and  partner,  Gov.
Salmon  P.  Chase,  offered  him  a  seat  upon  the
supreme  court  bench,  which  he  declined,  as  he  did
also  in  1862  a  similar  offer  made  by  Gov.  Todd.
1866  he  resigned  his  place  in  the  superior  court,

id  established  the  law-firm  of  which  he  was  the
head.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Consti-
tutional convention  of  1873-'4,  and  in  October.
1883,  was  elected  governor  of  Ohio,  defeating  Jo-
seph B.  Foraker,  by  whom  he  was  in  turn  defeat-
ed in  1885.  During  the  civil  war  he  became  a
Republican,  but  in  1876  his  opposition  to  a  pro-
tective tariff  led  him  to  affiliate  again  with  the
Democratic  party.  He  was  one  of  the  counsel
that  successfully  opposed  the  project  of  a  com-
pulsory reading  of  the  Bible  in  the  public  schools,


and  was  leading  counsel  for  the  assignee  and  credi-
tors in  the  case  of  Archbishop  Purcell.  He  was  a
professor  in  the  Cincinnati  law-school  in  1864-'87,
and  was  for  many  years  a  trustee  in  the  university.
In  March,  1887,  he  removed  to  New  York  city  and
became  the  head  of  a  law-firm.

HOADLEY,  John  Chipman,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Turin,  N.  Y,  10  Dec,  1818;  d.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  21  Oct.,  1886.  He  began  his  engineering
career  in  1836  on  the  preliminary  survey  for  the
enlargement  of  the  Erie  canal,  and  his  ability  soon
won  him  promotion.  After  eight  years  of  service
in  this  line  he  became  associated  with  Horatio  N.
and  Erastus  B.  Bigelow  in  the  construction  and
equipment  of  mills  in  Clinton,  Mass.,  devoting
himself  to  the  wide  range  of  work  necessary  to
build  up  a  variety  of  industries.  In  1848  he  estab-
lished works  with  Donald  McKay  for  the  manu-
facture of  locomotives  and  textile  machinery  in
Pittsfield.  Four  years  later  he  accepted  the  super-
in tendency  of  the  Lawrence  machine-shop,  after
which  he  returned  to  the  manufacture  of  engines.
He  invented  the  Hoadley  portable  engine,  which
was  probably  the  first  application  of  scientific
principles  to  the  design  of  high-speed  engines,  and
which  proved  highly  successful.  For  many  years
these  engines  had  an  extensive  sale  throughout
the  United  States,  and  he  continued  their  con-
struction until  1873,  when  the  business  depression
of  that  year  determined  the  company  to  close  up
its  affairs.  Later  he  became  interested  in  the  or-
ganization of  the  Clinton  wire-cloth  company,
agent  of  the  New  Bedford  copper  company,  and
of  the  McKay  sewing-machine  association.  Sub-
sequently to  1876  he  was  occupied  chiefly  as  an
expert  in  mechanical  and  engineering  questions,
serving  in  important  cases  in  the  courts  and  in  re-
sponsible positions  in  the  mechanical  exhibitions.
The  professional  work  of  Mr.  Hoadley  is  shown
by  its  influence  over  a  wide  range  of  engineering
practice  in  mill-work,  applications  of  steam,  sani-
tary engineering,  and  methods  of  expert  evidence,
rather  than  in  any  massive  structures.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  sent  to  England  by  Massa-
chusetts to  inspect  ordnance  and  examine  for-
tifications for  the  purpose  of  devising  a  system
for  American  sea-coast  defences.  He  held  various
minor  political  offices,  and  was  one  of  the  original
trustees  of  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technol-
ogy. For  many  years  he  was  a  member  of  the
state  board  of  health,  and  did  much  toward  pro-
moting its  efficiency.  He  was  a  member  of  sev-
eral scientific  societies,  and  contributed  technical
papers  to  their  transactions,  among  the  most  im-
portant of  which  was  his  "American  Steam-En-
gine  Practice  in  1884,"  read  at  the  Montreal  meet-
ing of  the  British  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  which  was  the  first  step  in  the  recent
polemical  engineering  papers  respecting  English
and  American  railway  practice.

HOADLEY,  Loaiiuni  Ives,  clergvman,  b.  in
Northford,  Conn.,  25  Oct.,  1790;  d.  in  Shelton.
Conn.,  21  March.  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1817,  and  at  the  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1820.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry.  15  Oct.,
1823,  was  pastor  of  an  orthodox  Congregational
church  at  Worcester,  Mass.,  in  1823-'30.  and  sub-
sequently had  charge  of  several  churches  in  New
England.  After  the  year  1866  he  was  pastor  at
New  Haven.  Mr.  Hoadley  was  assistant  editor  of
the  "Comprehensive  Commentary  of  the  Bible,"
edited  the  sixth  volume  of  "Spirit "of  the  Pilgrims"
and  many  publications  of  the  Massachusetts  Sab-
bath-school society,  and  contributed  to  various  re-
ligious periodicals.


220


HOADLY


HOBART


HOADLY,  Charles  Jeremy,  librarian,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  1  Aug.,  1828.  He  was  graduated
at  Trinity  in  1851,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
but  never  practised.  In  1855  he  assumed  charge
of  the  state  library.  He  has  edited  the  "New
Haven  Colonial  Records,  1638  to  1665  "  (2  vols.),
and  "  Colonial  Records  of  Connecticut,  Vols.  4  to
15,  1689  to  1775  "  (completed  in  1887).

HOAR,  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Concord,  Mass.,
about  1720 ;  d.  at  sea  in  1771.  He  was  the  son  of
Lieut.  Daniel  Hoar,  of  Concord,  Mass.,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1740,  and  served  as  a  lieuten-
ant in  Waldo's  regiment  at  the  capture  of  Louis-
burg  in  1745.  He  was  present  at  the  second  cap-
ture of  Louisburg  in  1758,  was  promoted  lieuten-
ant-colonel for  his  services  on  that  occasion,  and
was  afterward  a  member  of  the  provisional  assem-
bly of  Nova  Scotia.  He  commanded  a  regiment
under  Prideaux  in  the  expedition  against  Niagara
in  1759,  and  in  1769  was  appointed  governor  of
Newfoundland  and  the  adjacent  provinces.  He
died  while  on  his  way  from  London  to  New  York.

HOAR,  Leonard,  educator,  b.  about  1629 ;  d.  in
Braintree,  Mass.,  28  Nov.,  1675.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1650,  married  a  daughter  of  John
Lisle,  the  regicide,  was  a  minister  of  Wanstead,
Essex,  until  he  was  ejected  for  non-conformity  in
1662.  On  returning  to  Massachusetts  in  1672,  he
was  for  some  time  assistant  to  Thomas  Thatcher
at  the  South  church,  Boston.  He  was  president  of
Harvard  college  from  10  Sept.,  1672,  till  15  March,
1675,  and  was  the  first  person  to  propose  the  mod-
ern system  of  technical  education,  by  the  addi-
tion of  a  garden  and  orchard,  a  workshop,  and  a
chemical  laboratory  to  Harvard.  Mr.  Hoar  was
regarded  as  being  deficient  in  governing  power,
and  the  college  students  rendered  his  situation  so
uncomfortable  that  he  resigned.

HOAR,  Samuel,  statesman,  b.  in  Lincoln,  Mass.,
18  May,  1788 ;  d.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  2  Nov.,  1856.
His  father,  Capt.  Samuel  Hoar,  was  a  Revolu-
tionary officer,  and  served  for  many  years  in  the
legislature.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1802,  and  was  for  two  years  a  private  tutor  in
Virginia.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1805,  began  practice  at  Concord,  and
was  for  forty  years  one  of  the  most  successful  law-
yers in  the  state.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1820,  a  member  of
the  state  senate  in  1825  and  1833,  and  was  then
elected  a  representative  in  congress  as  a  Whig,
serving  from  7  Dec,  1835,  till  3  March,  1837.  In
1844  he  was  sent  by  the  legislature  to  South  Caro-
lina to  test  the  constitutionality  of  acts  of  that
state  authorizing  the  imprisonment  of  free  colored
persons  who  should  enter  it.  His  appearance  in
Charleston  caused  great  excitement,  and  on  5  Dec,
1844,  he  was  expelled  from  that  city.  On  that  day
the  legislature  of  South  Carolina  passed  resolu-
tions authorizing  his  expulsion.  Mr.  Hoar  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1838,  and
was  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences,  the  American  Bible  society,  and  the
Massachusetts  historical  society.  He  married  a
daughter  of  Roger  Sherman. — His  son,  Ebenezer
Rockwood,  jurist,  b.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  21  Feb.,
1816,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1835,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840,  and  practised
in  Concord  and  Boston.  He  was  a  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  in  1849-55,  and  of  the  state
supreme  court  in  1859-'69,  and  was  attorney-gen-
eral of  the  United  States  from  March,  1869,  till
July,  1870.  He  was  a  member  of  the  joint  high
commission,  which  framed  the  treaty  of  Washing-
ton with  Great  Britain  in  1871,  and  served  as  a


&Vm  ^/€^W


representative  in  congress  from  Massachusetts
from  1  Dec,  1873,  till  3  March,  1875,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Republican.  —  Another  son,  George
Frisfoie,  senator,  b.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  29  Aug.,
1826,  was  educated  at  Concord  academy  and  at  Har-
vard, where  he  was
graduated  in  1846.
He  studied  law,  was
graduated  at  the  Har-
vard law -school,  and
began  to  practise  in
Worcester,  Mass.  He
was  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  house
of  representatives  in
1852,  and  of  the  state
senate  in  1857,  and
was  then  elected  as  a
Republican  to  four
successive  congresses,
serving  from  4  March,
1869,  till  3  March,
1877.  He  declined  a
renomination  to  con-
gress, was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Massachu-
setts, taking  his  seat  5  March,  1877,  and  was  re-
elected in  1883.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Re-
publican national  conventions  of  1876,  1880,  and
1884,  one  of  the  managers  on  the  part  of  the  house
of  representatives  of  the  Belknap  impeachment
trial  in  1876,  and  a  member  of  the  electoral  com-
mission in  that  year.  He  was  an  overseer  of  Har-
vard in  1874-'80,  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  insti-
tution in  1880,  and  is  now  (1887)  president  of  the
American  antiquarian  society,  is  trustee  of  the
Peabody  museum  of  archaeology,  and  a  member
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.  He  has
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  William  and
Mary,  Amherst,  Yale,  and  Harvard.

HOBART,  Aaron,  congressman,  b.  in  Abing-
ton,  Mass..  26  June,  1787;  d.  in  East  Bridgewater,
Mass.,  19  Sept.,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1805,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  at  Abing-
ton.  After  a  visit  to  England  in  1810,  he  resumed
practice  in  1811  at  Hanover  Four  Corners,  where
he  remained  until  he  removed  to  East  Bridge-
water  in  1824.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massa-
chusetts house  of  representatives  in  1814,  of  the
state  senate  in  1819,  and  was  then  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat  to  fill  a  vacancy.  He  was
re-elected  three  times  in  succession,  and  served
from  18  Dec,  1820,  till  3  March,  1827.  He  was  a
member  of  the  state  executive  council  in  1827— '31,
and  judge  of  probate  from  1843  till  1858.

HOBART,  Augustus  Charles  (Hobart  Pasha),
Turkish  naval  officer,  b.  in  Waltham-on-the-Wclds,
Leicestershire,  England,  1  April,  1822 :  d.  in  Milan,
19  June,  1886.  He  was  the  third  son  of  the  Earl
of  Buckinghamshire.  He  entered  the  British  na\
in  1836,  during  the  Crimean  war  commanded  the
"  Driver  "  in  the  Baltic,  and  was  commended  for
his  gallantry  at  the  capture  of  Bomarsund  and  the
attack  on  Abo.  After  the  war  he  retired  on  half-
pay,  and  during  the  civil  war  in  the  United  Stales
was  in  command  of  a  blockade-runner,  the  "  Don."
which  cruised  along  the  coast  of  North  Carolina,
and  endeavored  to  keep  up  maritime  communica-
tion with  the  southern  states.  He  was,  perhaps,
the  most  daring  and  successful  of  the  English
blockade-runners.  In  1867  he  offered  his  services
to  the  sultan,  who  gave  him  command  of  the  fleet
operating  against  Crete.  For  this  his  name  was
stricken  from  the  British  naval  list,  but,  at  the  in-
stance of  Lord  Derby,  he  was,  in  1874,  restored  to
his  former rank of  captain on  the  retired  list.


HOBART


HOBART


221


When  the  war  between  Russia  and  Turkey  began,
in  1877,  Admiral  Hobart  was  placed  in  command
of  the  Turkish  fleet  in  the  Black  sea,  and  formally
withdrew  from  the  British  service.  On  8  Jan.,  1881,
the  sultan  raised  him  to  the  rank  of  "  Mushir,"
and  Marshal  of  the  Empire,  an  honor  never  before
conferred  on  a  Christian.  He  wrote  "Sketches
from  My  Life  "  (New  York,  1887).

HOBART,  John  Henry,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  Sept.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Auburn,
N.  Y.,  12  Sept.,  1830.  In  direct  descent,  he  stood
fifth  in  the  line  from  the  founder  of  the  family  at
Hingham,  Mass.  The  intervening  generations  pre-
sent a  succession  of  names  of  repute  in  the  colonial
history  of  New  England,  including  many  Puritan
ministers.  His  grandfather  was  the  first  of  the
family  to  leave  New  England  and  unite  with  the
Episcopal  church.  By  the  death  of  his  father  he
was  left,  when  but  a  year  old,  to  the  sole  charge
of  a  mother,  to  whose  training  the  rich  fruit  of  his
after-life  must  in  no  small  degree  be  referred.  His
school-days  were  spent  in  Philadelphia,  and  he  was
ready  in  his  sixteenth  year  for  the  junior  class  at
Princeton,  where  he  was  entered  in  1791.  The
two  years  that  followed  made  so  deep  an  impres-
sion that,  after  an  interval  spent  in  the  unconge-
nial air  of  a  counting-house,  he  accepted  a  tutorship
in  the  college  in  1795,  which  he  held  until  admitted
to  holy  orders  in  June,  1798.  The  permanent
traits  of  his  mind  and  character  developed  dur-
ing these  early  years  with  marked  distinctness.
From  1798  till  1811  was  the  period  of  his  minis-
terial activity  in  the  diaconate  and  priesthood.
In  the  humbler  office  he  served  in  several  parishes ;
but,  when  ordained  priest  in  1800,  he  had  just  been
appointed  one  of  the  assistant  clergy  of  Trinity
church,  New  York,  to  the  rectorship  of  which  he
was  afterward  elected.  About  this  time  he  mar-
ried a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Bradbury
Chandler  (q.  v.).  The  duties  of  a  large  city  parish
were  discharged  by  Dr.  Hobart  with  marked  suc-
cess and  great  increase  of  popularity.  In  preach-
ing he  had  a  clear  and  pointed  style,  an  earnest  and
animated  manner,  and  a  strong,  melodious  voice.
In  1804  he  published  a  "  Companion  for  the  Altar,'"
largely  original,  and  also  a  volume  on  "  Festivals
and  Pasts,"  on  the  basis  of  an  English  work  so
styled;  in  1805,  a  "Companion  to  the  Book  of
Common  Prayer,"  and  a  "  Clergyman's  Compan-
ion"; in  1806,  a  collection of  controversial es-

lys ;  and  in  1807  his  "  Apology  for  Apostolic  Or-
der." These  works  were  designed  to  instruct
shurchmen  in  the  elements  of  their  own  ecclesiasti-

il  institutions  and  usages. Although  a  name  for

'gressive  churchmanship  became  attached  to  Dr.

fobart,  he  never  addressed  his  instructions  or  ap-
peals to  any  except  those  to  whom  he  had  an  offi-
cial right  to  speak.  Among  them  primarily,  these
productions  were  widely  and  rapidly  circulated,
the  "  Festivals  and  Fasts "  reaching  its  27th  edi-
tion. They  are  regarded  as  having  contributed  in
a  marked  degree  to  the  vigorous  and  rapid  growth
of  the  Episcopal  church  during  the  first  half  of
this  century,  and  to  the  prevalence  of  that  type  of
churchmanship  which  they  attractively  presented.
Q  "  Apology  "  was  a  somewhat  larger  and  more


The


critical  work,  and  on  its  re-publication  in  England
first  attracted  attention  to  its  author  there.  The
natural  result  of  ability  displayed  in  so  many  and
various  forms  was  that,  when,  "in  1811,  the  failing
health  of  Bishop  Moore  called  for  the  election  of
an  assistant  bishop,  the  foremost  name  among  the
clergy  was  that  of  Dr.  Hobart.  and  the  choice  fell
upon  him  with  substantial  unanimity.  He  had
previously  filled  many  important  posts  in  connec-


tion with  the  diocesan  and  general  conventions.
The  episcopate  thus  begun  lasted  for  nineteen
years.  At  this  period  of  her  history,  the  condition
of  the  church  that  committed  to  him  this  great
trust  seemed  to  call  for  precisely  the  man  he  was.
From  her  connection  with  the  Church  of  England,
she  was  politically  an  object  of  suspicion,  which
was  but  slowly  dying  away.  She  was  regarded
with  strong  prejudice  and  dislike  by  many  whose
sympathies  were  Puritanic.  To  the  American
people  at  large  she  was  personally  a  stranger  in
garb  and  manners.  What  were  her  principles,
why  she  existed  in  this  country  at  all,  why  she
was  so  ready  to  enter  places  that  others  had  occu-
pied before  her,  were  questions  to  be  answered
promptly  and  effectively.  To  say  that  Bishop  Ho-
bart lived  and  labored  to  give  the  answer  fairly
indicates  the  sum  of  his  history  in  the  latter  half
of  his  life.  He  was  the  most  outspoken  of  men ;
he  had  no  concealments  or  reserves.  Whatever
was  distinctive,  theological,  or  ecclesiastical  in  the
system  he  upheld,  he  set  forth  with  the  utmost
plainness  and  in  every  feature,  never  hesitating  or
showing  any  nervousness  as  to  the  possible  result.
The  opportunity,  if  not  the  provocation,  to  con-
troversy thus  afforded  was  ample,  and  full  use
was  made  of  it  by  his  opponents,  so  that  pamphlets
on  both  sides  flew  over  the  field  of  dispute  like
leaves  in  autumn — except  his  were  never  dry  but
only  somewhat  crisp.  His  readiness  in  such  pro-
ductions was  remarkable,  and  greatly  enhanced  his
reputation.  But  the  cause  he  had  at  heart  did  not
suffer  by  this  vehement  frankness ;  and  person-
ally he  gained  friends  even  among  those  who  op-
posed him.  No
stronger  com-
mendation could
he  have  desired
than  the  words
of  his  most  emi-
nent and  formi-
dable adversary,
the  Rev.  Dr.  John
Mason  :  "  Were  I
compelled  to  en-
trust the  safety
of  my  country  to
any  one  man.  that
man  should  be
John  Henry  Ho-
bart." By  the
side  of  this  gen-
erous eulogium
may  be  placed  the
opinion  of  the
distinguished  jurist,  Brockholst  Livingston:  "Na-
ture fitted  him  for  a  leader.  .  .  .  Had  he  stud-
ied law  he  would  have  been  upon  the  bench ;
in  the  army,  a  major-general  at  least;  in  the
state,  nothing  under  prime-minister."  During
these  years  of  varied  and  engrossing  labor,  his  pen
continued  active.  He  produced  "  The  Christian's
Manual  "  (New  York,  1814),  and  an  "  Essav  on  the
State  of  the  Departed  "  (New  York,  1814) ;  and  in
1818  undertook  the  re-publication  of  D'Oyley  and
Mant's  familv  Bible,  which  largely  occupied  him
for  five  years  (2  vols.,  1818-20).  lie  was  also  ac-
tive in  founding  the  General  theological  seminary
in  New  York  city,  and  in  1821  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  pastoral  theology.  His  health,  which
had  been  somewhat  shaken  in  his  boyhood  by  his
persistent  application  to  study,  broke  down  under
all  this  labor,  and  a  long  period  of  cessation  from
it  and  absence  from  its  scene  were  deemed  neces-
sary. The  years  1824-'5 were  spent  in  Europe.


f  >  ^zrt&trf.


222


HOB ART


HOBSON


While  in  England,  he  published  two  volumes  of
sermons  on  "  Redemption,"  to  meet  the  charge
industriously  urged  that  in  his  ministrations  he
"  neglected  the  essentials  for  the  externals  of  re-
ligion." As  they  were  simply  specimens  of  his  or-
dinary parochial  instructions,  the  accusation  was
amply  refuted.  On  his  return  in  October,  1825,
his  first  sermon  was  a  comparison  of  the  institu-
tions of  the  two  countries.  The  key  to  its  spirit
was  in  the  words  "  I  love  and  revere  England  and
its  church ;  but  I  love  my  own  church  and  coun-
try better."  For  a  time,  the  feelings  toward  him
of  some  of  his  English  friends  were  chilled,  but
his  hold  upon  his  own  countrymen  was  greatly
strengthened.  He  took  up  the  work  of  his  office
with  renewed  vigor  and  zeal.  The  diocese  and
state  were  then  conterminous,  and,  though  the  par-
ishes were  much  fewer  than  at  the  present  day,  the
facilities  for  travel  were  so  much  less  that  the
3,000  miles  of  his  visitation  in  1826  represent  an
amount  of  exposure  and  fatigue  not  equalled  by
four  times  that  distance  by  rail  and  steamer.  So
it  continued  for  four  years  more.  Educational  in-
stitutions, benevolent  and  religious  societies  that
had  risen  under  his  own  eye,  required  constant  at-
tention. The  care  of  a  rapidly  enlarging  diocese
made  ever  increasing  demands,  till  the  apparently
vigorous  frame  suddenly  gave  way;  the  active
brain  could  order  the  pressing  throng  of  public
and  official  thoughts  and  cares  no  more  ;  and  the
warm,  loving  heart,  which  had  never  failed  to-
ward family  and  friends  and  the  people  of  his
charge,  ceased  from  earthly  emotion.  His  disorder,
which  was  almost  of  life-long  experience,  had  been
kept  in  check  by  the  use  of  stimulants.  On  this
last  visitation  of  his  diocese  he  ceased  to  take  the
usual  precaution,  and  virtually  yielded  up  his  life
that  he  might  "  give  no  offence  to  the  brethren,"
and  to  those  who,  to  use  his  own  words,  on  setting
out  on  his  journey,  "  flung  the  habit  of  the  bishop
in  the  teeth  of  the  church."  His  remains,  with
those  of  his  wife,  rest  beneath  the  chancel  of
Trinity  church,  New  York,  in  a  plain  massive
vault,  constructed  for  the  purpose.  See  his  "  Early
Life  and  Professional  Years,"  by  Prof.  McVickar
of  Columbia  (New  York,  1834 ;  republished  in  Eng-
land, with  an  introduction  by  Rev.  W.  Hook. — His
youngest  son,  John  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  1  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  31
Aug.,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1836,  and  in  June,  1841,  was  ordained.  He  was
engaged  in  mission  work,  and  held  various  pastor-
ates in  1841-'8,  and  was  then  assistant-minister  of
Trinity  church,  New  York  city,  till  1863.  In  1872
he  accompanied  Bishop  Whittingham  of  Maryland,
as  his  chaplain,  to  the  Old  Catholic  congress  in
Cologne,  Germany.  For  many  years  he  was  the
rector  of  Trinity  church,  Fishkill,  N.  Y.  Colum-
bia gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1856.  Dr.
Hobart  was  the  last  survivor  of  his  father's  seven
children.  He  published  "Instruction  and  Encour-
agement for  Lent "  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  Mediaeval-
ism  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Church  Reform  in  Mexico "
(1877) ;  and  also  edited  his  father's  "  Festivals  and
Fasts"  (27th  ed.,  1862),  and  "The  Clergyman's
Companion  "  (1863).

HOBART,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hingham,
Norfolk,  England,  in  1604 ;  d.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,
20  Jan.,  1678.  His  father,  Edmund  Hobart.  emi-
grated to  New  England  in  1633  and  settled  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  but  in  1635  removed  to  Hing-
ham, which  town  he  represented  in  the  general
court  from  1639  till  1642.  He  died  in  1646.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Cambridge,  England,  in
1629,  and  after  teaching  a  grammar-school,  held  a


pastorate  in  Haverhill,  Suffolk,  until  1635,  when
he  joined  his  family  in  Charlestown,  Mass.  He
settled  a  new  town,  which  he  called  Hingham,  and
established  a  Congregational  church,  of  which  he
was  pastor  until  his  death.  Four  of  his  sons,
graduates  of  Harvard,  were  Congregational  clergy-
men, one  of  whom  was  the  successor  of  JotUB
Eliot,  at  Newton,  in  1764. — His  grandson,  Noah,
clergyman,  b.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1705  ;  d.
in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  6  Dec,  1773,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1724,  and  was  pastor  of  a  Congrega-
tional church  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  from  7  Feb.,  1733,
until  his  death.  He  took  part  in  the  controversy
regarding  the  Episcopal  church,  and  wrote,  in  be-
half of  Presbyterian  ordination,  a  pamphlet  en-
titled "  Serious  Address  to  the  Episcopal  Separa-
tion" (1748).  He  also  published  several  sermons
and  "  Principles  of  the  Congregational  Church "
(1754). — His  son,  John  Sloss,  jurist,  b.  in  Fair-
field, Conn.,  in  1738 ;  d.  4  Feb.,  1805,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1757,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  in  New  York  state.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  provincial  convention  in  1775,  a
member  of  the  New  York  congress,  and  one  of  the
committee  to  draft  the  state  constitution,  1  Aug.,
1776.  In  July,  1777,  he  became  judge  of  the  New
York  district  court.  He  held  important  offices  in
the  state  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  after  which
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  three  judges  of  the  su-
preme court.  He  was  elected  IT.  S.  senator  in  Janu-
ary, 1798,  but  resigned  in  May,  and  became  judge
of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of  New  York.

HOBBIE,  Selah  R.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newburg,
N.  Y.,  10  March,  1797 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
23  March,  1854.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  at  Delhi,  Delaware
co.,  where  he  became  district  attorney  in  1823,
holding  this  office  till  1827.  He  was  also  brigade-
major  and  inspector  of  militia.  He  was  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  from  New  York  as  a  Demo-
crat from  1827  till  1829.  On  the  accession  of
Gen.  Jackson  to  the  presidency,  he  was  appointed
second  assistant  postmaster-general,  which  office
he  held  till  1836,  when  he  was  made  first  assistant
postmaster-general,  and  acted  in  this  capacity  till
1851,  when  he  resigned.  He  was  first  assistant
postmaster-general  from  1853  till  his  death.

HOBBY,  Sir  Charles,  soldier,  b.  about  1650;
d.  in  London,  England,  in  1714.  He  was  the  son
of  William  Hobby,  a  merchant  of  Boston.  He  held
the  rank  of  colonel,  commanded  a  Massachusetts
regiment,  and  was  senior  officer  at  the  capture  of
Port  Royal.  He  was  knighted  for  his  fortitude  at
the  time  of  the  earthquake  in  Jamaica  in  1692. —
His  nephew,  William,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  17
Aug.,  1707 ;  d.  in  Reading,  Mass.,  18  June,  1765,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1725.  He  was  minis-
ter of  Reading  from  1732  till  his  death.  He  pub-
lished "Vindication  of  Whitefield"  (1745);  "Self-
Examination  "  (1746) ;  and  a  pamphlet  against
"Jonathan  Edwards's  Dismission"  (1751).

HOBSON,  Edward  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Greensburg,  Ky.,  11  July.  1825.  He  was  educated
in  common  schools  in  Greensburg  and  Danville,
Ky.  In  1846  he  enlisted  in  the  2d  reghnent  of
Kentucky  volunteers,  and  was  soon  promoted  to
1st  lieutenant,  serving  in  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista,
22  and  23  Feb.,  1847.  He  was  mustered  out  of
service  in  June,  1847,  returned  to  Greensburg,  and
resumed  mercantile  business.  He  was  a  director
of  the  Branch  bank  of  Kentucky  in  1853,  and
served  as  president  from  1857  till  1861.  He  then
organized  and  became  colonel  of  the  13th  Kentucky
volunteers,  serving  at  Camp  Hobson  till  he  moved
southward with  Gen.  Buell's  army  in  February,


HODGE


HODGE


223


1862.  He  commanded  his  regiment  at  the  battle
of  Shiloh  with  such  success  that  he  was  nominated
by  President  Lincoln  for  brigadier-general.  Be-
fore receiving  this  commission,  he  took  part  in  the
siege  of  Corinth,  Miss.  He  commanded  a  brigade
at  Perrysville.  Owing  to  the  condition  of  his  regi-
ment, he  was  relieved  from  active  service  and
ordered  to  Mumfordsville,  Ky.,  to  protect  the  lines
of  communication  and  to  discipline  about  10,000
new  troops.  Receiving  his  commission  as  brigadier-
general,  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  southern
division  of  Kentucky  troops,  was  ordered  to
Marrowbone,  Ky.,  with  cavalry  and  infantry,  to
watch  the  movements  of  Gen.  John  Morgan,  and
after  a  slight  engagement  pursued  him  through
Kentucky,  Indiana,  and  Ohio.  At  Lebanon,  Ky.,
he  was  given  two  brigades  in  connection  with  his
own  in  the  pursuit  of  Gen.  Morgan,  whom  he  at-
tacked near  the  Ohio.  He  was  appointed  to  the  com-
mand of  Gen.  Burnside's  cavalry  corps,  but  owing
to  impaired  health  was  unable  to  serve,  and  again
commanded  troops  in  repelling  raids  at  Lexington,
Ky.  He  was  mustered  out  of  service  in  Septem-
ber, 1865,  since  which  time  he  has  been  engaged  in
business.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Re-
publican convention  of  1880,  serving  as  a  vice-presi-
dent, and  was  a  supporter  of  Gen.  Grant.  He  is
now  (1887)  president  of  the  southern  division  of
the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  railroad  company.

HODGE,  Charles,  theologian,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia. Pa.,  28  Dec,  1797;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  19
June,  1878.  He  was  prepared  for  college  in  the
academy  of  Somerville,  N.  J.,  was  graduated  at

Princeton  in  1815.
and  at  the  theologi-
cal seminary  there
in  1819.  lie  was
made  instructor  in
the  theological  sem-
inary in  1820,  and
professor  of  orien-
tal and  biblical  lit-
erature in  1822.  Af-
ter 1826  he  spent
two  years  in  Eu-
rope studying  in
the  universities  of
Paris,  Halle,  and
Berlin. On  his  re-

/ /  /? 0 // f  rjf  turn in 1828  ne  re"

£  H  a<  tcJ  o&  o  *  ^ sumed  his  profess.

orship,  and  in  1840
was  given  the  chair  of  didactic  and  exegetical
theology,  to  which  polemical  theology  was  added
in  1852.  He  founded  the  "  Biblical  Repertory "
in  1825.  enlarged  its  plan  in  1829,  changing  its
name  to  the  "Biblical  Repertory  and  Princeton
Review,"  and  remained  its  editor  until  it  was
changed  to  the  "  Presbyterian  Quarterly  and
Princeton  Review  "  in  1871.  Selections  from  his
contributions  to  this  periodical  have  been  reprint-
ed in  "  Princeton  Theological  Essays "  (2  vols.,
1846-'7)  and  in  his  "Essays  and  Reviews"  (1857).
In  1846  he  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly
of  the  Presbyterian  church  (old  school),  and  in  1858
one  of  a  committee  to  revise  the  "  Book  of  Dis-
cipline." A  volume  has  been  published  containing
a  record  of  the  semi-centennial  anniversary  of  his
professorship,  which  was  celebrated  at  Princeton,
24  April,  1872.  On  this  occasion  the  graduates  en-
dowed the  "  Charles  Hodge  Professorship  "  with
$50,000,  and  presented  Prof.  Hodge  with  $15,000.
Dr.  Hodge's  style  is  clear  and  argumentative;  as
a  controversialist  he  is  logical  and  fair,  and  he
is  regarded  as  a  leader  of  Presbyterian  thought.


The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Rut-
gers in  1834,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Washington
college  in  1864.  His  publications  are  "  Commentary
on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  "  (Philadelphia,  1835 ;
abridged  ed.,  1836;  rewritten  and  enlarged  ed.,
1866) ;  "  Constitutional  History  of  the  Presbyterian
Church  in  the  United  States"  (2  vols.,  1840-'l);
"The  Way  of  Life"  (1842);  commentaries  on
"Ephesians"  (1856),  "1  Corinthians"  (1857),  and
"2  Corinthians"  (1860);  "What  is  Darwinism!"
(1874) ;  and  "  Systematic  Theology,"  his  principal
work  (3  vols.,  1871-2).  See  his" life  bv  his  son,
Archibald  A.  Hodge  (New  York,  1880).— His  broth-
er, Hugh  Lenox,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  27  June,  1796 ;  d.  there.  26  Feb.,  1873,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1814,  and  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1818.  In  1820  he  began  to  practise  in  Philadelphia,
after  spending  two  years  in  India,  and  obtaining
there  a  knowledge  of  cholera.  During  the  epidemic
of  1832.  he  was  active  in  the  cholera  hospitals  and
successful  in  his  plan  of  treatment.  In  1821  he
taught  the  anatomical  class  of  Dr.  William  E.  Hor-
ner, who  was  then  in  Europe.  He  was  appointed  in
1823  to  lecture  on  surgery  in  the  school  that  sub-
sequently became  the  "  Medical  Institute."  and  also
became  physician  to  the  Philadelphia  almshouse.
In  1835  he  was  elected  professor  of  obstetrics  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  held  this  chair
till  1863,  when  he  became  emeritus  professor.  Dur-
ing his  service  he  made  several  important  medical
inventions.  He  was  active  in  the  councils  of  the
Presbyterian  church.  Dr.  Hodge  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1872.  He  wrote
much  for  medical  journals,  and  was  the  author  of
"  Diseases  Peculiar  to  Women  "(Philadelphia,  1859):
"  Principles  and  Practice  of  Obstetrics  "(1864);  and
"  Foeticide  "  (1869).— Charles's  son.  Archibald  Al-
exander, clergyman,  b.  in  Princeton.  N.  J.,  18
July,  1823;  d.  there,  11  Nov.,  1886.  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1841.  and  at  the  theological  semi-
nary in  1847.  For  three  years  he  was  a  missionary
in  India,  returning  in  1850.  He  held  charges  in
Lower  West  Nottingham.  Md.,  from  1851  till  1855,
in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  from  1855  till  1861,  and  in
Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  in  1861-'4.  From  1864  till  1877
he  was  professor  of  didactic  theology  in  Western
theological  seminary,  Allegheny,  Pa.,  during  which
time  he  was  also  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church.
In  1877  he  was  appointed  associate  professor  of
didactic  and  polemic  theology  at  Princeton,  suc-
ceeding his  father  in  1878.  He  was  a  member  of
the  board  of  trustees  of  Princeton,  and  for  a  time
an  editor  of  the  "  Presbyterian  Review."  He  re-
ceived the  degrees  of  D.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1862
and  LL.  D.  from  Worcester  college,  Ohio,  in  1876.
He  was  the  author  of  "  Outlines  of  Theology,"
which  is  used  as  a  text-book,  and  has  been  trans-
lated into  Welsh,  modern  Greek,  and  Hindustane
(New  York,  1860);  " The  Atonement  "  (1868);  "A
Commentary  on  Confession  of  Faith  "(1869) :  "  The
Life  of  Charles  Hodge"  (1880);  and  the  "Manual
of  Forms"  (1883).  His  "Popular  Lectures  on
Theological  Themes"  were  published  after  his
death  (1887).— Hugh  Lenox's  son,  Hugh  Lenox,
physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  30  July,  1836 ;
d.  there.  10  June,  1881,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1855  and  in  medi-
cine there  in  1858."  In  1861  he  was  appointed
demonstrator  of  surgery  and  chief  of  the  surgical
dispensary  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and
in  1870  was  made  demonstrator  of  anatomy.  He
was  attached  to  the  U.  S.  Satterlee  hospital  at
Philadelphia  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  also  a
surgeon  in  the  Pennsylvania  reserve  corps,  serving


224


HODGE


HODGINS


in  McClellan's  campaign,  before  Richmond,  in  the
Gettysburg  campaign,  and  at  Fredericksburg  in
Grant's  advance  on  Richmond.  He  was  consulting
surgeon  to  many  charitable  institutions,  served  as
president  of  the  Pathological  society,  and  was  a
member  of  various  medical  associations.  He  con-
tributed freely  to  medical  literature  on  his  original
investigations  on  the  subjects  of  metallic  sutures,
the  treatment  of  fractures  of  the  thigh  by  improved
apparatus,  the  drainage  of  wounds  by  a  solid  metal
probe,  deformities  after  hip  disease,  tracheotomy
in  cases  of  pseudo-membranous  croup,  ovariotomy,
and  excision  of  the  hip-joint.

HODGE,  George  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Fleming
county,  Ky.,  8  April,  1828.  He  was  educated  at
the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  Annapolis,  Md.,  became
a  midshipman,  16  Dec,  1845,  and  afterward  acting
lieutenant,  but  resigned  in  1851.  He  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  congress  in  1852,  was  sub-
sequently admitted  to  the  bar  at  Newport,  Ky.,
and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1859.  In
1860  he  was  an  elector  on  the  Breckinridge  ticket.
He  entered  the  Confederate  service  as  a  private  in
1861,  and  was  soon  afterward  chosen  to  represent
Kentucky  in  the  Confederate  congress.  While  not
at  Richmond,  he  was  in  the  field,  and  was  made
captain  and  assistant  adjutant-general  in  Breck-
inridge's division.  He  was  promoted  major  for
gallantry  at  Shiloh,  and  colonel  in  1864,  serving
as  inspector-general.  He  became  a  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,
subsequently  commanding  the  districts  of  east
Louisiana  and  Mississippi  until  the  close  of  the
war.  He  then  resumed  practice  at  Newport,  Ky.,
and  was  an  elector  on  the  Greeley  ticket  in  1872.
He  was  state  senator  in  1873-'7.

HODGE,  James  Thatcher,  geologist,  b.  in
Plymouth,  Mass.,  12  March,  1816 ;  d.  in  Lake  Huron,
20  Oct.,  1871.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Dr.  James
Thatcher,  the  medical  historian  of  the  Revolution-
ary war,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1836.
He  devoted  himself  to  the  pursuit  of  geology  and
mineralogy,  and  his  scientific  knowledge  and  zeal
soon  attracted  the  attention  of  professional  experts.
He  was  employed  on  the  state  geological  survey  of
Maine  under  Dr.  Charles  T.  Jackson,  and  on  that
of  Pennsylvania  under  Prof.  Henry  D.  Rogers,
also  at  times  serving  on  the  geological  surveys  of
New  Hampshire  and  Ohio.  Mr.  Hodge  afterward
took  part  in  several  enterprises  for  the  develop-
ment of  the  United  States  and  the  promotion  of
mechanical  inventions.  He  travelled  extensively
through  this  country  and  England,  and  wrote
valuable  papers  on  scientific  and  industrial  topics,
including  numerous  articles  in  the  "  New  Ameri-
can Cyclopaedia."  For  some  years  he  had  been  en-
gaged in  the  explorations  of  the  mining  regions  of
the  territories,  and  for  several  months  before  his
death  was  employed  on  a  geological  investigation
in  the  Lake  Superior  region.  On  his  return  he
embarked  on  the  steamer  "  R.  G.  Coburn,"  which
was  lost  in  Lake  Huron.

HODGE,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fork,  Sul-
livan co.,  Tenn.,  7  June,  1829.  lie  was  graduated
at  Washington  college,  Tenn.,  in  1850,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1853.  He  was
ordained  in  1854,  supplied  New  Providence  church,
Hawkins  co.,  Tenn.,  in  1855,  and  in  1857  became  a
professor  in  Washington  college,  where  he  re-
mained until  it  was  disbanded  during  the  civil
war.  Leaving  Tennessee  in  1865  he  went  to  Iowa
to  become  professor  of  languages  in  Lenox  collegi-
ate institute  in  Hopkinton.  In  1866  he  was  ap-
pointed president  of  Lenox  institute,  but  resigned
in  1882. He  also  had  charge  of  the  Presbyterian


church  in  this  town  from  1866  till  1876.  He  now
(1887)  resides  in  Lake  Forest,  111.  In  1872  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Iowa  university.
He  has  published  "  The  Centennial  of  New  Bethel
Presbyterian  Church,  Tennessee  "  (Bristol,  1882).

HODGES,  Edward,  organist,  b.  in  Bristol,  Eng-
land, 20  July,  1796;  d.  there,  1  Sept.,  1876.  He
engaged  in  the  stationery  business  with  his  father,
whom  he  succeeded  in  1818,  was  appointed  organist
of  St.  James's  church,  Bristol,  in  1819.  and  of  St.
Nicholas's  church  in  1821.  He  entered  Sydney  Sus-
sex college,  Cambridge,  in  May,  1825,  and  received
the  degrees  of  bachelor  and  doctor  in  music,  5  July,
1825.  He  retired  from  business  in  1830,  and  in
1835  went  to  Toronto,  Canada,  and  in  1838  to  New
York,  where  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  mu-
sic in  Trinity  parish  in  1839.  In  1846  his  duties
were  restricted  to  Trinity  church,  then  newly  built.
For  its  consecration  he  composed  his  "  consecration
service,"  first  performed  on  ascension-day,  1846.
He  retained  his  place  in  Trinity  church  until  he
was  compelled  to  resign  on  account  of  physical
disability,  and  in  1863  returned  to  his  native  city.

HODGES,  Silas  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Claren-
don, Vt.,  12  Jan.,  1804;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
21  April,  1875.  His  ancestors  settled  in  Bristol
county,  Mass.,  in  1630.  His  grandfather,  Dr.  Silas
Hodges,  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  and  his
father,  Henry,  was  judge  of  Rutland  county,  Vt.,
from  1821  till  1824.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  in  1821,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1825.  In  1832  he  abandoned  his  pro-
fession, studied  theology,  and  became  a  Congrega-
tional clergyman,  preaching  till  1841,  when  he  re-
sumed his  law  practice  in  Rutland,  and  continued
it  till  1861.  From  1845  till  1850  he  was  auditor  of
accounts  for  Vermont.  He  was  appointed  com-
missioner of  patents  on  9  Nov.,  1852,  and  held  this
office  till  25  March,  1853.  On  5  April.  1861,  he  was
made  examiner-in-chief  in  the  U.  S.  patent-office,
which  post  he  held  until  his  death.

HODGINS,  John  George,  Canadian  author,  b.
in  Dublin,  Ireland,  12  Aug.,  1821.  He  came  to
Canada  with  relatives  in  1833,  and  was  educated  at
Upper  Canada  college  and  Victoria  college,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1856.  In  1846  he  became  sec-
retary of  the  board  of  education  for  Upper  Canada,
and  in  October,  1876,  he  was  appointed  deputy
minister  of  education  for  Ontario,  which  office  he
now  (1887)  holds.  He  was  graduated  in  the  facul-
ty of  law  in  Toronto  university,  from  which  he  re-
ceived in  1860  the  degree  of  LL.  B.,  and  in  1870
the  degree  of  LL.  D.,  and  the  same  year  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  of  Ontario.  He  was  secretary  of
the  international  congress  of  educators  that  met  at
New  Orleans  in  1885,  became  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
geographical  society  in  1861,  received  the  decora-
tion of  the  palm-leaf  from  France  in  1879,  and
was  awarded  a  confederation  medal  in  1886.  Since
his  first  official  connection  with  educational  mat-
ters, no  other  person  in  Ontario  has  been  so  in-
strumental in  perfecting  the  school  system  of  that
province.  From  1855  till  1879  he  was  chief  editor
of  the  Upper  Canada  "Journal  of  Education."
He  is  the  author  of  "  Lovell's  General  Geography  "
(Montreal.  1862);  "School  History  of  Canada"]
(1862);  "Canadian  School  Speaker  and  Reciter"
(1862);  "Sketches  and  Anecdotes  of  the  Queen"
(1870);  "  The  School-House  and  its  Architecture  a
(Toronto,  1872);  "School  Manual"  (1870);  "Lec-
tures on  School  Law"  (1870);  and  "Report  of  the
Educational  Features  of  the  Centennial  Exhibition
at  Philadelphia"  (1877).

HODGINS,  Thomas,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1835. He  was  educated  in  Dub-


HODGKINSON


HOE


225


lin,  in  Bristol,  England,  and  at  University  college,
Toronto,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1856.  He  was
appointed  a  queen's  counsel  in  1873,  a  bencher  of
the  law  society  in  1874,  and  chairman  of  its  legal
educational  committee  in  1875.  He  was  senior  law-
examiner  in  Toronto  university  for  several  years,
until  he  was  elected  to  represent  the  law  society  in
the  senate  of  that  institution.  He  was  one  of  the
originators  of  the  Toronto  university  association,
and  has  been  president  of  the  literary  and  scientific
society  of  that  institution.  He  was  elected  to  the
parliament  of  Ontario  in  1871,  and  became  master-
in-ordinary  of  the  supreme  court  in  October.  1883.
Together  with  Robert  A.  Harrison  (afterward  chief
justice)  he  edited  a  volume  of  "  Municipal  Law  Re-
ports "  (1863),  and  has  also  published  educational
law  manuals  and  other  works.  He  was  a  con-
tributor and  equity  reporter  to  the  Upper  Canada
"  Law  Journal "  for  several  years,  and  has  written
on  parliamentary  and  legal  questions.

HODGKINSON,  John,  actor,  b.  in  England  in
1766 ;  d.  near  Bladensburg,  Md..  12  Sept.,  1805.  In
1792  he  came  to  this  country,  and  first  appeared  at
the  Southwark  theatre  in  Philadelphia  as  Belcour,
in  the  "  West  Indian."  Soon  afterward  he  ap-
peared in  New  York  on  his  opening  night  at
the  John  street  theatre  as  Vapid  in  "  The  Drama-
tist." Later  he  went  to  Boston,  Philadelphia,  and
other  cities.  In  1793  he  bought  out  the  interest  of
John  Henry  in  the  theatrical  firm  of  Hallam  and
Henry,  and  in  1798  became  the  active  manager  of
the  Boston  theatre.  On  the  opening  night  of  that
year  he  recited  a  prologue  written  by  Robert  Treat
Paine,  and  later  in  the  season,  when  President  John
Adams  attended  the  theatre,  introduced  and  sang
for  the  first  time  the  song  of 4i  Adams  and  Liberty."
His  career  was  checkered  by  successes  and  mis-
fortunes, until  he  retired  from  management  in
favor  of  William  Dunlap.  One  of  his  favorite
characters  was  that  of  Osmond  in  "  The  Castle
Spectre."  Dunlap  says  his  real  forte  was  low  com-
edy. Such  was  his  versatility  that  in  a  single  season.
in  Charleston,  S.  C.  he  acted  eighty  different  char-
acters; and  such  his  memory  that,  after  a  few
readings,  he  could  recite  perfectly  any  new  part.
He  was  also  an  efficient  stage-manager.  Hodgkin-
son  wrote  several  short-lived  plays  that  were  never

[mblished. — His  wife.  Arabella,  actress,  b.  in  Eng-
and  about  1765.;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  Septem-
ber, 1804,  appeared  as  Miss  Brett  at  the  Haymarket
theatre,  London,  in  1784,  and  subsequently  joined
the  company  of  comedians  in  Bath.  In  1792  Miss
Brett  came  to  this  country  in  company  with  Hodg-
kinson,  and  shortly  after  their  arrival  in  New  York
city  she  was  married  to  him.  Her  first  appear-
ance here  was  at  the  Southwark  theatre  in  Phila-
delphia, within  the  year  of  her  arrival.  In  the  year
following  she  became  a  member  of  the  company  of
the  John  street  theatre  in  Xew  York,  and.  in  course
of  time,  she  visited  other  large  cities  of  the  Union.
Mrs.  Hodgkinson's  ability  was  confined  to  singing
parts,  and  the  personation  of  romps  and  young

HODGSON,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Duf-
field,  England,  13  Feb..  1805 ;'d.  16  April,  1877.
He  early  came  to  the  United  States,  and  settled
with  his  family  in  West  Chester,  Pa.  In  1828  his
active  ministry  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church
began,  with  an  appointment  at  Dauphin,  Pa.,
which  was  followed  by  pastorates  in  Philadelphia,
New  York,  Hartford,  >*ew  Haven,  and  elsewhere.
He  was  presiding  elder  of  the  South  Philadelphia
district  during  1859-62.  He  was  the  author  of  an
"  Examination  into  the  System  of  New  Divinity  "
(New  York,  1829) ;  "  The  Ecclesiastical  Polity  of

VOL.  III.— 15


Methodism  Defended  " ;  M  The  Calvinistic  Doctrine
of  Predestination  Examined  and  Refuted  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1855) ;  and  "  Fidelity  to  Truth."

HODGSON,  Sir  Robert,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  Island,  in  1 798  ;  d.
16  Sept.,  1880.  He  was  educated  at  the  Collegi-
ate school,  Windsor,  Nova  Scotia,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  of  that  province  in  1819.  He  was  ap-
pointed surrogate  and  judge  of  probate  for  Prince
Edward  Island  in  1828,  attorney-general  and  advo-
cate-general the  same  year,  president  of  the  legis-
lative council  in  1840,  and  acting  chief  justice  in
1841.  In  1851,  on  the  introduction  of  responsible
government  into  the  colony,  he  resigned  all  these
offices  except  those  of  surrogate  and  judge  of  pro-
bate. He  was  again  appointed chief  justice in

1852,  and  judge  of  the  court  of  vice-admiralty  in

1853.  He  administered  the  government  of  Prince
Edward  Island  in  1865  and  1868,  and  from  July,
1873,  till  July,  1874.  when  he  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-governor of  the  island,  and  retained  this
office  till  July,  1879. He  was  knighted  in  1869.

HOE,  Robert,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Leicester-
shire, England.  29  Oct.,  1784:  d.  in  Westchester
county,  N.  Y.,  4  Jan.,  1833.  He  was  apprenticed
to  a  joiner  by  his  father,  who  was  a  farmer,  but
succeeding  in  purchasing  his  articles  of  indenture
from  his  master,  came  to  the  United  States  in
1803.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Xew  York  he
found  employment  at  his  trade,  and  after  the  in-
vention by  his  brother-in-law,  Peter  Smith,  of  a
hand  printing-press,  was  associated  with  him  and
his  brother,  Matthew  Smith,  in  their  manufacture.
In  1823  he  succeeded  to  the  sole  control  of  the
business,  which  rapidly  developed  with  the  in-
creased demand  for  presses  and  other  printing
material.  The  Hoe  press  was  brought  out  by  him,
and  built  from  ideas  that  were  obtained  from  the
English  fiat-bed  cylinder  presses.  He  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  American  machinist  to  employ
steam  as  a  motor  for  his  machinery.  Failing
health  compelled  his  retirement  from  business  in
1832.  and  he  died  during  the  following  year. — His
son,  Richard  March,  inventor,  b.  in  Xew  York
city,  12  Sept..  1812  ;  d.  in  Florence,  Italy.  7  June,
1886,  entered  his  fathers  workshop  at  the  age  of
fifteen,  became  thoroughly  familiar  with  every  de-
tail of  the  business,  and  was  made  senior  member
of  the  firm  in  1833.  He  showed  considerable  in-
ventive skill,  and  kept  steady  pace  with  the  de-
mands on  his  establishment  for  improved  and
rapid  presses.  In  the  style  of  press  that  was
prevalent  when  he  entered  business,  the  type  was
placed  on  a  flat  bed.  inked  by  a  roller  that  travelled
back  and  forth,  and  then  laid  under  a  cylinder
which  carried  the  paper.  He  soon  improved  this
method  by  placing  the  type  on  a  fixed  cylinder,
and  making  the  impression-cylinders  travel  around
it.  Later  he  placed  the  type  on  a  revolving  cylin-
der, in  contact  with  which  revolved  four  iron  im-
pression-cylinders, each  carrying  sheets  of  paper.
This  rotary  press  became  known  as  Hoe's  "  light-
ning press."  At  first  it  consisted  of  but  two  cyl-
inders, but  their  number  was  increased  to  four.  six.
eight,  and  finally  to  ten.  Subsequently  he  built  a
press  capable  of  printing  from  a  long  sheet,  or
web,  of  paper,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  sheet  at  a
single  operation.  This  press  is  a  combination  of
the  most  delicate  and  intricate  devices.  A  roll  of
paper  five  miles  long  is  put  through  the  machine
at  the  rate  of  eight  hundred  feet  a  minute.  As  the
sheets  come  out  they  are  passed  over  a  knife  which
cuts  them  apart,  and  they  are  then  run  through
an  apparatus  which  folds  them  for  the  mail  or  for
carriers. These  completely  printed  and  folded


226


HOECKEN


HOFFMAN


newspapers  are  delivered  as  quickly  as  the  eye  can
follow  them.  He  early  added  the  production  of
steel  saws  to  his  business,  and  the  manufacture  of
these  was  gradually  improved.  In  1837  he  visited
England,  and  obtained  a  patent  for  a  better  pro-
cess of  grinding  saws.  He  established  in  New
York,  in  connection  with  his  factory,  an  appren-
tice's school,  where  free  instruction  was  given.
Mr.  Hoe  acquired  a  large  fortune,  and  at  the  time
of  his  death  was  travelling  in  Europe  for  his
health. — Another  son,  Robert,  b.  in  New  York
city,  19  July,  1815;  d.  in  Tarrytown,  N.  Y,  13
Sept.,  1884,  was  associated  with  his  father  and
elder  brother  in  business.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  National  academy  of  design,  and  a
patron  of  young  artists. — Robert,  son  of  the  sec-
ond Robert,  b.  in  New  York  city,  10  March,  1839,
is  at  present  (1887)  senior  member  of  the  firm,  and
is  also  president  of  the  Grolier  club,  an  organiza-
tion for  promoting  the  arts  pertaining  to  the  pro-
duction of  books.  He  has  edited  "  The  Print  Col-
lector," by  J.  Maberley  (New  York,  1880).

HOECKEN,  Christian,  missionary,  b.  in  Up-
per Brabant ;  d.  on  the  Missouri  river,  19  June,
1851.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Jesuit  order
in  Belgium,  and  was  sent  to  labor  among  the  In-
dians. In  1836  he  assisted  Father  Van  Quicken-
barne  in  founding  a  mission  among  the  Kickapoos.
After  the  death  of  the  former  he  remained  a  few
months  with  this  tribe,  and  then  took  charge  of
the  Pottawatomie  mission  of  St.  Stanislaus  on
Osage  river.  Here  he  not  only  cared  for  the  spirit-
ual interests  of  his  flock,  but  gave  them  lessons  in
agriculture.  He  next  visited  the  Ottawas,  con-
verted their  chief,  and  did  much  to  banish  intoxi-
cation from  among  the  tribe,  afterward  preaching
among  the  Sioux,  Gros  Ventres,  Ricarees,  Man-
dans,  and  Assiniboins,  of  whom  he  baptized
about  400.  In  1843  he  founded  the  mission  of  St.
Ignatius  among  the  Kalispiels.  He  built  a  church
thirty  miles  above  the  mouth  of  Clark  river,  and
converted  most  of  the  tribe,  at  the  same  time
teaching  them  to  build  log-houses  and  sow  grain.
B>om  this  station  he  visited  the  Zingomenes  and
four  other  tribes,  and  completed  the  conversion  of
the  Shuyelpi  Indians  that  had  been  begun  by  De
Smet.  He  afterward  went  to  St.  Louis,  and  died
of  cholera  while  sailing  up  the  Missouri  on  the
way  back  to  his  mission.  Father  Hoecken  was
well  acquainted  with  many  of  the  Indian  lan-
guages and  with  their  peculiar  customs.

HOEY,  Josephine,  actress,  b.  in  Liverpool,
England,  in  June,  1824.  She  is  the  eldest  of  four
sisters,  whose  maiden  names  were  Shaw,  and  to-
gether with  them  and  her  brother  began  her  pub-
lic life  as  a  ballad-singer  in  various  museums.
After  her  marriage  with  William  H.  Russell  in
1839,  she  appeared  in  small  parts  at  the  National
theatre  in  New  York,  and  thereafter  became  a
stock  actress  in  other  places.  In  1849  Mrs.  Rus-
sell was  connected  with  Burton's  Chambers  street
theatre,  and  from  1854  was  a  conspicuous  mem-
ber of  Wallack's  theatre,  New  York.  During  a
brief  interval  in  1857  she  was  also  seen  at  the
Walnut  street  theatre  in  Philadelphia.  Her  last
performances  were  at  Wallack's  theatre.  In  1847
Mrs.  Russell  was  divorced  from  her  husband,  and
two  years  later  she  married  John  Hoey,  manager
of  Adams  express  company,  New  York  city.  Al-
though her  manner  was  somewhat  cold  and  arti-
ficial, she  was  popular  in  high-comedy  parts.

HOFF,  Henry  Kuliu,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Washington,  I).  C,  25
Dec,  1878.  He  was  appointed  a  midshipman
from  South  Carolina  on  28  Oct.,  1823,  commis-


sioned lieutenant  on  3  March,  1831,  and  com-
mander on  6  Feb.,  1854.  In  1861-'2  he  commanded
the  steam  sloop  "  Lancaster"  of  the  Pacific  squad-
ron. He  was  promoted  commodore  on  16  July,
1862,  was  on  special  duty  in  1863,  and  afterward
on  ordnance  duty  in  Philadelphia  till  1867.  He
was  made  a  rear-admiral  on  13  April,  1867,  and  in
1868-'9  commanded  the  North  Atlantic  squadron.
During  the  Cuban  insurrection,  which  began  in
October,  1868,  he  promptly  and  energetically  inter!
fered  to  protect  resident  American  citizens,  who
suffered  injustice  from  Spanish  officials.  He  was
placed  on  the  retired  list  on  19  Sept.,  1868,  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  August,  1869,  was
a  member  of  the  retiring  board,  and  in  1870  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  visitors  at  Annapolis.

HOFFMAN,  Beekman  Verplanck,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y,  28  Nov.,  1789 ;  d.
in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  10  Dec,  1834.  He  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman  on  4  July,  1805,  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant  on  21  May,  1812,  and  commander
on  5  March,  1817,  and  reached  the  grade  of  captain
on  7  March,  1829.  He  served  first  in  the  "  Argus  "
under  Capt.  Trippe,  and  was  attached  later  to  the
frigate  "  Constitution,"  and  participated  in  all  her
battles.  He  was  present  at  the  victory  over  the
English  ship  "  Guerriere "  on  19  Aug.,  1812,  at
that  over  the  "  Java  "  on  29  Dee",  1812,  and  at  the
combat  with  the  "  Cyane  "  and  "  Levant "  off  Ma-
deira on  20  Feb.,  1820,  and  carried  the  "  Cyane "
into  New  York.

HOFFMAN,  David,  lawyer,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  25  Dec,  1784;  d.  in  New  York  city,  11  Nov.,
1854.  He  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  law,
became  a  member  of  the  Maryland  bar,  and  was
professor  of  law  in  the  University  of  Maryland
from  1817  till  1836,  when  the  professorship  was
abolished.  He  then  visited  Europe  for  relaxation,
and  remained  abroad  two  years.  On  his  return  he
took  part  in  the  presidential  canvass  as  an  earnest
supporter  of  Gen.  William  H.  Harrison,  and  was
an  elector  from  Maryland.  After  the  election  he
settled  in  Philadelphia,  and  practised  law  there
till  1847,  when  he  went  to  Europe  to  devote  him-
self to  the  preparation  of  a  work  on  the  history  of
the  world.  While  in  London  he  contributed  to
the  "  Times  "  a  series  of  articles  on  the  political
and  social  arrangements  and  economical  condition
of  the  United  States.  He  returned"  from  England
in  December,  1853,  in  order  to  regulate  his  private
affairs,  and  while  travelling  on  business  died  from
an  attack  of  apoplexy.  He  had  received  degrees
from  the  universities  of  Gottingen  and  Oxford.
When  entering  upon  his  professorship  he  pub-
lished "  A  Course  of  Legal  Study  "  (1817;  2d  ed.,
1836),  which  was  commended  by  the  most  eminent
jurists  for  its  plan  and  execution.  He  also  pub-
lished "  Legal  Outlines,"  an  epitome  of  the  prac-
tice and  study  of  the  law  (1836) ;  two  volumes  en-
titled '  Miscellaneous  Thoughts  on  Men,  Manners,
and  Things,"  by  "  Anthony  Grumbler,  of  Grum-
bleton  Hall,  Esq."  (1837);  "Viator,  or  a  Peep
into  my  Note-Book  "  (1841),  in  which  he  discussed
in  a  popular  style  questions  of  law,  religion,  art,
and  literature,  and  opposed  the  radical  tendencies
of  American  thought ;  and  "  Legal  Hints,"  a  con-
densation of  the  ideas  relating  to  professional  de-
portment contained  in  "  A  Course  of  Legal  Study,"
with  the  addition  of  some  counsel  to  law-students
(1846).  The  work  on  which  he  was  engaged  in
England  is  entitled  "  Chronicles  selected  from  the
Originals  of  Cartaphilus,  the  Wandering  Jew."
He  employed  the  legend  to  embellish  an  epito-
mized history  of  government  and  religion  since
the  time  of  Christ. Two  volumes,  bringing  the


HOFFMAN


HOFFMAN


227


history  down  to  the  year  573,  were  issued  in  a
striking  form  (London,  1853).  The  third  volume
was  partly  in  type  when  the  author  returned  to
the  United  States.  Three  other  volumes  had  been
in  great  part  written.  Mr.  Hoffman  also  left
"Moot  Court  Decisions,"  and  an  "Abridgment  of
Lord  Coke's  Reports,  with  Notes."

HOFFMAN,  David  Bancroft,  physician,  b.  in
Bainbridge,  Chenango  co.,  N.  Y.,  25  July,  1827.
He  studied  medicine  in  his  father's  office,  and  at-
tended lectures  at  Rush  and  Jefferson  medical  col-
leges. He  crossed  the  plains  in  1849,  and  spent
two  years  in  California.  In  1851-'3  he  was  a  sur-
geon on  mail  steamers  from  New  York  to  Aspin-
wall  and  from  Panama  to  San  Francisco.  He  then
settled  in  San  Diego,  Cal.,  was  coroner  and  after-
ward postmaster  there,  and  represented  the  county
in  the  legislature  in  1861-'2. He  received  the  de-

frea  of  M.  D.  from  Toland  medical  college  in  San
'rancisco  in  1864.  During  the  civil  war  he  served
as  a  field-surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  afterward
as  a  contract-surgeon  till  1880.  In  1868  he  was  a
presidential  elector,  in  1869-'73  collector  of  cus-
toms at  San  Diego,  and  in  1870-'5  U.  S.  commis-
sioner in  bankruptcy.  He  engaged  in  railroad
enterprises,  and  was  chosen  president  of  the  San
Diego  and  San  Bernardino  railroad  company.  He
published  a  "  Medical  History  of  San  Diego  Coun-
ty "  (San  Francisco,  1864).

HOFFMAN,  John  N.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Adams
county,  Pa,,  16  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Reading,  Pa.,  26
July,  1857.  He  studied  theology  under  the  Rev.
Frederick  D.  Shaeffer,  entered  the  ministry  in
1825,  and  was  pastor  of  Lutheran  churches  at
Taneytown,  Md.,  till  1831,  and  Chambersburg,  Pa.,
till  1842.  For  the  next  eleven  years  he  preached  at
Carlisle,  and  during  that  period  held  the  office  of
president  of  the  West  Pennsylvania  synod  for  three
years.  In  1853  he  assumed  charge  of  a  church  in
Lebanon,  Pa.,  and  a  few  months  later  was  called
to  Reading,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.  He
published  a  translation  of  Arndt's  "True  Chris-
tianity "  (Chambersburg,  1834) ;  a  volume  of  "  Evan-
gelical Hymns,  Original  and  Selected  "  (1838) ;  "  A
Collection  of  Texts  " ;  and  "  The  Broken  Platform,
a  Defence  of  the  Symbolical  Books  of  the  Luther-
an Church"  (Philadelphia,  1856).

HOFFMAN,  John  Thompson,  governor  of
New  York,  b.  in  Sing  Sing,  N.  Y.,  10  Jan..  1828 ;
d.  in  Wiesbaden,  Germany,  24  March.  1888.  He
was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1846,  studied
law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  January,  1849.
He  acquired  an  extensive  practice  in  New  York  city,
and  interested  himself  in  politics.  He  was  elected
recorder  in  1860,  re-elected  in  1863,  and  in  July  of
the  latter  year  delivered  severe  sentences  against
persons  that  had  been  engaged  in  the  draft  riots.
He  was  elected  by  the  Democrats  mayor  of  New
York  city  in  1865,  and  re-elected  in  1867.  He  was
first  nominated  a  candidate  for  governor  in  1866,
and  defeated  by  Reuben  E.  Fenton,  but  in  1868
was  re-nominated  and  elected,  and  in  1870  was  re-
elected. The  "Public  Papers  of  Governor  Hoff-
man "  were  published  (Albany,  1872).

HOFFMAN,  Michael,  politician,  b.  in  Clifton
Park,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y,  in  1788 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
X.  V..  27  Sept.,  1848.  He  studied  medicine,  and
afterward  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  at  Herkimer.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  in  1824,  and  re-elected  for  the  three
•ucceeding  terms,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1825,  to  2
March,  1833.  In  1833-5  he  was  canal  commis-
sioner of  the  state  of  New  York.  He  was  ap-
pointed register  of  the  land-office  at  Saginaw,  111.,
in  1836,  subsequently  returned  to  Herkimer,  and


was  a  member  of  the  New  York  legislature  in
1841,  1842,  and  1844,  and  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in  1846.  As  chairman  of  the
committee  of  ways  and  means  in  the  assembly,  and
of  the  committee  on  finance  in  the  convention,  he
originated  and  carried  through  important  financial
reforms.  He  was  at  the  time  of  his  death  naval
officer  of  the  port  of  New  York.

HOFFMAN,  Murray,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  29  Sept.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Flushing,  L.  I.,  7  May,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1809,
studied  law,  and  practised  in  New  York  city.  In
March.  1839,  he  became  assistant  vice-chancellor,
which  office  he  held  for  four  years.  He  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  superior  court  in  New  York
in  November,  1853,  and  held  that  office  till  the  end
of  1861.  He  published  "  Office  and  Duties  of  Mas-
ters in  Chancery  "  (1824) ; "  Vice-Chancery  Reports  "
(1839-40) ;  " Treatise  on  the  Practice  of  the  Court
of  Chancery "  (1840-'3) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Corpo-
ration of  New  York  as  Owners  of  Property,  and
Compilation  of  the  Laws  relating  to  the  Citv  of
New  York "  (1853) ;  and  "  Digest  of  the  Statutes
and  Decisions  relating  to  the  Board  of  Supervisors
of  the  County  of  New  York  "  (1866).  He  was  an
active  layman  in  the  Episcopal  church,  and  pub-
lished a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States "  (1850) :
"  Ecclesiastical  Law  in  the  State  of  New  York "
(1868) ;  and  "  The  Ritual  Law  of  the  Church,  with
Notes  on  the  Offices,  Articles,  etc."  (1872). — His
brother,  Ogden,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  3
May,  1793  ;  d.  there,  1  May,  1856,  was  intended  for
the  bar,  but  his  father  permitted  him,  after  his
graduation  at  Columbia  in  1812,  to  join  the  navy.
He  was  appointed  a  midshipman  on  31  Dec,  1814,
was  taken  prisoner  with  Capt.  Decatur  on  the
"  President,"  and  in  1815  served  under  that  officer
in  the  war  with  the  Barbary  states.  In  1816  he
resigned,  began  the  study  of  law  with  his  father,
and  completed  it  with  a  lawyer  of  Goshen,  N.  Y.,
whose  partner  he  became.  The  young  midship-
man displayed  courage  and  presence  of  mind  on
several  trying  occasions,  and  was  a  favorite  with
his  commanding  officer,  Com.  Decatur,  who,  when
Hoffman  left  the  navy,  expressed  regret  that  he
shoidd  have  exchanged  "an  honorable  profession
for  that  of  a  lawyer."  In  May,  1823,  he  was  ap-
pointed district  attorney  of  Orange  county,  and
in  1825  he  was  elected  by  the  Democrats  to  the
legislature.  At  the  close  of  his  term  he  removed
to  New  York  city,  and  became  a  partner  of  Hugh
Maxwell,  then  district  attorney.  When  President
Jackson  removed  the  deposits  from  the  U.  S.  bank
he  joined  the  Whig  party,  and  in  1828  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  state  assembly,  where  he
suggested  various  improvements  in  practice  and
procedure,  as  a  member  of  the  judiciary  committee.
He  succeeded  Maxwell  as  district  attorney  in  1829,
and  held  the  office  for  six  years.  During  twenty-
five  years  he  was  counsel  in  almost  every  noted
criminal  trial  in  New  York,  and  in  many  impor-
tant civil  cases.  In  1836  he  was  elected  a  member
of  congress,  served  on  the  committee  on  foreign
affairs,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  debates.
He  was  re-elected  in  1838,  and  at  the  conclusion  of
his  second  term  was  appointed  by  President  Har-
rison U  S.  district  attorney  at  New  York.  This
office  he  resigned  in  1845.  In  1853-5  he  was  at-
tornev-general  of  the  state. — Their  half-brother,
Charles  Fenno,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1806 ;  d.
in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  7  June,  1884,  was  sent  to  an
academy  in  Poughkeepsie  at  the  age  of  nine,  but
ran  away  to  escape  harsh  treatment,  and  was  placed
under  the  tuition  of  a  Scotch  clergyman  in  New


228


HOFFMAN


HOFFORD


Jersey.  In  1817  his  leg  was  crushed  between  a
ferry-boat  and  the  wharf,  necessitating  amputa-
tion. Notwithstanding  the  loss  of  his  leg,  he  be-
came proficient  in  athletic  exercises.  He  entered
Columbia,  but  left  before  graduation,  studied  law
with  Harmanus  Bleecker  in  Albany,  at  the  same

time  contributing
articles  to  the  news-
papers, and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  at
the  age  of  twenty-
one.  After  three
years  of  practice  he
resolved  to  adopt
literature  as  his  pro-
fession, and  joined
Charles  King  in  the
editorship  of  the
New  York  "  Ameri-
can," to  which  he
had  previously  been
a  contributor.  In
1833  he  established
^fea^^S^**^"*6?  the  "Knickerbocker

Magazine,"  which
he  transferred  to  Timothy  Flint  after  issuing  a
few  numbers.  He  then  became  proprietor  of  the
"  American  Monthly  Magazine,"  and  was  its  chief
editor  for  many  years.  For  twelve  months  he  edited
also  the  "  New  York  Mirror."  In  1846  he  became
editor  of  the  "  Literary  World,"  and  conducted  it
for  a  year  and  a  half.  After  relinquishing  the  edi-
torship he  contributed  to  that  journal  a  series  of
"  Sketches  of  Society,"  which  was  closed  in  Decem-
ber, 1848.  Of  these  papers  the  most  popular  were
fanciful  sketches  entitled  "  The  Man  in  the  Reser-
voir "  and  "  The  Man  in  the  Boiler."  He  received
an  appointment  in  the  civil  service  at  Washington,
but  in  1849  was  attacked  with  a  mental  disorder,
from  which  he  never  entirely  recovered,  spending
the  last  thirty-five  years  of  his  life  in  the  Harris-
burg  insane  asylum.  His  first  published  book  was
"A  Winter  in  the  West"  (New  York  and  London,
1835),  containing  spirited  descriptions  of  nature  and
sketches  of  frontier  life,  originally  printed  in  the
"  American,"  composed  after  a  long  journey  in  the
saddle,  undertaken  for  his  health,  in  the  western
country  in  1833.  It  was  followed  by  "  Wild  Scenes
in  Forest  and  Prairie"  (London,  1837),  which  was
republished  with  additions  (New  York,  1843).  A
novel  entitled  "  Vanderlyn "  was  published  in  the
"American  Monthly"  in  1837.  Next  appeared
"  Greyslaer,  a  Romance  of  the  Mohawk  "  (New  York,
1840),  founded  on  the  trial  of  Beauchamp  for  the
murder  of  Col.  Sharpe.  He  wrote  another  romance
called  "  The  Red  Spur  of  Ramapo,"  but  the  manu-
script was  destroyed  by  a  careless  servant.  Hoff-
man was  also  the  author  of  many  poems  and  of
songs  that  were  set  to  music  and  attained  great
popularity.  Among  the  latter  are  "  Sparkling  and
Bright,"  "  Rosalie  Clare,"  and  "  Monterey,"  a  great
favorite  with  Gen.  Grant.  The  first  collection
of  his  poetry  was  "  The  Vigil  of  Faith,  a  Le-

fend  of  the  Adirondack  Mountains,  and  other
'oems  "  (New  York,  1842).  of  which  several  edi-
tions were  published  in  the  United  States  and
England.  A  larger  collection  is  "The  Echo,  or
Borrowed  Notes  for  Home  Circulation"  (Phila-
delphia, 1844),  the  title  of  which  was  suggested  by
a  criticism  in  the  "  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,"
charging  Hoffman  with  plagiarizing  from  Thomas
Moore.  "  Lays  of  the  Hudson,  and  other  Poems  "
(New  York,  1846)  contained  additional  lyrics.
"Love's  Calendar,  and  other  Poems"  (1848)'  is  a
fuller  collection  than  "The  Echo." He  was  the


author  of  "The  Administration  of  Jacob  Leisler"
(1848)  in  Sparks's  "  American Biography." In

1847  he  delivered  before  the  St.  Nicholas  society  a
discourse  on  "  The  Pioneers  of  New  York,"  which
was  published  (New  York,  1848).  A  new  edition
of  his  poems  was  prepared  by  his  nephew,  Edward
F.  Hoffman  (New  York,  1874).  It  contains  a  criti-
cal sketch  of  the  author  by  his  friend,  William
Cullen  Bryant. — Their  grandmother,  Sarah,  phi-
lanthropist, b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  8  Sept.,  1742,  was
a  daughter  of  David  Ogden,  and  married  Nicholas
Hoffman  in  1762.  She  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Society  for  the  relief  of  poor  widows  with
small  children,  which  was  established  in  New  York
city  in  1797,  and  was  accustomed  to  visit  the  poor
quarters  of  the  city  to  administer  to  the  wants  of
the  sick  and  destitute.  Washington  Irving  was
engaged  to  her  grand-daughter,  Matilda  Hotiman.
who  died  before  the  time  appointed  for  their  mar-
riage.— Murray's  son,  Wickiiam,  diplomatist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  2  April,  1821,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1841.  He  served  during  the  civil  war
in  the  adjutant-general's  department,  being  ap-
pointed a  captain  on  6  March,  1862,  and  promoted
major  on  26  Aug.,  1863.  He  was  commissioned
secretary  of  legation  at  London  on  15  Dec,  1874,
and  on  27  Feb.,  1883,  minister  to  Denmark,  which
post  he  held  until  his  successor  was  appointed  on
2  April,  1885.

HOFFMAN,  Richard  H.,  musician,  b.  in  Man-
chester, England,  24  May,  1831.  He  received  his
early  musical  instruction  from  his  father.  Later
he  studied  successively  under  distinguished  Euro-
pean masters,  among  them  Moscheles,  Thalberg,
and  Liszt. He  came  to  New  York  in  1847,  and  in

1848  made  with  the  violinist  Burke  an  extended  con-
cert tour  in  the  United  States  and  Canada.  He  was
the  solo  piano-player  of  the  first  series  of  the  Jenny
Lind  concerts.  In  1854  he  was  elected  an  hono-
rary member  of  the  Philharmonic  society.  He
then  settled  in  New  York  as  a  teacher  and  concert-
player.  In  the  latter  capacity  he  now  appears  but
rarely,  except  at  the  concerts  of  the  Philharmonic
society.  He  has  composed  several  gracefully  con-
ceived pieces  for  the  piano-forte.

HOFFMAN,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city,  2  Dec,  1807 ;  d.  in  Rock  Island,  111.,  12  Aug.,
1884.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  a  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  the  U.  S.  army.  The  son  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1829,
entered  the  army  as  a  lieutenant  of  infantry,  served
in  Kansas  and  in  the  Black  Hawk  war  in  1832,  and
was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  on  16  Nov.,  1836,
and  captain  on  1  Feb.,  1838.  In  the  war  with
Mexico  he  was  engaged  in  the  march  through
Chihuahua,  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  the  battle  of
Cerro  Gordo,  was  brevetted  for  services  at  Contre-
ras  and  Churubusco,  and  again  for  bravery  in  the
battle  of  Molino  del  Rey,  and  was  present  at  the
storming  of  Chapultepec  and  at  the  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  He  was  promoted  major  on  15
April,  1851,  served  in  the  Sioux  expedition  of  1855,
and  in  1858  in  the  Utah  expedition  and  the  march
to  California.  He  became  a  lieutenant-colonel  on
17  Oct.,  1860,  and  was  engaged  in  frontier  duty  at
San  Antonio,  Tex.,  when  he  was  made  a  prisoner
of  war  by  the  Confederates,  and  not  exchanged  till
27  Aug.,  1862.  He  was  made  a  colonel  on  25  April,
1862,  served  during  the  war  as  eommissary-gi'iieral
of  prisoners  at  Washington,  and  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  and  major-general.  At  the  clow
of  the  war  he  took  command  of  his  regiment  in
Kansas,  and  in  1870  was  retired  at  his  own  request.

HOFFORD,  Martin Lowrie,  clergyman  and
educator,  b.  near  Doylestown,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  27


I


HOGAN


IIOGE


229


Jan.,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  Lafayette  and  at
Princeton,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1849,  studied
theology  at  the  Princeton  seminary  for  one  year,
and  became  principal  of  the  Camden  collegiate  in-
stitute. While  there  he  organized  a  church  at
Beverly,  N.  J.,  being  licensed  by  the  Presbytery  in
Philadelphia  in  1852.  In  1855  he  was  ordained  as
an  evangelist  in  Burlington,  N.  J.  In  1860  he  be-
came a  teacher  in  the  Trenton  city  institute,  and
in  1863  took  charge  of  a  military  institute  at
Allentown,  Pa.,  which  nourished  under  his  admin-
istration, and  was  incorporated  as  Muhlenberg  col-
lege, in  which  he  was  a  professor  and  afterward
president.  He  taught  and  held  pastorates  at  Cam-
Sen  and  Beverly,  N.  J.,  and  Doylestown,  Pa.,  in
1868-'78,  and  then  became  pastor  at  Morrisville,
Pa.  He  is  the  author  of  devotional  songs  and
gospel  hymns  that  are  extensively  used.

HOGAN,  John,  politician,  b.  in  Mallow,  Ireland,
2  Jan.,  1805.  He  emigrated  with  his  father  to  the
United  States  in  1817,  learned  the  shoemaking
trade  in  Baltimore,  removed  to  the  west  in  1826,
and  opened  a  store  in  Madison  county,  111.,  in  1831.
From  1834  till  1837  he  was  president  of  the  Illinois
board  of  public  works,  and  in  1836  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature.  He  was  also  elected  a  member
of  congress,  but  did  not  qualify  as  such.  He  held
the  office  of  register  of  the  land-office  at  Dixon,
111.,  from  1841  till  1845,  when  he  settled  as  a  mer-
chant and  banker  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  In  1857-'61
he  was  postmaster  at  St.  Louis.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat  from  Missouri  in  1864.  He
is  the  author  of  "Thoughts  about  St.  Louis"  (St.
Louis,  1857) ;  "  The  Resources  of  Missouri "  (1858) ;
f  Sketches  of  Early  Western  Pioneers  "  (1859) ;  and
"History  of  Western  Methodism  "  (1860).

HOGAN,  John  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Bruff  county,  Limerick,  Ireland,  10  May,  1829.
He  studied  at  the  village  school  of  Holycross  and
under  private  tutors,  came  to  the  United  States
about  1847,  settled  in  St.  Louis,  where  he  entered
the  Theological  seminary,  and  in  April,  1852,  was
ordained  priest.  After  holding  pastorates  at  Old
Mines  and  Potosi,  Mo.,  he  was  in  1854  transferred
to  St.  Louis,  where  he  organized  the  new  parish  of
St.  Michael's  and  built  its  church.  He  afterward
took  charge  of  the  northwest  of  Missouri,  where
there  was  neither  Roman  Catholic  church  nor
priest,  founded  numerous  missions,  and  also  tried
to  found  a  Roman  Catholic  settlement  in  southern
Missouri,  but  the  civil  war  prevented  its  success.
The  new  diocese  of  St.  Joseph's  was  created  on  3
March,  1868,  comprising  part  of  Missouri,  and
Father  Hogan  was  consecrated  as  its  bishop  in  St.
Louis,  13  Sept.,  1868.  There  were  at  this  time  but
nine  priests  and  eleven  churches  under  the  juris-
diction of  Bishop  Hogan.  In  1880  the  number  of
priests  had  increased  to  twenty-six  and  the  churches
to  thirty.  A  Benedictine  monastery  was  founded
by  Bishop  Hogan  at  Conception,  Mo.,  and  he  also  in-
troduced various  sisterhoods,  by  whose  aid  he  car-
ried on  the  work  of  the  parochial  schools.  The
new  diocese  of  Kansas  City  was  created  on  10  Sept.,
1880,  and  Bishop  Hogan  was  appointed  its  bishop,
retaining  charge  of  the  diocese  of  St.  Joseph's  as
administrator,  but  residing  in  Kansas  City.  Schools
were  at  once  begun  in  nine  parishes,  the  Redemp-
torist  fathers  founded  a  novitiate  and  college  in
Kansas  City,  and  the  Benedictine  abbey  of  New
Engelberg  and  several  charitable  institutions  were
established.  In  May,  1882,  Bishop  Hogan  began
to  build  the  cathedral  of  the  immaculate  concep-
tion in  Kansas  City,  and  in  1884  the  two  dioceses
nnder  his  jurisdiction  contained  40,000  Roman
Catholics  with  75  churches  and  80  priests.


HOGAN,  John  Sheridan,  Canadian  journalist,
b.  near  Dublin,  Ireland,  about  1815 ;  d.  in  Toronto,
Canada,  in  December,  1859.  He  was  sent  to  an
uncle  in  Toronto  at  the  age  of  eleven,  but  ran
away,  found  employment  as  a  newsboy  for  the
"  Canadian  Wesleyan,"  rose  to  be  foreman,  and  was
subsequently  placed  on  the  staff  of  writers.  He
then  studied  law,  but  was  never  admitted  to  the
bar.  About  1840  he  contributed  articles  on  Cana-
dian politics  to  •'  Blackwood's  Edinburgh  Maga-
zine." A  short  time  afterward  he  was  arrested  in
Lockport,  N.  Y.,  for  complicity  in  the  burning  of
the  steamer  "  Caroline,"  and  after  his  discharge
brought  a  claim  for  indemnity,  which  was  not  en-
tertained. In  1856  he  was  awarded  the  first  prize
by  the  Paris  exhibition  committee  for  an  essay  on
"  Canada  and  Her  Resources  "  (New  York,  1855).
He  was  for  a  short  time  editor  of  the  Toronto
"  Colonist."  In  1857  he  was  elected  to  represent
the  county  of  Grey  in  the  provincial  parliament,
and  acted  with  the  Reform  party.  While  still  a
member  of  the  house  he  suddenly  disappeared,  and
eighteen  months  later  it  was  ascertained  that  he
had  been  murdered.

HOGAN,  William,  lawver,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1792 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  about  1875.  He
accompanied  his  father  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
and  there  learned  the  Dutch  language.  After  his
return  he  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1811,  and
studied  law.  Purchasing  land  in  Black  River
county,  he  became  a  pioneer  in  that  region,  and
did  much  to  develop  the  country.  The  town  of
Hogansport  on  the  St.  Lawrence  river  was  named
for  him.  He  was  for  many  years  a  county  judge,
and  in  1830  was  elected  as  a  jacksonian  Democrat
to  the  national  house  of  representatives.  He  be-
came an  examiner  of  claims  in  the  department  of
state  at  Washington  in  1850,  and  afterward  trans-
lator. This  post,  for  which  he  was  fitted  by  travel
and  study  in  Europe,  he  retained  till  1869.

HOGE,  John  (hoag),  member  of  congress,  b.
near  Carlisle,  Pa.,  10  Sept.,  1760 ;  d.  near  Wash-
ington, Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1824.  He  was  educated  pri-
vately, and,  entering  the  Revolutionary  army  in
1776,  was  made  an  ensign  of  the  9th  Pennsylvania
regiment.  In  1782  he  removed  to  the  western  part
of  the  state,  and  with  his  brother  William  founded
the  town  of  Washington.  He  was  in  1789  a  dele-
gate to  the  convention  that  formed  the  state  con-
stitution, and  from  1790  till  1795  was  in  the  state
senate.  In  1799  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
"  American  philosophical  society,"  and  was  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  from  Pennsylvania  in  1804
and  1805,  for  the  unexpired  term  of  his  brother
William. — His  brother,  William,  b.  in  Cumber-
land county.  Pa.,  in  1762 ;  d.  in  Washington,  Pa.,
25  Sept.,  1814,  was  a  representative  in  congress
from  Pennsylvania  from  1801  till  1804,  when  he
resigned,  and  again  from  1807  till  1809.

HOGE,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Frederick
county,  Va.,  15  Feb.,  1752;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
5  July,  1820.  His  ancestors,  Scotch  Presbyterians,
emigrated  to  the  United  States  during  the  religious
persecutions  of  Charles  II.  Moses  served  for  a  short
time  in  the  Continental  army  during  the  Revolu-
tion. In  1778  he  entered  Timber  Ridge  academy,
Virginia,  and  in  1780  became  a  candidate  for  the
ministry,  having  received  his  theological  instruc-
tion from  Rev.  James  Waddell,  the  "  Blind
Preacher."  In  1781  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  a
Presbyterian  church  in  Hardy  county,  Va.  During
his  eight  years'  pastorate,  he  also  taught  a  school,
which  enjoyed  a  wide  popularity.  From  1806  till
his  death  he  was  president  of  Hampden  Sidney
college,  and,  after  the  establishment  of  the  theolog-


•230


HOGE


HOLABIRD


ical  seminary  in  1812,  was  also  professor  of  divinity
in  that  institution.  In  1820  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church
which  met  in  Philadelphia,  and  he  died  during  its
session.  John  Randolph  said  that  Dr.  Hoge  was
the  most  eloquent  preacher  he  had  ever  heard.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Prince-
ton in  1810.  He  published  "  Christian  Panoply,
an  Answer  to  Payne's  '  Age  of  Reason ' "  (Phila-
delphia, 1799);  and  "Sermons"  (1820).— His  son,
fames,  clergyman,  b.  in  Moorfield,  Va.,  in  1784;
d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  22  Sept.,  1863,  was  educated
by  his  father,  licensed  to  preach  in  1805,  and  or-
dained and  appointed  missionary  to  Ohio  in  1809.
Within  the  next  year  he  organized  a  church  in
Franklinton,  Ohio,  and  was  then  ordained  pastor
of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Columbus,  continu-
ing in  this  charge  till  1858,  when  age  and  infirmity
compelled  his  resignation.  Dr.  Hoge  was  the  pio-
neer of  the  temperance  movement  in  Ohio,  and  an
ardent  abolitionist,  although  born  in  a  slave-state.
He  was  instrumental  in  establishing  the  state  deaf,
dumb,  blind,  and  insane  asylums,  was  a  trustee  of
two  educational  institutions,  and  a  founder  of  the
Ohio  Bible  society. — Another  son,  Samuel  Davies,
clergyman,  b.  in  Shepherdstown,  Va.,  in  1791 ;  d.
in  Athens,  Ohio,  10  Dec,  1826,  was  graduated  at
Hampden  Sidney  college,  Virginia,  in  1810,  studied
theology  there,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1831.
Before  his  licensure  he  was  for  a  short  period  vice-
president  of  Hampden  Sidney.  In  1816  he  was
installed  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in  Madi-
son and  Culpeper  counties,  Va.,  and,  removing  to
Ohio  in  1821,  officiated  at  Hillsborough  and  Rock
Spring.  In  1824  he  became  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  philosophy  in  the  Ohio  uni-
versity, Athens,  was  acting  president  for  several
sessions,  and  pastor  of  the  town  and  college
churches. — His  son,  Moses  Drury,  clergyman,  b.
near  Hampden  Sidney  college,  Va.,  17  Sept.,  1819,
was  graduated  at  Hampden  Sidney  in  1839,  and,
after  taking  the  course  at  Union  theological  semi-
nary, was  licensed  to  preach  in  1844,  and  immedi-
ately called  to  Richmond  as  assistant  pastor  of  the
1st  Presbyterian  church.  Under  Dr.  Hoge's  charge,
a  colony  soon  went  out  from  that  church,  which,  in
January,  1845,  was  organized  as  the  2d  Presbyte-
rian church.  This  has  been  his  only  charge  during
a  ministry  of  forty  years.  During  the  civil  war
he  ran  the  blockade  to  England,  in  order  to  pro-
cure Bibles  and  other  religious  books  for  the  Con-
federate army.  Among  those  who  cordially  fa-
vored his  application  to  the  British  and  foreign
Bible  society  was  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  who  was
largely  instrumental  in  obtaining  for  him  a  grant
of  £4,000  worth  of  Bibles  and  testaments.  Dr.
Hoge  has  travelled  extensively  throughout  Europe
and  the  east,  was  a  delegate  to  the  Evangelical  al-
liance that  met  in  Philadelphia  in  1873,  and  to  the
Pan-Presbyterian  council  in  Edinburgh  in  1877.  In
1875  he  delivered  the  oration  at  the  unveiling  of  the
statue  of  "  Stonewall "  Jackson,  that  was  presented
by  English  gentlemen  to  the  state  of  Virginia.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Union  theolog-
ical seminary,  va.,  and  declined  the  presidency
of  Hampden  Sidney  college.  In  1862-7  he  was
associated  with  Rev.  Thomas  Moore,  D.  D.,  in
the  editorship  of  the  "  Central  Presbyterian."
Throughout  his  ministry  he  has  made  numerous
addresses  before  literary  and  scientific  societies,
and  is  regarded  as  the  most  eloquent  pulpit  orator
in  the  southern  Presbyterian  church. — Another
son,  William  James,  clergyman,  b.  near  Hamp-
den Sidney  college,  Va.,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  Petersburg,
Va.,  5  July,  1864,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1850,


and  in  1852  became  pastor  of  the  Westminster
Presbyterian  church  in  Baltimore,  Md.  In  1856
he  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of  Biblical  New  Tes-
tament literature  in  Union  theological  seminary,
New  York  city,  and  after  three  years  of  successful
work  became  collegiate  pastor  of  the  Brick  church  in
that  city.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  went
to  the  south,  and  after  a  short  service  in  Charlottes-
ville, Va.,  was  called  to  Petersburg,  Va.,  where  his
labors  during  the  siege  of  the  city  brought  on  a
fever  to  which  he  succumbed.  He  published,  be-
sides tracts  and  sermons, il  Blind  Bartimeus,  or  the
Sightless  Sinner  "  (New  York,  1859),  which  had  a
large  circulation  in  this  country,  and  was  trans-
lated into  most  of  the  continental  languages.

HOGE,  Solomon  La  Fayette,  member  of  con-
gress, b.  in  Logan  county,  Ohio,  about  1837.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Cincinnati  law  college  in  1859,
and  practised  at  Bellefontaine.  He  entered  the
army  in  1861  as  1st  lieutenant  of  Ohio  volunteers,
was  promoted  captain,  and  was  severely  wounded
at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  was  twice
brevetted  for  gallantry  in  battle,  and  on  23  Feb.,
1866,  received  the  commission  of  2d  lieutenant  in
the  6th  regular  infantry.  He  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  on  28  July,  1866,  but  resigned  in  1868
and  removed  to  South  Carolina,  where  he  took  an
active  part  in  the  reconstruction  movement.  He
was  elected  an  associate  judge  of  the  state  supreme
court,  and  afterward  to  congress,  serving  from  De-
cember, 1869,  till  March,  1871,  and  again  from  6
Dec,  1875,  till  3  March,  1877.  He  was  comptroller-
general  of  South  Carolina  in  1874-'5.

HOGEBOOM,  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Columbia
countv,  N.  Y.,  in  1808 ;  d.  in  Hudson.  N.  Y.,  12
Sept.,*  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1827,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1830,  be-
gan practice  in  Hudson,  and  soon  attained  emi-
nence in  his  profession.  In  1831  he  became  a  mas-
ter in  chancery  and  county  judge  of  Columbia
county,  and  in  1839  was  elected  to  the  legislature.
In  1847  and  1849  he  was  a  candidate  for  justice  of
the  supreme  court,  but  was  defeated.  In  1857  he
was  elected  to  that  office  and  again  in  1865.  His
written  judicial  opinions  are  regarded  as  elegant
in  style  and  accurate  in  expression.

HOGUET,  Henry  Louis,  merchant,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  5  Nov.,  1816.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1834,  and  was  clerk  in  a  commercial
house  until  1848,  when  he  became  a  member  of  the
house  of  Wilmerding,  Hoguet  and  Co.,  from  active
participation  in  which  he  retired  in  1875.  It  was
principally  through  him  that  the  New  York  Catho-
lic protectory  was  founded.  He  has  been  its  presi-
dent for  over  thirteen  years,  and  has  done  much
to  make  it  successful.  He  has  been  connected
with  the  emigrant  industrial  savings-bank  for
twenty-eight  years,  and  its  president  for  twenty-
one.  Pope  Pius  IX.  conferred  on  him  in  1877  the
title  of  Knight  of  St.  Gregory  the  Great.  He  has
been  a  commissioner  of  emigration,  a  member  of
the  state  board  of  public  charities,  and  is  active  in
works  of  charity  and  public  enterprise.

HOIT,  Albert  Gallatin,  artist,  b.  in  Sand-
wich, N.  H.,  13  Dec,  1809 ;  d.  in  West  Roxbury,
Mass.,  18  Dec,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1829,  and  became  a  portrait-painter,  buj;
he  was  also  successful  as  a  landscape  artist.  He
painted  in  Portland,  then  in  Bangor  and  Belfast,
and  at  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,  but  settled  in
Boston  in  1839.  From  October,  1842,  till  July,
1844,  he  was  in  Europe.

HOLABIRD,  Samuel  Beckley, soldier,  b.  in  Ca-
naan, Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,16  June,  1826.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849.


HOLBROOK


HOLCOMBE


231


assigned  to  the  1st  infantry,  promoted  1st  lieuten-
ant in  May,  1855,  and  was  in  service  at  the  acade-
my as  adjutant  from  2  Sept.,  1859,  till  13  May,
1861.  He  served  during  the  civil  war  in  the
Northern  Virginia  campaign  in  August  and  Sep-
tember, 1862,  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in
the  Maryland  campaign,  and  was  chief  quarter-
master of  the  Department  .of  the  Gulf  from  16
Dec,  1862,  till  July,  1865.  He  was  present  at  the
siege  of  Port  Hudson  in  1863,  and  on  13  March,  1865,
was  brevetted  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  colonel,
and  brigadier-general,  for  meritorious  services  dur-
ing the  war.  He  was  depot  quartermaster  at  New
Orleans  from  1  Oct.  till  16  Dec,  1865,  and  was
chief  quartermaster  of  the  Department  of  Louisi-
ana from  1  Oct.,  1865,  till  7  March,  1866.  He  was
appointed  lieutenant-colonel  and  deputy  quarter-
master-general 29  July,  1866 ;  colonel  and  quarter-
master-general, 22  Jan.,  1881,  and  brigadier-gen-
eral and  quartermaster-general,  1  July,  1883.  Gen.
Holabird  has  translated  Gen.  Jomini's  "Treatise
on  Grand  Military  Operations  "  (1865).

HOLBROOK,  Alfred,  educator,  b.  in  Derby,
Conn.,  in  1816.  He  is  the  son  of  Josiah  Hol-
brook,  a  philanthropic  educator  and  inventor.
The  son  received  part  of  his  education  at  the
academy  in  Groton,  Mass.  He  possessed  great  in-
ventive talents  and  a  taste  for  civil  engineering,
but  devoted  himself  to  teaching.  He  founded  a
large  institution  at  Lebanon,  Ohio,  principally  for
the  training  of  teachers,  which  proved  success-
ful. He  published  a  volume  of  "  Lectures  "  on
the  subject  of  education.

HOLBROOK,  Amos,  physician,  b.  in  Belling-
ham,  Mass.,  23  Jan.,  1754;  d.  in  Milton,  Mass..  17
June,  1842.  Early  in  life  he  began  the  study  of
medicine,  and  in  1775  entered  the  army  as  a  sur-
geon's mate  in  Col.  John  Greaton's  regiment.  In
March,  1776,  he  was  appointed  a  surgeon  in  this
corps,  and  soon  afterward  accompanied  it  to  New
York  and  then  to  Albany,  with  the  troops  that
were  intended  to  re-enforce  the  expedition  against
Quebec.  In  March,  1777,  failing  health  obliged
him  to  apply  for  a  discharge,  and  he  soon  after-
ward began  practice  in  Milton,  Mass.  In  the
summer  of  that  year  he  procured  the  place  of  sur-

feon  in  a  privateer  under  the  command  of  Capt.
_  'ruxton,  visited  France,  and  returned  to  Milton
in  about  a  year.  About  this  time  he  established
temporary  hospitals  for  the  admission  of  patients
who  had  been  inoculated  for  the  small-pox,  and
was  active  in  introducing  and  promoting  public
vaccination  in  Milton,  which  was  the  first  town  in
the  country  that  in  a  corporate  capacity  gave  its  in-
habitants the  benefits  of  this  protective  agent.
In  1811  he  was  elected  a  foreign  member  of  the
Medical  society  of  London.  In  1813  the  degree  of
M.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Harvard.

HOLBROOK,  James,  journalist,  b.  in  1812 ;  d.
in  Brooklyn,  Conn.,  28  April,  1864.  He  was  to  a
great  extent  self-educated,  and  was  a  printer  by
trade.  He  was  for  several  years  editor  of  the
"Norwich  Aurora,"  and  in  i839  established  the
"Patriot  and  Eagle  "  at  Hartford,  Conn.  In  1845
Mr.  Holbrook  was  appointed  special  agent  of  the
post-office  department,  which  office  he  held  till
his  death.  He  was  remarkably  skilful  as  a  detect-
ive, and  brought  many  mail  robbers  to  justice.
In  1859  he  established  "  The  United  States  Mail,"
a  journal  devoted  to  postal  matters,  which  he
edited  till  his  death.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Ten
Years  among  the  Mail-Bags,"  in  which  he  narrates
his  experience  as  a  detective  (1855).

HOLBROOK,  John  Edwards,  naturalist,  b.  in
Beaufort,  S.  C,  30  Dec,  1794;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Mass.,


8  Sept.,  1871.  He  spent  his  early  life  in  Wren-
tham,  Mass.,  which  for  many  years  had  been  the
home  of  his  father's  family,  and  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1815.  He  took  his  medical  degree  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1818,  and  then
continued  his  professional  studies  for  two  years  in
London  and  Edinburgh,  after  which  he  spent  two
more  years  on  the  continent,  devoting  much  time
to  natural  history,  especially  in  Paris.  In  1822  he
returned  to  the  United  States,  and  established
himself  as  a  physician  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  He
was  chosen  professor  of  anatomy  at  the  Medical
college  of  South  Carolina  in  1824,  and  continued
to  occupy  that  chair  for  more  than  thirty  years.
Dr.  Holbrook  attained  a  high  reputation  by  his
lectures,  owing  to  his  wonderful  knowledge  of  com-
parative anatomy,  but  seldom  performed  a  surgical
operation  or  attended  an  obstetric  case.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  head  of  the  examining  board  of
surgeons  of  South  Carolina.  Dr.  Holbrook's  work
as  a  naturalist  made  his  name  widely  known.  His
first  contribution  to  science  was  "  American  Her-
petology,  or  a  Description  of  Reptiles  inhabiting
the  United  States"  (5  vols.,  4to,  Philadelphia,
1842).  The  simplicity  and  precision  of  its  descrip-
tions, and  the  beauty  and  correctness  of  its  illus-
trations, attracted  attention  not  only  in  the  United
States,  but  also  in  Europe.  Through  it  he  became
acquainted  with  Louis  Agassiz,  with  whom  he
afterward  maintained  the  friendliest  of  relations,
visiting  him  annually  during  his  summer  trips  to
New  England.  He  then  began  a  "  Southern  Ich-
thyology," to  include  descriptions  of  the  fishes  of
Georgia,  South  Carolina,  and  Florida,  but,  after  the
publication  of  two  numbers,  he  found  the  field  too
extensive,  and  therefore  confined  his  studies  to  the
"  Ichthyology  of  South  Carolina "  (Charleston,
1854  et  seq.),  of  which  ten  numbers  made  their
appearance.  In  consequence  of  the  civil  war  this
publication  was  discontinued.  He  was  a  member
of  the  American  philosophical  society  and  an  early
member  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences. —
His  brother,  Silas  Pinckney,  author,  b.  in  Beau-
fort. S.  C,  1  June,  1796;  d*.  in  Pineville,  S.  C,
26  May,  1835,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1815,
studied  law  in  Boston,  and  practised  at  Med-
field,  Mass.  He  was  one  of  the  most  popular  con-
tributors to  the  "  New  England  Galaxy  "  and  the
"  Boston  Courier,"  to  which  he  furnished  sketches
entitled  "  Letters  from  a  Mariner  and  Travels  of
a  Tin  Peddler,"  under  the  name  of  "Jonathan
Farbrick,"  and  amusing  "  Letters  from  a  Boston
Merchant,"  and  "  Recollections  of  Japan  and
China."  These,  with  others,  were  published  as
"  Sketches  by  a  Traveller  "  (1834).  He  also  wrote
the  European  part  of  Peter  Parley's  "  Pictorial
Geography,"  and  conducted  the  "Boston  Trib-
une, and  a  comic  paper  called  the  "  Spectacles."

HOLCOMBE,  Amasa,  manufacturer,  b.  in  that
part  of  Granbv,  Conn.,  that  now  belongs  to  South-
wick,  Mass.,  18  June,  1787;  d.  there,  27  Feb.,  1875.
He  was  a  farmer's  son,  and  received  a  district-school
education.  In  1806  he  made  surveyors'  compasses
for  his  own  use,  and  two  years  afterward  began  the
compilation  of  almanacs,  which  he  published  for
several  years.  Subsequently  he  taught  surveying,
civil  engineering,  and  astronomy,  and  in  1826
adopted  the  profession  of  civil  engineering.  In
1828  he  began  to  make  telescopes,  and  until  1842
had  no  competitor  in  the  United  States.  For  his
skill  he  received  in  1835  the  "  Scott  Legacy  "  from
the  city  of  Philadelphia,  a  silver  medal  from  the
Franklin  institute  in  1838,  a  gold  medal  from  the
American  institute,  New  York,  in  1839,  and  a  di-
ploma in  1840  from  the  same  institute. He  repre-


232


HOLCOMBE


HOLDEN


sented  Southwick  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature
for  three  years,  and  in  1852  was  a  member  of  the
state  senate.  In  1837  he  received  the  degree  of
A.  M.  from  Williams.  For  over  thirty  years  he
was  a  licensed  preacher  in  the  Methodist  church,
and  served  the  church  in  his  town  without  salary.

HOLCOMBE,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Prince
Edward  county,  Va.,  22  Sept.,  1762;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  22  May,  1826.  After  serving  as  a  cap-
tain in  the  Revolutionary  army,  he  began  to  preach,
and  in  1785  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church
in  Pike  Creek,  S.  C.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  South
Carolina  convention  that  ratified  the  constitution
of  the  United  States.  In  1791  he  became  pastor
of  the  Baptist  churches  in  Eutah,  May  River,  and
St.  Helena,  was  afterward  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  and
in  1799  accepted  a  call  to  Savannah,  Ga.  There  he
organized  the  Savannah  female  seminary,  and  con-
ducted the  "  Georgia  Analytical  Repository."  He
was  also  instrumental  in  establishing  Mount  Enon
academy  in  1804,  and  a  missionary  society  in  1806.
Prom  1812  till  his  death  he  was  pastor  of  the  1st
Baptist  church  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  in  1810.  He  pub-
lished a  "  Funeral  Discourse  on  the  Death  of  Wash-
ington," and  a  volume  of  "  Lectures  on  Primitive
Theology  "  (Philadelphia,  1822).

HOLCOMBE,  Hosea,  clergvman,  b.  in  Union
District,  S.  C,  20  July,  1780;  d.  in  Jefferson
county,  Ala.,  in  1841.  He  was  a  farmer  until  1800,
when  he  began  the  study  of  theology,  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1801,  and,  after  ten  years'  labor,  re-
moved to  North  Carolina,  and  finally  settled  in
Jefferson  county,  Ala.  He  published  "A  Collec-
tion of  Sacred  Hymns"  (1815);  "Anti-Mission
Principles  Exposed"  (1836);  and  "The  History
of  Alabama  Baptists  "  (1840).

HOLCOMBE,  James  Philemon,  author,  b.  in
Lynchburg,  Va.,  25  Sept.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Capon
Springs,  Va.,  26  Aug.,  1873.  He  was  educated  at
Yale  and  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  and  was
professor  of  law  in  the  latter  institution  from  1852
till  1860.  He  was  a  secession  member  of  the  Vir-
ginia convention  of  1861,  served  in  the  Confeder-
ate congress  in  1861-'3,  and  was  Confederate  com-
missioner to  Canada  in  1863-'5.  From  1868  until
his  death  he  was  principal  of  the  Bellevue  high-
school,  Nelson  county,  Va.  Besides  constant  con-
tributions to  periodicals  and  to  the  publications  of
the  Virginia  historical  society,  of  which  he  was  a
member,  he  published  "Leading  Cases  on  Commer-
cial Law  "  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  Digests  of  the  De-
cisions of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court "  (1848) ;  "  Mer-
chants' Book  of  Reference  "  (1848) ;  and  "  Litera-
ture and  Letters  "  (1868). — His  brother,  William
Henry,  physician,  born  in  Lynchburg,  Va.,  25  May,
1825,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1847,  and  has  practised  his
profession  in  Lynchburg,  Va.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
and  New  Orleans,  La.,  where  he  now  (1887)  resides.
In  1874-'5  he  was  president  of  the  American  in-
stitute of  homoeopathy.  He  has  published,  be-
sides numerous  contributions  to  homoeopathic  and
Swedenborgian  literature,  "Scientific  Basis  of
Homoeopathy  "  (Cincinnati,  1852) ;  "  Poems  "  (New
York,  1860) ;  "  Our  Children  in  Heaven  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1868)";  "The  Sexes  Here  and  Hereafter "
(1869) ;  "  In  Both  Worlds  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Other
Life"  (1871);  "Southern  Voices"  (1872);  "The
Lost  Truths  of  Christianitv  "  (1879) ;  "  The  End  of
the  World  "(1881);  "The  New  Life "(1884);  and
"  Letters  on  Spiritual  Subjects  "  (1885).

HOLCOMBE,  William  Frederic,  physician,
b.  in  Sterling,  Mass.,  2  April,  1827.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Albany  medical  college  in  1850,  studied


several  years  in  Europe,  was  a  member  of  the
American  medical  society  in  Paris,  and,  settling  in
New  York  city,  was  lecturer  on  diseases  of  the  eye
in  the  New  York  university  medical  college  in  1861,
professor  of  eye  and  ear  diseases  in  the  New  York
medical  college  in  1862,  in  the  New  York  ophthal-
mic college  and  hospital  in  1863,  and  in  the  New
York  medical  college  for  women  in  1867.  Dr.
Holcombe  is  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York
genealogical  and  biographical  society.  In  1881  he
delivered  the  address  at  the  centennial  of  Sterling,
Mass.  Besides  occasional  articles  published  in
medical  journals,  he  is  the  author  of  "  The  History
of  Sterling,  Mass.,"  "  Genealogy  of  the  Bush  Fam-
ily, of  Watertown,  Mass.,"  "History  of  the  Hol-
combes  in  America,"  and  "  Family  Records,  their
Importance  and  Value"  (New  York,  1877).

HOLDEN,  Edward  Singleton,  astronomer,  b.
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  5  Nov.,  1846.  He  was  graduated
at  the  scientific  school  of  Washington  university
in  1866,  and  in  that  year  assisted  Dr.  Benjamin  A.
Gould  in  collecting  materials  for  the  "  Investiga-
tions in  the  Military  and  Anthropological  Statis-
tics of  American  Soldiers."  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1870,  and  appointed
2d  lieutenant  in  the  4th  artillery.  He  served  at
Fort  Johnson,  N.  C,  until  1871,  when  he  returned
to  West  Point  as  assistant  professor  of  philosophy.
In  1872  he  was  transferred  to  the  engineer  corps,
serving  as  instructor  in  engineering.  In  March,
1873,  he  resigned  his  commission  in  the  army,  be-
came professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  navy,
and  was  ordered  to  the  naval  observatory  at  Wash-
ington, as  assistant  in  the  work  of  the  transit  circle.
Subsequently  he  was  assistant  to  Prof.  Simon  New-
comb  in  charge  of  the  26-inch  equatorial  telescope.
His  "  Monograph  of  the  Central  Parts  of  the  Neb-
ula of  Orion  "  is  an  exhaustive  treatise  on  all  of
the  observations  hitherto  made  upon  that  subject,
including  several  vears'  work  of  his  own  (Washing-
ton, 1882).  In  1876  Prof.  Holden  went  to  London
to  examine  the  South  Kensington  loan  collection
of  scientific  instruments.  He  gave  much  attention
to  the  methods  of  testing  chronometers,  and  in
1879  the  time-ball  on  the  Western  Union  telegraph
building  in  New  York  was  erected  according  to  his
plans.  On  6  May,  1878.  he  observed  the  transit  of
Mercury,  with  Dr.  Henry  Draper,  at  Hastings,  and
in  that  year  was  placed  in  charge  of  a  party  to  ob-
serve the  total  eclipse  of  29  July  in  Colorado.  In
1881  he  became  professor  of  astronomy  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Wisconsin  and  director  of  the  new  Wash-
burn observatory.  He  remained  there  till  1886,
and  issued  four  volumes  of  publications.  He  was
also  head  of  the  division  of  climate  and  rivers  in
Prof.  Raphael  Pumpelly's  northern  trans-conti-
nental survey.  In  1882  he  terminated  his  official
connection  with  the  navy,  but  was  placed  in  charge
of  the  government  expedition  to  the  Caroline  isl-
ands, to  observe  the  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  on  6
May,  1883.  In  1886  he  became  president  of  the
University  of  California  and  director  of  the  Lick
observatory  on  Mt.  Hamilton,  San  Jose.  He  is  a
member  of  numerous  scientific  associations,  and
has  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Wisconsin  (1886),  and  from  Columbia
(1887).  He  has  published  "Astronomy  for  Stu-
dents," with  Prof.  Simon  Newcomb  (New  York,
1880) ;  and  is  the  author  of  "  Sir  William  Herschel :
his  Life  and  Works"  (New  York  and  London,
1881).  His  writings  include  "  On  the  Adopted
Value  of  the  Sun's  Apparent  Diameter,"  "  On  the
Number  of  Words  used  in  Speaking  and  Writ-
ing," "  On  the  Proper  Motion  of  the  Trifid  Neb-
ula," "The Cipher Despatches," "Studies in


HOLDEN


HOLGUIN


233


Central  America  Pictu  re-Writing,"  "Observations
on  the  Transit  of  Mercury  at  Mt.  Hamilton,"
"  List  of  Twenty-three  New  Double  Stars  discov-
ered at  the  Caroline  Islands  by  Edward  S.  Holden
and  Charles  S.  Hastings,"  and  "A  System  of
Local  Warnings  against  Tornadoes."

HOLDEN,  Oliver,  psalmist,  b.  in  Shirley,  Mass.,
18  Sept.,  1765;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  in  1831.
While  engaged  in  the  carpenter's  trade  he  pub-
lished his  first  book  of  sacred  music,  arranged  in
three  and  four  parts,  entitled  "  The  American  Har-
mony "  (1793).  Most  of  this  was  original.  Soon
afterward  he  published  the  "  Union  Harmony,  or  a
Universal  Collection  of  Sacred  Music  " ;  "  The  Mas-
sachusetts Compiler,"  with  Hans  Gram  and  Samuel
Holyoke  (1795) ;  and  edited  "  The  Worcester  Col-
lection of  Sacred  Harmony  "  (1797).  The  last  was
a  sixth  edition,  altered,  revised,  and  corrected,  with
an  appendix  containing  new  psalm-tunes.  It  was
printed  upon  movable  types  that  had  been  pro-
cured from  England  in  1786,  by  Isaac  Thomas,  of
Worcester,  and  is  the  oldest  music-book  that  was
thus  printed.  Holden  was  the  author  of  several
hymn-tunes,  including  "  Confidence  "  and  "  Coro-
nation," which  are  still  popular.

HOLDEN,  William  Woods,  journalist,  b.  in
Orange  county,  N.  C,  24  Nov.,  1818.  He  attended
a  common  school  until  he  was  sixteen  years  old,
was  in  a  printing-office  in  Hillsborough,  N.  C,  for
the  next  two  years,  and  in  1841  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Raleigh,  N.  C.  In  1843  he  bought  "  The
Raleigh  Standard,"  and  was  its  editor  twenty-five
years.  He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1846,  was
a  member  of  the  State  convention  in  1861,  and
signed  the  ordinance  of  secession.  He  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Johnson  provisional  governor
of  North  Carolina  in  1865,  declined  the  mission  to
San  Salvador  in  1866,  and  in  1868  he  was  elected
governor,  as  a  Republican,  by  popular  vote.  Re-
ports of  "  Ku-klux  "  outrages  in  the  latter  part  of
1869,  and  early  in  1870,  caused  the  governor,  by
virtue  of  authority  that  had  been  conferred  on  him
by  the  legislature,  to  issue  a  proclamation  on  7
March,  declaring  the  county  of  Alamance  to  be  in

state  of  insurrection,  and  a  similar  one  on  8  July
egarding  Caswell  county,  and  several  arrests  were
made  with  the  aid  of  the  militia.  This  action
caused  much  excitement,  and  the  Democrats,  in
addresses  that  were  issued  in  March  and  July,  as-
serted that  the  accounts  of  outrages  were  exagger-
ated, that  the  local  authorities  were  fully  able  to
preserve  order,  and  that  the  governor's  course  was
intended  to  influence  the  coming  election.  Gov.
Holden  applied  to  President  Grant  for  troops,  and
at  first  refused  to  deliver  the  prisoners  to  the  civil
authorities  on  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  but  afterward
did  so  by  advice  of  the  U.  S.  attorney-general.  The
accused  persons  were  held  for  trial  in  their  respect-
ive counties,  and  on  10  Nov.  the  governor  pro-
claimed the  restoration  of  civil  authority.  The
opposition  to  Gov.  Holden  on  account  of  his  course
in  this  matter  culminated  in  the  presentation  by
the  state  house  of  representatives  to  the  senate  on
20  Dec,  1870,  of  eight  articles  of  impeachment
against  him  "  for  high  crimes  and  misdemeanors."
The  senate  declared  him  guilty  of  six  of  the  eight
indictments,  and  ordered  that  he  "  be  removed  from
the  office  of  governor,  and  disqualified  to  hold  any
office  of  trust,  honor,  or  profit  under  the  state  of
North  Carolina."  He  removed  to  Washington  and
edited  the  "  National  Republican,"  but  afterward
returned  to  Raleigh  and  was  postmaster.

HOLDER,  Joseph  Bassett,  zoologist,  b.  in
Lynn,  Mass.,  26  Oct.,  1824:  d.  in  New  York  city,  28
Feb.,  1888.  He  studied  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  took


a  course  in  the  Harvard  medical  school.  Subse-
quently he  entered  the  U.  S.  army,  and  from  1860
till  1867  was  surgeon-in-charge  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary prison  in  Tortugas,  Fla.,  and  then  assistant
post-surgeon  at  Fort  Monroe,  Va.  In  1870  he  was
appointed  curator  of  invertebrate  zoology,  icthy-
ology,  and  herpetology  in  the  American  museum
of  natural  history,  New  York.  He  was  a  member  of
several  scientific  societies  and  a  fellow  of  the  New
York  academy  of  sciences.  His  publications  in-
clude "  History  of  the  North  American  Fauna  "
(New  York,  1882);  "Historv  of  the  Atlantic  Kight
Whales  "  (1883) ;  and  "  The  Living  World  "  (1884).
— His  son,  Charles  Frederick,  naturalist,  b.  in
Lynn,  Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1851,  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  school  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  at  Allen's
seminary,  West  Newton,  Mass.,  and  at  the  U.  S.
naval  academy  in  Annapolis,  Md.  From  1870  till
1877  he  was  assistant  in  the  American  museum  of
natural  history,  and  subsequently  was  connected
with  the  New  York  aquarium,  for  which  he  made
several  trips  to  various  parts  of  the  United  States
for  rare  specimens.  In  1880  he  settled  in  New
York  city,  and  thenceforth  devoted  himself  to  lec-
turing on  zoology  in  schools,  and  in  literary  pur-
suits. He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  is
a  fellow  of  the  New  York  academy  of  sciences.  Mr.
Holder  has  contributed  to  magazine  literature,  and
especially  to  periodicals  for  young  people.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Elements  of  Zoology  "  (New  York,
1885) ;  "  Marvels  of  Animal  Life  "  (1885) ;  "  The
Ivory  King"  (1886);  "Living  Lights"  (1887);
and  "  Wonder  Wings  "  (Boston,  1887).

HOLDICH,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cam-
bridgeshire, England,  20  April,  1804.  He  removed
to  the  United  States  in  1812,  entered  the  Meth-
odist ministry  in  1822,  and  officiated  in  Philadel-
phia, New  York,  and  several  cities  of  New  Jersey,
until  1835,  when  he  became  assistant  professor  of
moral  science  and  belles-lettres  in  Wesleyan  univer-
sitv,  Middletown,  Conn.  He  was  full  professor  in
1836-'49,  and  from  1849  till  1878  secretary  of  the
American  Bible  society,  but  failure  of  eyesight
compelled  his  resignation  from  this  office  in  1878.
He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Princeton  in
1822,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  La  Grange  college,
Alabama,  in  1843.  He  has  published  "  Bible  His-
tory" (1833):  "Life  of  A.  H.  Hurd"  (1839);  and
"  Life  of  Wilbur  Fisk  "  (New  York,  1842).

HOLE-IN-THE-DAY,  Chippewa  chief,  b.  in
Minnesota  about  1827 ;  d.  in  Crow  Wing,  Minn.,
29  June,  1868.  He  was  chief  of  the  Chippewa  na-
tion, displayed  unusual  intelligence,  understood
something  of  the  nature  of  civil  government,  be-
lieved in  the  arts  of  peace,  and  realized  the  influ-
ence and  power  of  the  white  man.  He  married  an
Irishwoman,  and  became  one  of  the  wealthiest  men
in  Minnesota,  his  possessions  being  valued  at  about
$2,000,000.  At  the  beginning  of  the  last  Indian
war  in  Minnesota  in  1862,  it  was  his  influence  that
restrained  the  Chippewas  from  joining  the  unruly
Sioux  in  their  assaults  on  the  white  settlers.  He
was  assassinated  by  Indians.

HOLtrUIN,  Carlos  (ole-sboon').  South  American
statesman,  b.  in  No  vita,  Colombia,  11  July.  1832.
He  studied  in  Cali  and  in  a  Jesuit  college  in  Bogota.
After  the  members  of  that  society  were  expelled
from  Colombia  on  18  May,  1850.  Holguin  contin-
ued his  studies  in  the  University  of  Bogota  and
was  graduated  as  a  lawyer  in  1852.  He  has  been
always  a  warm  defender  of  the  Conservative  party,
in  the  tribune  and  the  press,  as  a  member  of  con-
gress and  as  the  editor  of  several  newspapers,  such
as  "  El  Caucano  "  (1857)  and  "  La  Prensa  "  (1866-'8),
and  has  actively  opposed  the  Liberal  party  of  his


234


HOLGUIN


HOLLAND


country  through  the  newspapers  "  El  Filotemico,"
"El  Porvenir,"  "El  Tradicionista,"  and  others.
He  has  written  works  on  international  law  and  his-
tory, and  essays  on  Lord  Macaulay,  Machiavelli,
Byron,  Warren  Hastings,  and  Lord  Olive,  which
are  still  in  manuscript.  Since  1881  he  has  been
Colombian  minister  in  Spain.

HOLGUIN,  Diego  Gonzalez,  Spanish  linguist,
b.  in  Estremadura,  Spain,  about  1560 ;  d.  in  Lima,
Peru,  about  1620.  In  early  life  he  entered  the
Jesuit  order,  and  was  sent  to  the  missions  of  Peru,
where  he  resided  till  his  death.  He  acquired  the
Quichua  dialect,  and  wrote  "  Gramatica  y  arte  de
la  lengua  general  del  Peru  "  (Lima,  1607) :  "  Voca-
bulario  de  la  lengua  general  del  Peru "  (1608) ;
and  "  Privilegios  concedidos  a  los  Indios  "  (1608).

HOLLAND,  Edward  Clifford,  poet,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  O,  in  1794 ;  d.  there,  11  Sept.,  1824.
He  was  noted  as  a  controversialist  and  satirical
writer,  for  several  years  edited  the  "  Charleston
Times,"  and  was  the  author  of  a  volume  of  patri-
otic verses  entitled  "  Odes,  Naval  Songs,  and  other
Poems  "  (Charleston,  1814).

HOLLAND,  Frederick  West,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  22  June,  1811.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1831,  and  at  the  Cambridge  divinity-
school  in  1834,  settled  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  in  1838,
and  was  pastor  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  1843.  He
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  American  Unitarian
association  in  1847,  but  resigned  in  1850  and  went
abroad,  visiting  Europe,  Egypt,  and  Asia  Minor.
On  his  return  in  1851,  he  lectured  in  New  England
and  the  middle  states  on  "  Palestine,"  "  The  Nile
Territory,"  and  "  The  Turkish  Question."  He  has
done  much  gratuitous  work  in  the  ministry,  or-
ganized ten  religious  societies,  and  for  several  years
was  chaplain  in  institutions  for  criminals.  He  re-
sides in  Concord,  Mass.  He  has  contributed  vari-
ous articles  to  the  publication  of  the  New  England
historic-genealogical  society,  of  which  he  is  a  mem-
ber, and  is  the  author  of  "  Scenes  in  Palestine  "
(Boston,  1851). — His'  son,  Frederic  May,  author,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  May,  1836,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1859,  and  in  1863  was  ordained  at
Rockford,  111.,  as  a  Unitarian  clergyman;  but  he
has  since  ceased  to  preach.  He  has  published
"The  Reign  of  the  Stoics"  (New  York,  1879);
"Stories  from  Robert  Browning"  (London,  1882);
and  "  The  Rise  of  Intellectual  Liberty,  from  Thales
to  Copernicus  "  (New  York,  1885).  He  is  now  (1887)
writing  a  continuation  of  the  last-named  work.

HOLLAND,  George,  actor,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 6  Dec,  1791 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20  Dec,
1871.  He  began  his  career  in  London  as  clerk  in
a  silk  warehouse,  in  succession  entered  the  office
of  a  money-broker  and  a  newspaper-publisher,  and
eventually  became  a  commercial  traveller.  He  be-
gan as  an  actor  in  1817,  in  small  parts,  at  Drury
Lane  theatre.  In  1820  he  played  at  the  London
Olympic  theatre,  and  later  became  connected  with
play-houses  in  Birmingham,  Manchester,  and  New-
castle-on-Tyne.  His  first  appearance  in  this  coun-
try was  at  the  Bowery  theatre,  New  York,  on  12
Sept.,  1827,  as  Jerry  in  "  The  Day  after  the  Fair,"
followed  by  Billy  Lackaday  in  "  Sweethearts  and
Wives,"  and  Paul  Pry.  After  engagements  for
several  seasons  in  New  York  city,  Holland  made
prolonged  tours  of  the  southern  and  western  thea-
tres, and  in  1834  was  settled  as  a  performer  in  New
Orleans,  where  he  became  treasurer  of  the  St.
Charles  theatre.  Returning  north,  he  formed  a
connection  with  Mitchell's  Olympic  theatre,  from
1843  till  1849,  and  within  the  last  two  years  be-
came its  stage-manager.  From  1849  till  1852  he
lost  his  professional  identity,  by  attaching  himself,


under  an  assumed  name,  to  Wood's  and  Christy's
negro  minstrels.  In  1852  he  reappeared  as  an
actor  at  Placide's  Varieties,  New  Orleans,  but
soon  returned  to  New  York  to  become  a  member
of  the  company  at  Wallack's  theatre.  This  was
his  last  permanent  engagement.  He  made  his
final  appearance  on  15  May,  1870,  at  the  Fifth
avenue  theatre.  After  his  death,  a  fund  was  raised
by  subscription  for  the  benefit  of  his  widow  and
children,  which  amounted  to  over  $15,000.  Hol-
land was  an  amusing  performer  in  farce  and  bur-
lesque, where  he  brought  in  play  numerous  eccen-
tricities, ventriloquial  diversions,  and  imitations  of
men  and  animals.  As  a  comedian  he  never  lost
his  identity  in  the.  characters  he  personated,  and
frequently  resorted  to  grimace  and  extravagance
to  provoke  merriment.  See  memorial  sketch  of
"  Life  of  George  Holland,"  edited  by  Thomas  H.
Morrell  (printed  privately,  New  York,  1871).

HOLLAND,  Josiah  Gilbert,  author,  b.  in  Bel-
chertown,  Hampshire  co.,  Mass.,  24  July,  1819 ;  d.
in  New  York  city,  12  Oct..  1881.  He  was  the  son
of  a  farmer,  who  was  also  an  inventor.  His  early
educational  advantages  were  limited.  After  a  long
struggle,  he  entered  the  Northampton  high-school,
where  he  studied
so  earnestly  that
his  health  gave
way.  Subsequent-
ly he  taught  pen-
manship for  a
while,and  became
successively  an
operator  in  a  da-
guerreotype gal-
lery, a  copyist  and
a  district  school-
master. At  the
age  of  twenty-one
he  began  the
study  of  medi-
cine, and  in  1844
was  graduated  at
Berkshire  medi-
cal college,  Pitts-
field,  Mass.  Set-
tling at  Springfield,  he  received  but  little  encour-
agement, although  his  patients  were  numerous
enough  to  give  him  a  distaste  for  the  practice  of
his  profession.  In  his  leisure  moments  he  wrote
and  sent  an  article  or  two  to  the  "  Knickerbock-
er" magazine.  These  being  accepted,  he  was
encouraged  to  undertake  the  publication  of  a  lit-
erary journal,  "The  Bay  State  Weekly  Courier."
but  it  was  not  successful,  and  was  discontinued
at  the  end  of  six  months.  He  then  became  a
teacher  in  Richmond,  Va.,  and  three  months  later
superintendent  of  public  schools  in  Vicksburg,
Miss.  There.,  after  ^fifteen  months  of  hard  work,
he  succeeded  in  introducing  a  superior  graded
educational  system,  which  resulted  in  the  clos-
ing of  all  the  private  schools  in  the  city  but
one.  Just  as  he  had  achieved  this  success,  Dr.
Holland  was  compelled  to  return  north,  for  family
reasons.  At  the  age  of  thirty  he  again  settled  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  and  became  the  associate  of
Samuel  Bowles,  editor  of  the  "Republican."  His
first  year's  salary  was  $480,  the  second  year  he  re
ceived  $700,  and  he  began  the  third  as  owner  of  a
quarter  interest  in  the  paper  (then  worth  $3,500).
for  which  he  had  given  his  notes.  Fifteen  years
afterward  he  sold  his  share  for  more  than  fourteer
times  what  it  had  originally  cost  him.  From  the
first,  Dr.  Holland  exhibited  remarkable  aptitude
for  journalism ;  and,  while  Mr.  Bowles,  through


HOLLAND


HOLLEY


235


his  political  opinions,  made  the  "  Republican  "  es-
teemed and  feared  in  Massachusetts,  his  associate,
becoming  a  popular  preacher  of  social  and  domes-
tic moralities,  made  it  loved  in  ten  thousand
homes.  Dr.  Holland's  first  venture  as  a  book-
maker was  the  reprinting  from  the  "  Republican  "
of  his  "History  of  Western  Massachusetts"  (2
vols.,  Springfield,  1855).  Two  years  later  he  pub-
lished "The  Bay  Path:  a  Colonial  Tale"  (New
York,  1857),  which  was  not  at  first  popular.  He
now  began  a  series  of  papers  entitled  "  Timothy
Titcomb's  Letters  to  Young  People,  Married  and
Single,"  which,  when  collected  (New  York,  1858),
were  remarkably  successful.  Nine  editions  ap-
peared within  a  few  months,  and  more  than  75,000
copies  in  all  have  been  sold.  In  November  of  the
same  year  he  published  "  Bitter  Sweet,  a  Poem  in
Dramatic  Form  "  (New  York),  the  sales  of  which
exceeded  those  of  the  "  Titcomb  Letters."  In  the
autumn  of  1865  appeared  his  "Life  of  Abraham
Lincoln"  (Springfield),  of  which  more  than  100,000
copies  were  sold.  In  1866  he  sold  his  interest  in  the
"  Republican."  In  1867  he  published  "  Kathrina :
Her  Life  and  Mine  in  a  Poem,"  of  which  over
100,000  copies  were  called  for.  The  following  year
he  travelled  in  Europe,  and  while  sojourning  in
Geneva,  with  Roswell  Smith,  conceived  the  idea  of
a  new  illustrated  magazine.  Long  previous  to  this
Charles  Scribner  had  solicited  Dr.  Holland  to  go  to
New  York  and  edit  "  Hours  at  Home."  In  1870
Dr.  Holland,  as  editor  and  one  third  owner,  began
publishing  "Scribner's  Monthly."  with  Roswell
Smith  and  Scribner,  Armstrong  and  Company  as
joint  owners.  He  became  a  member  of  the  board
of  education  of  New  York  city  in  1872,  and  was
subsequently  its  president.  He  also  held  the
chairmanship  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Col-
lege of  the  city  of  New  York.  As  a  lecturer  Dr.
Holland  was  extremely  popular.  In  addition  to
the  books  above  named,  he  published  "  Gold  Foil
Hammered  from  Popular  Proverbs"  (New  York,
1859);  "Miss  Gilbert's  Career,"  a  novel  (1860);
"  Lessons  in  Life  "  (1861) ;  "  Letters  to  the  Joneses  "
(1863) ;  "  Plain  Talks  on  Familiar  Subjects  "  (1865) ;
"  The  Marble  Prophecy,  and  Other  Poems  "  (1872) ;
I  Arthur  Bonnicastle."  a  novel,  and  "  Garnered
Sheaves,"  a  complete  collection  of  his  poetical
works  (1873) ;  "  The  Mistress  of  the  Manse,"  a  poem
(1874):  "The  Story  of  Sevenoaks"  (1875);  and
I  Every-Day  Topics  "  and  "  Nicholas  Minturn  "
(1876).  None  of  his  works  subsequent  to  1867  at-
tained the  popularity  of  his  earlier  books.

HOLLAND,  Samuel,  surveyor-general,  b.  in
Canada;  d.  in  eastern  Canada  in  1801.  He  was
surveyor-general  of  the  colonies  north  of  Virginia,
served  in  the  army  as  a  major  during  the  war  with
France,  and  engaged  in  the  expeditions  against
Louisburg  and  Quebec.  He  was  near  Wolfe  when
that  officer  fell,  and  was  mentioned  by  him  in  his
will.  In  1773  he  had  completed  surveys  as  far
west  as  Boston,  and  in  1775  he  wrote  to  Lord  Dart-
mouth that  he  was  ready  to  run  a  line  between
Massachusetts  and  New  York.  He  lent  to  Alexan-
der Shcpard,  a  surveyor,  a  plan  or  survey  of  Maine,
which  the  latter,  by  advice  of  the  Provincial  con-
gress of  Massachusetts,  did  not  return,  fearing  that
it  might  be  used  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Whigs.
Mr.  Holland  then  went  to  Lower  Canada,  and
served  there  for  nearly  fifty  years  as  surveyor-
general.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  executive  and  legislative  councils.

HOLLANDER,  Peter,  governor  of  New  Swe-
den, b.  about  1600.  Previous  to  his  appointment  in
1640  as  governor  of  the  territory  that  was  claimed
by  Sweden  along  the  Delaware,  he  had  sailed  with


the  colonists  that  had  been  sent  to  re-enforce  the
original  settlers.  He  ruled  the  colony  for  about
a  year  and  a  half,  and  added  much  to  its  territory.
HOLLEY,  Alexander  Lyman,  metallurgist,
b.  in  Lakeville,  Conn.,  20  July,  1832 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  29  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  the  son  of
Alexander  H.  Holley,  who  was  afterward  governor
of  Connecticut,  and  who  was  a  nephew  of  Hor-
ace, noticed  below.
The  son  was  grad-
uated in  the  sci-
entific course  at
Brown  in  1853,
then  served  for
eighteen  months
as  a  draughtsman
and  machinist,  and
afterward  secured
employment  at  the
locomotive  -  works
in  Jersey  City.  In
1856  he  took  the
management  of
"The  Railroad  Ad-
vocate." to  which
he  had  previously
contributed  when
it  was  edited  by
Zerah  Colburn.  Its
name  was  soon
changed  to  "  IIol-
ley's  Railroad  Ad-
vocate," and  it  was
published  until  July.  1857,  when  it  gave  place
to  "  The  American  Engineer."  of  Holley  and  Col-
burn, which  suspended  with  its  third  issue.  He
then  went  abroad  with  Colburn  to  study  foreign
railway  practice,  and  to  report  on  those  features  of
it  which  would  be  of  greatest  importance  at  home.
On  the  return  of  the  two  engineers  they  published
"  The  Permanent  Way  and  Coal-burning  Locomo-
tives of  European  Railways,  with  a  Comparison  of
the  Working  Economy  of  European  and  American
Lines,  and  the  Principles  upon  which  Improve-
ment must  Proceed "  (New  York,  1858),  in  which
it  was  shown  that  the  annual  operating  expenses
of  an  American  railroad  was  one  third  more  for
the  same  mileage  than  in  England.  Their  state-
ments were  taken  up  by  the  daily  journals,  and
many  of  the  leading  editorials  which  appeared  at
this  time  were  by  Mr.  Holley.  He  then  became
connected  with  the  "  New  York  Times."  and  be-
tween 1858  and  1863  contributed  to  it  upward  of
200  articles.  In  1859  he  was  sent  to  Europe  by
the  "  Times,"  and  wrote  letters  on  engineering
topics,  including  a  series  on  the  "  Great  Eastern,"
which  was  then  in  course  of  construction.  A  year
later  he  went  to  Europe  again  for  the  "Times,"
returning  on  the  first  trans-Atlantic  trip  of  the
"  Great  Eastern."  and  meanwhile  contributing  to
the  "  American  Railway  Review,"  of  which  he  was
editor  of  the  mechanical  department.  During
these  years  he  had  in  preparation  his  "American
and  European  Railwav  Practice  "  (New  York  and
London,  1860 ;  2d  ed.,  1867).  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  when  he  had  a  professional  standing
of  the  highest  rank,  he  offered  his  services  to  the
U.  S.  government,  but  no  notice  was  taken  of  his
letter.  In  1862  he  was  sent  abroad  by  Edwin  A.
Stevens  to  study  the  subject  of  ordnance  and  ar-
mor. This  led  to  his  subsequent  publication  of
"  A  Treatise  on  Ordnance  and  Armor  "  (New  York
and  London,  1865).  A  year  later  he  again  visited
England,  at  the  request  of  Corning,  Winslow,  and
Company,  of  Troy,  to  obtain  information  concern-


236


HOLLEY


HOLLEY


irig  the  Bessemer  process  for  the  manufacture  of
steel.  He  returned  after  purchasing  the  American
rights  of  the  Bessemer  patents,  which  were  sub-
sequently combined  with  the  conflicting  Amer-
ican patents  of  William  Kelly.  The  first  Bessemer
plant  was  established  at  Troy  in  1865  under  his
supervision,  and  enlarged  in  1867.  He  also  built
the  works  at  Harrisburg  in  1867,  and  later  planned
those  at  North  Chicago  and  Joliet,  the  Edgar
Thompson  works  at  Pittsburg,  and  the  Vulcan
works  at  St.  Louis,  besides  acting  as  consulting
engineer  in  the  designing  of  the  Cambria,  Bethle-
hem, Scranton,  and  other  works.  The  history  of
his  career  after  1865  is  substantially  that  of  the
Bessemer  manufacture  in  the  United  States.  After
the  formation  of  the  Bessemer  association  he  issued
confidential  reports  to  it  on  the  various  branches
of  steel  manufacture.  During  his  lifetime  the
capacity  of  the  American  Bessemer  plant  was
raised  from  that  of  about  900  tons  a  month  to
more  than  10,000  tons  for  the  same  period.  In
1875  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  board
for  testing  iron,  steel,  and  other  metals,  and  was
one  of  the  most  laborious  of  its  members.  Four
years  later  he  became  lecturer  on  the  manufacture
of  iron  and  steel  at  the  Columbia  school  of  mines,
and  continued  this  work  until  his  death.  Mr.
Holley  obtained  about  sixteen  patents,  of  which
several  were  for  improvements  in  the  Bessemer
process,  and  of  these  his  last,  that  of  the  detached
converter-shell,  is  perhaps  the  most  important.  In
1878  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Brown,
and  he  was  a  trustee  of  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic
institute  from  1865  till  1867  and  from  1870  till
1882.  He  was  president  of  the  American  institute
of  mining  engineers  in  1875,  vice-president  of  the
American  society  of  mechanical  engineers  in  1880,
and  vice-president  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers  in  1876.  In  addition  to  the  books  already
mentioned,  Mr.  Holley  was  the  author  of  numer-
ous technical  papers.  From  1877  till  1880  he  pre-
pared, with  Lenox  Smith,  a  series  of  forty-one
articles  on  "  American  Iron  and  Steel,"  which  were
published  in  the  London  "Engineering."  A
statue  to  his  memory  is  to  be  erected  in  Central
Park  by  the  societies  of  mining,  civil,  and  me-
chanical engineers,  from  a  design  furnished  by
John  Q.  A.  Ward.  See  "  Memorial  of  Alexander
Lyman  Holley  "  (New  York,  1884).

HOLLEY,  Myron,  reformer,  b.  in  Salisbury,
Conn.,  29  April,  1779 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  4
March,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1799,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1802.  He  began  practice  in  Salisbury,  but  in
1803  settled  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.  Finding  the
law  uncongenial,  he  purchased  the  stock  of  a
local  bookseller  and  became  the  literary  purveyor
of  the  town.  In  1810-'14  he  was  county-clerk,
and  in  1816  was  sent  to  Albany  as  an  assembly-
man. The  project  of  the  Erie  canal  was  at  that
time  the  great  subject  of  interest,  and  through  the
efforts  of  Mr.  Holley  a  board  of  commissioners  was
appointed,  of  whom  he  was  one.  His  work  thence-
forth, until  its  completion,  was  on  the  Erie  canal.
For  eight  years  his  practical  wisdom,  energy,  and
self-sacrifice  made  him  the  executive  power,  with-
out which  this  great  enterprise  would  probably
have  been  a  failure.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term
of  office,  in  1824,  as  canal-commissioner  and  treas-
urer of  the  board,  he  retired  to  Lyons,  where  with
his  family  he  had  previously  removed.  The  anti-
Masonic  excitement  of  western  New  York,  arising
from  the  abduction  of  William  Morgan,  soon  drove
Mr.  Holley  into  prominence  again.  This  move-
ment culminated  in  a  national  convention  being


held  in  Philadelphia  in  1830,  where  Henry  I).
Ward,  Francis  Granger,  William  H.  Seward,  and
Myron  Holley  were  the  representatives  from  New
York.  An  "  Address  to  the  People  of  the  United
States,"  written  by  Holley,  was  adopted  and  signed
by  112  delegates.  The  anti-Masonic  adherents  pre-
sented a  candidate  in  the  next  gubernatorial  can-
vass of  New  York,  and  continued  to  do  so  for  sev-
eral years,  until  the  Whigs,  appreciating  the  ad-
vantages of  their  support,  nominated  candidates
that  were  not  Masons.  This  action  resulted,  in
1838,  in  the  election  of  William  H.  Seward.  Mean-
while, in  1S31,  Mr,  Holley  became  editor  of  the
Lyons  "Countryman,"  a  journal  devoted  to  the
opposition  and  suppression  of  Masonry ;  but  after
three  years,  this  enterprise  not  having  been  suc-
cessful, he  went  to  Hartford,  and  there  conducted
the  "  Free  Elector "  for  one  year.  He  then  re-
turned to  Lyons,  but  soon  disposed  of  his  property
and  settled  near  Rochester,  where  for  a  time  he
lived  in  quiet,  devoting  his  attention  to  horticul-
ture. When  the  anti-slavery  feeling  began  to
manifest  itself  Mr.  Holley  became  one  of  its  adher-
ents. At  this  time  he  was  offered  a  nomination  to
congress  by  the  Whig  party,  provided  he  would  not
agitate  this  question ;  but  this  proposition  he  de-
clined. He  participated  in  the  meeting  of  the
anti-slavery  convention  held  in  Cleveland  in  1839,
and  was  prominent  in  the  call  for  a  national  con-
vention to  meet  in  Albany,  to  take  into  considera-
tion the  formation  of  a  Liberty  party.  At  this
gathering  the  nomination  of  James  G.  Birney  was
made,  and  during  the  subsequent  canvass  Mr.
Holley  was  active  in  support  of  the  candidate,  both
by  continual  speaking  and  by  his  incessant  labors
as  editor  of  the  Rochester  "  Freeman."  Mr.  Hol-
ley's  remains  rest  in  Mount  Hope  cemetery,  at
Rochester,  and  the  grave  is  marked  by  an  obelisk,
with  a  fine  medallion  portrait  in  white  marble,  the
whole  having  been  paid  for  in  one-cent  contribu-
tions by  members  of  the  Liberty  party,  at  the  sug-
gestion of  Gerrit  Smith.  See  "Myron  Holley;
and  What  he  did  for  Liberty  and  Tine  Religion."
by  Elizur  Wright  (Boston,"  1882).— His  brothe;
Horace,  educator,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  13  Fe*
1781 ;  d.  31  July,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1803,  and  studied  law  for  a  short  time  in  New
York,  but,  abandoning  this  for  theology,  was  or-
dained at  Greenfield  Hill,  Fairfield  co.,  Conn.,  in
September,  1805.  In  1809-'18  he  was  pastor  of
Hollis  street  church  (Unitarian),  Boston.  He  was
president  of  Transylvania  university,  Lexington,
Ky.,  in  1818-'27.  A  plan  was  formed  for  erect-
ing a  seminaiy  in  Louisiana,  to  be  placed  under
his  charge,  but  while  at  New  Orleans  in  the  sum-
mer of  1827  he  became  ill,  and  died  while  on  the
passage  to  New  York.  He  had  a  great  reputation
as  a  pulpit  orator,  published  several  sermons  and
addresses,  and  contributed  papers  to  the  "  Western
Review  "  and  other  periodicals.  See  a  discourse
on  his  life  and  character  by  Charles  Caldwell,  M.  D.
(Boston,  1828). — Horace's  wife,  Mary  Austin,  d.  in
New  Orleans,  2  Aug.,  1846,  married  Mr.  Holley
in  1805,  and  in  1831  emigrated  to  Texas  under  the
protection  of  Gen.  Austin.  She  published  a  "  His-
tory of  Texas"  (Baltimore,  1883),  and  a  memoir  of
her  husband. — Another  brother,  Orville  Luther,
editor,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  19  May,  1791  ;  d.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  25  March,  1861,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1813,  studied  law  in  New  York  city,
and  practised  successively  at  Hudson,  Canandaigua,
and  the  city  of  New  York.  He  edited  in  succession
the  "Anti-Masonic  Magazine"  in  New  York,  the
"  Troy  Sentinel,"  the  Ontario  "  Repository,"  the
Albany  "  Daily  Advertiser,"  and  the  "  State  Regis-


HOLLIDAY


HOLLISTER


237


ter."  In  1853  he  arranged  and  indexed  twenty-
three  folio  volumes  containing  the  papers  of  Gov.
George  Clinton.  He  was  surveyor-general  of  the
state  in  1838,  and  during  the  last  ten  years  of  his
life  was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of
state  of  New  York.  He  was  the  author  of  "  De-
scription of  Citv  of  New  York  "  (1847),  and  "  Life
of  Franklin  "  (Boston,  1856).

HOLLIDAY,  Ben,  expressman,  b.  in  Bourbon
county,  Ky.,  in  1819 ;  d.  in  Portland,  Oregon,  8
July,  1887.  He  became  a  pioneer  in  western  Mis-
souri, and  afterward  in  Kansas,  was  an  army  con-
tractor during  the  Mexican  war,  and  in  1849-'52
established  mercantile  houses  in  Salt  Lake  City
and  San  Francisco.  A  few  years  later  he  founded
Holliday's  mail  and  overland  express,  which  for
ten  years  was  the  connecting  link  between  the
western  frontier  states  and  the  Pacific.  He  also
established  the  fast  pony-express,  and  a  line  of
twenty-three  steamers  from  Alaska  to  Mexico.  He
afterward  invested  in  mining  property,  and  with
the  proceeds  of  the  Ophir  mine  in  Nevada  bought
a  tract  of  land  in  Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,  which
he  called  Ophir  farm.  Here  he  built  a  house  that
cost  $1,000,000,  where  he  entertained  his  friends
in  magnificent  fashion,  but  the  property  was  for
many  years  in  litigation,  and  it  finally  passed  en-
tirely out  of  his  hands.

HOLLINGSWORTH,  Levi,  merchant,  b.  in
Elkton,  Md.,  29  Nov.,  1739 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
24  March,  1824.  His  great-grandfather,  Valentine
Hollingsworth,  accompanied  William  Penn  to
Pennsylvania  in  1682.  Levi  became  a  merchant
in  Philadelphia  in  1760,  and  was  a  zealous  and  ac-
tive supporter  of  the  cause  of  American  independ-
ence. He  suffered  loss  from  supplies  that  he  fur-
nished the  army,  and  served  in  the  field  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  original  troop  of  city  cavalry.  He  was
sent  to  Canada  with  the  specie  for  the  payment  of
Gen.  Montgomery's  army  when  it  was  investing
Quebec,  and  was  employed  in  many  other  special
ervices.  He  was  afterward  one  of  the  leaders  of
le  Federal  party  in  Philadelphia.

HOLLINS,  George  Nichols,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  20  Sept.,  1799 ;  d.  there,  18  Jan.,
1878.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1814,
and  served  on  the  sloop-of-war  "  Erie  "  in  her  un-
successful attempt  to  break  the  British  blockade
of  Chesapeake  bay.  He  was  assigned  to  the  frigate
"President"  under  Stephen  Decatur,  was  cap-
tured by  the  British,  and  kept  a  prisoner  of  war
at  Bermuda  until  peace  was  established.  He  also
served  under  Decatur  in  the  Algerian  war  in  1815,
and  received  from  him  a  Turkish  sabre  for  his
bravery  in  the  capture  of  an  Algerian  frigate.
After  serving  on  the  "  Guerriere,"  the  "  Columbus."
the  "  Franklin,"  and  the  "  Washington,"  he  took
command  of  an  East  Indian  merchantman.  In
1825  he  was  promoted  lieutenant,  and  in  1844  com-
mander. In  1855,  while  lying  off  the  Mosquito
coast  of  Nicaragua,  the  American  residents  of
Greytown  appealed  to  him  for  protection  from  the
local  authorities,  by  whom  they  alleged  they  had
been  injured.  Hollins  accordingly  bombarded  the
city  as  a~  punishment  to  the  authorities,  and  the
property  and  lives  of  the  English  residents  being
imperilled,  they  declared  he  had  encroached  on
British  domain,  as  Nicaragua  was  under  the  pro-
tection of  that  government.  In  consequence  of
his  precipitate  conduct,  serious  difficulties  were  ap-

{irehended  between  England  and  the  United  States.
n  1861  he  resigned  his  commission  to  join  the
Confederate  navy,  but  the  war  department  refused
to  accept  it,  struck  his  name  from  the  rolls,  and
ordered  his  arrest. He  eluded  the  authorities,  went


to  the  south,  and  was  commissioned  commodore  in
the  Confederate  navy.  In  October,  1861,  he  attacked
the  National  blockading  squadron  at  the  passes  of
the  Mississippi,  and  was  appointed  flag-captain  of
the  New  Orleans  station  for  what  was  claimed  as
an  important  victory.  In  1862  he  was  superseded
by  Com.  William  C.  Whipple.  After  the  war  he
became  a  crier  in  the  city  court  of  Baltimore.

HOLLIS,  Thomas,  benefactor,  b.  in  England
in  1659  ;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  February,  1731.
He  was  for  many  years  a  successful  merchant  in
London,  and  a  bequest  made  to  Harvard  college  in
his  uncle's  will,  of  which  he  was  a  trustee,  first  at-
tracted his  attention  to  that  seat  of  learning.  After
making  two  considerable  donations  to  the  college,
he  gave  in  1721  the  fund  by  which  the  Hollis  pro-
fessorship of  divinity  was  constituted.  He  was  a
Baptist  and  a  Calvinist,  required  his  professor  of
divinity  to  be  "  of  sound  or  orthodox  principles,"
and  stipulated  that  Baptists,  who  were  then  in  no
great  favor  in  New  England,  should  not  be  ex-
cluded from  the  chair  that  he  had  established.  In
1727  he  also  established  a  professorship  of  mathe-
matics and  philosophy,  and  his  donations  amounted
at  that  time  to  £4.900  in  Massachusetts  currency.
He  also  gave  books  for  the  library,  and  a  set  of
Hebrew  and  Greek  types  for  printing. — His  broth-
ers, John  and  Nathaniel,  were  also  donors  to  the
college. — His  nephew  and  heir,  Thomas,  son  of
Nathaniel,  d.  in  1735,  also  gave  money,  books,
and  philosophical  apparatus  to  the  college. —
Thomas,  son  of  the  second  Thomas,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1720;  d.  in  Corsecombe,  Dorset,  Eng-
land, in  1774,  followed  literary  pursuits,  and  did
much  to  propagate  the  principles  of  civil  and  relig-
ious liberty.  Among  his  gifts  to  Harvard  college
was  a  donation  of  books  that  were  valued  at  £1,400.
He  is  said  to  have  given  away  half  his  large  fortune
for  benevolent  purposes.  He  was  a  zealous  pro-
moter of  the  spirit  of  freedom  in  America,  and
aided  in  republishing  the  political  treatises  of  ^lay-
hew,  Otis,  and  John  Adams.  His  memoirs,  com-
piled by  the  Rev.  Francis  Blackburn,  archdeacon
of  Cleveland,  were  published  in  1780  in  two  quartos,
with  engravings,  by  Thomas  Brand  Hollis,  also  a
benefactor  of  Harvard. — Other  members  of  the
Hollis  family  were  also  liberal  donors  to  Harvard
college,  and  one  of  the  halls  of  that  institution
is  named  in  their  honor.

HOLLISTER,  Gideon  Hiram,  author,  b.  in
Washington,  Conn..  14  Dec,  1817;  d.  in  Litchfield,
Conn..  24  March.  1881.  He  was  graduated  in  1840
at  Yale,  where  he  was  class  poet,  studied  law  in
Litchfield  with  Origen  S.  Seymour,  and  after  a
brief  stay  in  Woodbury,  Conn.,  practised  in  the
former  town.  He  was  clerk  of  courts  there  in
1843-'52,  and  in  1856  was  chosen  to  the  state  sen-
ate, where  he  was  instrumental  in  procuring  the
election  of  James  Dixon  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  Presi-
dent Johnson  appointed  him  consul-general  and
U.  S.  minister  at  Hayti  in  1868,  and  he  served  till
1869,  when  he  removed  to  Stratford,  Conn.,  and
practised  law  in  Bridgeport,  but  in  1876  returned
to  Litchfield.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1880,  and  made  a  speech  on  the  New  York  bound-
ary question  that  was  published  and  attracted
much  attention.  Mr.  Hollister  was  an  enthusiastic
student  of  the  English  classics.  The  acting  copy-
right of  his  tragedy  "  Thomas  a  Becket  "  is  owned
by  Edwin  Booth,  but  it  was  produced  only  three
times.  His  poem  "  Andersonville  "  acquired  con-
siderable popularity  during  the  civil  war.  He  pub-
lished "Mount  Hope,"  an  historical  romance  of
King  Philip's  war  (New  York,  1851) ;  a  "  History
of  Connecticut "  (2  vols.,  New  Haven,  1855) ;  and


238


HOLLOWAY


HOLMAN


"  Thomas  a  Becket,  a  Tragedy,  and  Other  Poems  "
(Boston,  1866).  After  his  death  appeared  "  Kinley
Hollow,"  a  novel  (New  York,  1882).

HOLLOWAY,  David  P.,  commissioner  of  pat-
ents, b.  in  Wavnesville,  Warren  co.,  Ohio,  6  Dec,
1809 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  10  Sept.,  1883.  He
removed  with  his  parents  to  Cincinnati  in  1813,
and  learned  the  printer's  trade  at  Richmond,  Ind.
In  1833  he  purchased  "The  Richmond  Palla-
dium," and  was  its  editor  for  several  years.  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature  in  1843,  of
the  state  senate  in  1844-'53,  and  was  then  elected  a
representative  in  congress,  serving  from  3  Dec,
1855,  till  3  March,  1857.  He  was  commissioner  of
patents  from  28  March,  1861,  till  17  Aug.,  1865.

HOLLOWAY,  James  Montgomery,  physician,
b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  14  July,  1834.  He  was  edu  •
cated  at  Oakland  college,  Miss.,  and  Centre  college,
Danville,  Ky.,  and  in  1857  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Louisiana.  He  practised
at  Vernon,  Madison  co.,  Miss.,  and  in  1861-5  served
as  a  surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army.  In  1863  he
was  senior  medical  officer,  and  appointed  president
of  the  medical  examining  board  of  all  the  hospitals
in  Richmond.  He  was  professor  of  anatomy  in
Louisville  college,  Ky.,  in  1865-'6,  of  physiology  in
1866-7,  in  1867-70  held  the  chair  of  physiology
and  medical  jurisprudence  in  the  Kentucky  school
of  medicine,  from  1870  till  1874  was  professor  of
physiology  and  clinical  surgery  in  Louisville  medi-
cal college,  and  from  1874  till  1877  professor  of
surgery  in  the  hospital  college  of  the  medical  de-

Eartment  of  Central  university,  Kentucky.  He
as  written  much  for  medical  periodicals.
HOLLOWAY,  Laura  Carter,  author,  b.  in
Nashville,  Tenn.,  22  Aug.,  1848.  She  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Nashville  female  seminary  in  1862,
since  that  time  has  continually  engaged  in  literary
work,  has  edited  the  "  Home  Library  Magazine
in  Chicago,  111.,  and  for  twelve  years  was  associate
editor  of  the  "Brooklyn  Daily  Eagle."  In  1862
she  married  Junius  B.  Holloway,  of  Richmond,
Ky.  Her  published  works  include  "  Ladies  of  the
White  House  "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  An  Hour  with
Charlotte  Bronte"  (1883);  "The  Hearthstone,  or
Life  at  Home  "  (Philadelphia,  1883) ;  "  The  Moth-
ers of  Great  Men  and  Women  "  (New  York,  1884) ;
"  The  Home  in  Poetry"  (1884) ;  "  Chinese  Gordon  "
(1885);  "Howard,  the  Christian  Hero"  (1885);
"  Adelaide  Neilson,  a  Biography  "  (1885) ;  and  "  The
Buddhist  Diet  Book  "  (1887).

HOLLS,  (xeorge  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in
Darmstadt,  Germany,  26  Feb.,  1824 ;  d.  in  Mount
Vernon,  N.  Y.,  12  Aug.,  1886.  He  was  educated  at
Darmstadt  and  at  Strasburg,  and  at  an  early  age
he  became  assistant  to  Dr.  Wichern,  founder  of  the
"  Rauhe  Haus,"  near  Hamburg.  When  he  was
twenty-five  years  of  age  he  was  placed  in  charge  of
the  government  charities  in  the  province  of  Upper
Silesia,  and  while  holding  this  office  organized  the
work  of  relief  during  the  famine  of  1848-'9  in  that
province,  having  at  one  time  4,000  destitute  chil-
dren under  his  charge.  He  resigned  in  1851  and
came  to  this  country,  where,  after  teaching  for  sev-
eral years  in  Ohio,  he  was  appointed  superintend-
ent of  the  Lutheran  orphan  farm-school  at  Zelieno-
ple,  Pa.  He  remained  there  until  1866,  when  he
took  charge  of  the  newly  founded  Wartburg  farm-
school  near  Mount  Vernon,  N.  Y.  In  August,
1885,  failing  health  compelled  him  to  resign,  and
he  afterward  lived  in  retirement  till  his  death.

HOLLY,  James  Theodore  Augustus,  P.  E.
bishop  of  Hayti,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  3  Oct.,
1829.  His  parents  were  colored  and  Roman  Catho-
lics. His  great-great-grandfather  was  an  English-


man named  Holly,  while  his  mother  was  descended
from  an  Irishwoman  named  Butler.  He  was  edu-
cated at  public  and  private  schools  and  by  tutors  in
Washington,  New  York  city,  Buffalo,  and  Detroit.
In  1851  he  withdrew  from  the  Roman  Catholic
and  entered  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In
1852-'3  he  was  associate  editor  of  "  The  Voice  of  the
Fugitive,"  a  weekly  paper,  published  at  Windsor,
Canada  West,  and  in  1854  was  principal  of  a  pub-
lic school  in  Buffalo.  He  studied  theology,  and
was  ordered  deacon,  17  June,  1855,  and  ordained
presbyter,  2  Jan.,  1856.  He  was  rector  of  St.  Luke's
church,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  from  1856  till  1861,
when  he  was  sent  to  Hayti  as  a  missionary.  He
served  as  consul  for  Liberia  at  Port-au-Prince  from
1864  till  1874,  in  which  year  he  was  made  mission-
ary bishop  of  Hayti  by  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  In  1878  Bishop  Holly  went  to  England
as  a  delegate  to  the  Lambeth  conference.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Howard  universit  v,
Washington,  D.  C,  in  1874,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Liberia  college,  Monrovia,  in  1882.  He  has
contributed  to  the  "  Church,"  the  "  Church  Eclec-
tic" and  the  "  African  Methodist  Church  "  reviews.
HOLM,  John  Campanius,  Swedish  clergyman,
b.  in  Stockholm,  Sweden,  in  1601 ;  d.  there,  17
Sept.,  1683.  He  sailed  with  Gov.  Printz  from  Got-
tenburg,  1  Nov.,  1642,  and  arrived  at  Fort  Chris-
tina, on  the  Delaware,  15  Feb.,  1643,  where  he  en-
tered on  his  duties  as  chaplain  to  the  Swedish
colony,  and  continued  to  officiate  in  this  capacity
during  six  years.  Prior  to  his  coming  he  had  been
preceptor  of  the  orphans'  seminary  in  Stockholm.
Under  his  ministry  in  the  colony  a  church  was
erected  at  Tinicum,  the  seat  of  government,  and
was  consecrated  by  him,  4  Sept.,  1646.  This  was
the  first  house  of  worship  that  was  erected  with-
in the  limits  of  Pennsylvania.  He  manifested  a
deep  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Indians,  and
performed  missionary  work  among  them.  They
visited  his  house  and  came  to  hear  him  preach.
To  further  his  work  he  applied  himself  to  learn-
ing their  language,  into  which  he  here  began
the  task  of  translating  Luther's  catechism.  His
labors  in  New  Sweden  ended  in  May,  1648,  when
he  sailed  for  home  in  the  ship  "  Swan,"  arriving  at
Stockholm  on  4  July  following.  On  his  return  to
Sweden  he  was  made  chaplain  to  the  admiralty,
and  afterward  rector  at  Upland,  where  he  com-
pleted his  translation  of  the  catechism  into  the
language  of  the  Delawares,  or  Lenni-Lenape,  wmich
is  probably  the  first  translation  of  any  work  into
an  Indian  language  of  this  country.  It  was  pub-
lished in  the  Delaware  and  Swedish  languages
(Stockholm,  1696),  together  with  a  vocabulary,  a
copy  of  which  is  in  the  library  of  the  American
philosophical  society.  In  the  translation  he  ac-
commodates the  Lord's  Prayer  to  the  circumstances
of  the  Indians  by  substituting  for  "  daily  bread  I
"  a  plentiful  supply  of  venison  and  corn."  He  was
buried  in  the  church  of  Frost  Hults,  where  there
is  a  monument  to  his  memory.  —  His  grandson,
Thomas  Campanius,  published  a  history  of  New
Sweden,  known  as  "  Campanius's,"  which  is  largely
made  up,  it  is  said,  of  data  that  were  obtained
from  his  grandfather,  and  partly,  too,  it  is  sup-
posed, from  information  that  was  given  verbally
by  him  to  the  author.
"HOLMAN,  Jesse  Lynch,  jurist,  b.  in  Danville,
Ky.,  24  Oct.,  1784;  d.  in  Aurora,  Ind.,  28  March,
1842.  His  father  was  killed  by  the  Indians  while
defending  a  block-house  in  which  he  had  sought
shelter  with  his  family.  With  limited  opportuni-
ties of  education  the  son  displayed  in  early  life  an
interest  in  literary  pursuits,  and  before  he  reached


HOLMAN


HOLME


239


his  twenty-first  year  was  the  author  of  a  novel  en-
titled "  Errors  of  Education,"  which  he  published
in  two  volumes  under  the  auspices  of  Henry  Clay,
in  whose  office  he  studied  law.  In  1808  he  re-
moved with  his  family  to  the  territory  of  Indiana,
and  soon  afterward  was  appointed  judge  of  one  of
the  two  judicial  circuits  into  which  the  territory
was  then  divided.  In  1813  he  was  a  member  of
the  territorial  legislature,  and  in  1814  he  was  the
president  of  the  territorial  council.  On  the  ad-
mission of  Indiana  into  the  Union  in  1816  he  was
appointed  one  of  the  judges  of  the  supreme  court
of  the  state,  and  held  the  office  fourteen  years.  In
1835  he  was  appointed  by  President  Jackson  U.  S.
district  judge  for  Indiana,  which  office  he  held  till
his  death.  Judge  Holman  was  identified  with  the
early  history  of  the  Baptists  of  Indiana,  and  served
as  pastor  of  a  church  in  Aurora  from  1834  till  his
death.  He  was  president  of  the  Western  Baptist
publication  and  Sunday-school  society,  and  of  the
state  conventions  of  the  Baptist  church  from  1837
till  his  death.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  es-
tablishment of  Indiana  college,  now  the  university
of  the  state,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Frank-
lin college,  the  chief  Baptist  institution  of  learning
in  Indiana.  He  left  a  large  collection  of  manu-
scripts which  have  not  yet  been  published. — His
son,  William  Steele,  congressman,  b.  in  Dearborn
county,  Ind.,  6  Sept.,  1822,  received  a  common-
school  education,  was  in  Franklin  college,  Ind.,
for  two  years,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice  in  Aurora,  Ind.  He  was
judge  of  probate  from  1843  till  1846,  prosecuting
attorney  in  1847-'9,  a  member  of  the  State  consti-
tutional convention  of  1850,  and  of  the  state  legis-
lature in  1851-'2.  He  was  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  from  1852  till  1856,  was  then  elect-
ed to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  has  been  nom-
inated fourteen  times,  suffering  only  three  de-
feats, in  1854,  1876,  and  1878,  and  serving,  with
those  exceptions,  from  1859  to  the  present  time
<1887).  He  has  been  an  uncompromising  enemy  of
trickery,  and  has  won  the  name  of  the  "  Great  Ob-
jector from  his  fearlessness  in  opposing  doubtful
measures  and  the  schemes  of  lobbyists.  He  is  thor-
oughly versed  in  the  statutes,  and  takes  cognizance
of  every  important  bill  that  is  before  the  house.

HOLMAN,  Joseph  George,  actor,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1764;  d.  in  Rockaway,  L.  I.,  24  May,  1817.
He  was  educated  at  Queen's  college,  Oxford,  and
intended  for  the  church.  During  his  college
course  he  joined  a  Thespian  society,  and  became  so
deeply  interested  in  acting  that  he  turned  his  at-
tention to  the  stage.  After  preparatory  study  and
practice  in  country  play-houses,  Holman,  on  26
Oct.,  1784,  made  his  appearance  at  Covent  Garden
theatre,  London,  in  the  character  of  Romeo,  fol-
lowed by  other  personifications,  with  much  success.
He  then  spent  several  years  as  a  player  in  Scot-
land and  Ireland,  part  of  the  time  as  director  of
the  Dublin  theatre.  In  1798  he  married  a  daugh-
ter of  Frederick  Hamilton ;  but  his  wife  died  in
1810,  and  he  returned  to  London  in  1812  and  ap-
peared at  the  Haymarket  theatre  with  his  daugh-
ter. At  the  close  of  this  engagement  father  and
daughter  came  to  this  country,  making  their  first
appearance  at  the  New  York  Park  theatre  in  "  The
Provoked  Husband."  From  there  they  made  the
usual  tour  to  Boston,  Albany,  and  Philadelphia.
For  a  single  season  Holman  leased  the  Philadel-
phia Walnut  street  theatre,  and  toward  the  close
of  his  career  unsuccessfully  managed  the  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  theatre.  He  returned  to  New  York  city
from  the  south  impoverished  and  broken  in  health,
and  for  most  of  the  time  thereafter  continued  un-


employed. Holman  rose  to  much  distinction  in
juvenile  tragedy  and  high-comedy  parts,  in  some
of  which  he  had  no  equal  on  the  London  stage.
Some  of  his  best  renderings  were  Hamlet,  Edgar
in  "King  Lear,"  Benedict,  Lord  Townley,  Mr.
Oakley,  and  Duke  Aranza.  He  had  more  ease  and
finish  than  intensity,  was  a  studious  performer,  and
a  well-bred,  scholarly  man.  Six  or  seven  plays
came  from  his  pen  that  were  acted  on  a  few  occa-
sions, but  never  published. — Holman's  second  wife,
b.  in  England  about  1798;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1
Sept.,  1859,  was  a  Miss  Lattimer.  Holman  engaged
her  to  come  from  England  and  join  his  troupe  at
the  Charleston  theatre.  On  the  return  of  the  com-
pany to  New  York  city  she  was  married  to  Hol-
man, 22  May,  1817,  two  days  before  he  died.  Her
second  marriage  was  with  Isaac  S.  Clason,  and
her  third,  in  1824,  to  Charles  W.  Sandford.  a  law-
yer and  general  of  militia.  After  this  event  she
retired  from  the  stage  and  concert-room  for  about
two  years.  At  her  instigation,  Gen.  Sandford,  in
1826,  became  lessee  of  the  new  Lafayette  theatre,
when  she  resumed  her  former  dramatic  efforts.
After  the  destruction  of  that  play-house  by  fire,
Mrs.  Holman.  retaining  her  professional  name,
performed  occasionally  in  various  cities,  and  in
June,  1832,  made  her  last  appearance  at  the  Park
theatre  in  New  York  city  as  Maria  in  "  Of  Age
To-morrow."  On  a  single  occasion,  in  1838,  she
came  forward  for  her  husband's  benefit,  at  the  New
York  National  theatre,  as  Susan  in  the  play  of
"  Perfection."  Mrs.  Holman  was  an  attractive
singing  actress,  and  frequently  appeared  with  suc-
cess in  concerts  and  oratorios.  Her  renderings  of
"  The  Soldier  Tired  of  War's  Alarms  "  and  Bishop's
"  Echo  Song  "  were  greatly  admired.

HOLME,  John,  poet,  b.  in  England  ;  d.  in  Sa-
lem, N.  J.,  in  1701.  He  came  to  this  country  about
1685,  settled  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1687-'9  was
one  of  the  justices.  He  left  in  manuscript  a  long
and  interesting  poem  entitled  "  A  True  Relation
of  the  Flourishing  State  of  Pennsylvania,"  which
was  preserved  by  his  descendants  and  published
for  the  first  time  in  "Bulletin  of  Historical  Col-
lections "  (Philadelphia,  1845-'7,  vol.  v.).

HOLME,  Thomas,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  Ireland,  in  1625 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in
1695.  He  was  commissioned,  18  April,  1682,  by
William  Penn  to  be  surveyor-general  of  Pennsyl-
vania, being  designated  in  the  commission  as  "  my
loving  friend,  Capt.  Thomas  Holme."  From  this
mention  it  is  inferred  that  Holme  had  served  in
the  land  or  naval  forces  of  England,  and  possibly
under  Penn's  father,  the  admiral.  He  sailed  for
Pennsylvania  in  the  ship  "  Amity  "  four  days  after
his  appointment,  and  immediately  on  his  arrival
in  the  province  entered  on  the  duties  of  his  office,
in  the  performance  of  which  he  engaged  until  his
death.  His  map  of  the  "  Province  of  Pennsylva-
nia," together  with  his  "  Portraiture  of  the  City
of  Philadelphia,"  published  extensively  in  Europe
in  1683-'4,  has  made  his  name  familiar  to  every
student  of  American  history.  On  Penn's  arrival  in
the  province,  28  Oct.,  1682,  he  appointed  Holme  to
be  one  of  his  councillors,  and  Holme  sat  with  the
lord  proprietor  in  his  first  court,  held  3  Nov.,  1682,
at  New  Castle ;  in  his  first  legislative  assembly,
held  on  7  Dec,  at  Chester  ;  and  in  the  first  council
that  was  held  at  Philadelphia,  10  March,  1683.
He  continued  a  member  of  the  council,  and,  by
virtue  of  this  office,  a  member  of  each  legislature
that  met  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  and  served
on  many  important  committees,  among  which  were
a  committee  "  to  prepare  the  charter,"  in  1683 ;  a
committee  "  to  Looke  into  the  Actions  of  ye  Lord


240


HOLMES


HOLMES


Baltimore,  and  to  draw  up  a  Declaration  to  hinder
his  Illegal  proceedings,"  in  1684;  and  a  committee
"  to  draw  up  a  charter  for  Philadelphia  to  be  made
a  Burrough,"  in  1684.  As  president  of  the  council
he  was  frequently  in  1685  acting  governor  of  the

grovince.  In  1682  he  was  one  or  those  who,  in
enn's  behalf,  treated  with  the  Indians  "about
land  and  a  firm  league  of  peace."  He  read  to  the
Indians,  through  an  interpreter,  Penn's  second  let-
ter to  them  ;  and,  according  to  a  recent  authority,
"  the  actual  treaty  for  the  lands  of  the  present
Philadelphia  and  adjacent  country,  out  to  the  Sus-
quehanna, was  made  in  the  year  1685  by  Thomas
Holme,  as  president  of  the  council  in  the  absence
of  William  Penn,  who  had  gone  to  England."

HOLMES,  Abiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Conn.,  24  Dec,  1763;  d.  in  Cambridge.  Mass.,  4
June,  1837.  John  Holmes  settled  in  Woodstock,
Conn.,  in  1686.  His  grandson,  David,  father  of
Abiel,  served  as  a  captain  of  British  troops  in  the
French  war,  and  was  afterward  a  surgeon  in  the
Revolutionary  army.  Abiel  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1783,  became  a  tutor  there,  and  at  the  same  time
studied  theology.  In  1785  he  was  settled  as  a  pas-
tor in  Midway,  Ga.,  but  six  years  later  he  resigned,
and  in  1792  he  was  settled  over  the  first  parish  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  was  pastor  till  Sep-
tember, 1832.  In  1817  he  delivered  a  course  of
lectures  on  ecclesiastical  history,  with  special  ref-
erence to  New  England.  He  had  married  for  his
first  wife,  in  1790,  a  daughter  of  Ezra  Stiles,  presi-
dent of  Yale  college,  became  his  literary  executor,
and  published  his  life  (Boston,  1798).  His  second
wife  was  a  daughter  of  Oliver  Wendell.  The  ex-
amination of  Dr.  Stiles's  manuscripts  drew  his  at-
tention to  the  subject  of  early  American  history,
and  he  wrote  "  Annals  of  America  "  (2  vols.,  Cam-
bridge, 1805 ;  new  ed.,  brought  down  to  1820, 1829),
which  is  a  standard  authority.  He  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  collections  of  the  Massachusetts
historical  society,  the  27th  volume  of  which  con-
tains a  list  of  his  writings.  His  home  in  Cambridge
is  seen  in  the  accompanying  engraving. It  was  the


birthplace  of  his  son,  Oliver  Wendell,  author,  b.
in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  29  Aug.,  1809,  who  was  the
third  of  five  children.  Among  his  schoolmates
were  Alfred  Lee,  afterward  bishop  of  Delaware,
Margaret  Fuller,  and  Richard  Henry  Dana,  Jr.
He  was  prepared  for  college  at  Phillips  Andover
academy,  where  he  made  his  first  attempt  at  versi-
fication, a  translation  from  the  first  book  of  the
JEneid,  in  heroic  couplets.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1829,  among  his  classmates  being  Will-
iam H.  Channing,  James  Freeman  Clarke,  and
Benjamin  R.  Curtis.  He  was  a  contributor  to  one
of  the  college  periodicals,  delivered  the  poem  at
commencement,  and  was  one  of  the  sixteen  mem-
bers chosen  into  the  *  B  K  society.  The  next  year,
when  it  was  proposed  to  break  up  the  old  frigate


sM/y%^«1/.


"  Constitution,"  Holmes  published  in  the  Boston
"  Advertiser  "  his  lyrical  protest,  beginning,
"  Ay,  tear  her  tattered  ensign  down  1 "
which  was  widely  copied  in  the  newspapers  and
circulated  in  handbills,  saving  the  ship  from  de-
struction and  giving  the  young  poet  a  reputation.
He  studied  law
for  a  year  at  the
law  -  school  in
Cambridge,  and
at  that  time  pro-
duced some  of
his  best-known
humorous  pieces,
including"Even-
ing  bv  a  Tailor"  •
and  "The  Height
of  the  Ridicu-
lous." In  1833,
with  Epes  Sar-
gent and  Park
Benjamin,  he
contributed  to  a
gift  -  book,  enti-
tled "The  Har-
binger," the  prof-
its of  which  were  given  to  the  Asylum  for  the
blind.  But  his  hereditary  instincts  appear  to  have
been  for  the  profession  of  medicine,  and  he  studied
under  Dr.  James  Jackson  and  then  spent  three
years  chiefly  in  Paris.  He  received  his  degree  in
1836,  and  in  the  same  year  published  his  first  vol-
ume of  poems  (Boston),  which  contained  forty-five
pieces,  including,  besides  those  already  named,
"  Poetry,  a  Metrical  Essay,"  read  before  the  *  B  K
society ;  "  The  Last  Leaf  " ;  "  My  Aunt " :  "  The
Treadmill  Song  " ;  and  "  The  September  Gale."  In
1839  he  was  chosen  professor  of  anatomy  and  physi-
ology at  Dartmouth.  In  1840  he  married  Amelia
Lee,  daughter  of  Judge  Charles  Jackson,  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Massachusetts,  and  soon  afterward
he  resigned  his  professorship  at  Dartmouth  in  order
to  devote  himself  to  practice  in  Boston.  In  1849
he  established  a  summer  home  at  Pittsfield,  Mass.
Hawthorne  at  that  time  was  living  at  Lenox,  a
few  miles  away,  and  in  his  "  Hall  of  Fantasy,''
after  describing  an  ideal  group  of  poets,  he  says :
"  In  the  most  vivacious  of  these  I  recognized
Holmes."  In  1847  he  succeeded  Dr.  John  C.  Warren
as  professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in  the
medical  school  of  Harvard.  About  the  same  time
he  became  a  lyceum  lecturer.  Dr.  Holmes  had
gained  three  of  the  Boylston  prizes  for  medical
dissertations,  and  his  three  essays  were  published
together  (Boston,  1838).  His  other  scientific  works
include  an  edition  of  "  Marshall  Hall's  Theory  and
Practice  of  Medicine,"  with  Dr.  Jacob  Bigelow
(1839) ;  "  Lectures  on  Homoeopathy  and  its  Kindred
Delusions "  (1842) ;  "  Report  on  Medical  Litera-
ture," in  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  National  medi-
cal association  (1848) ;  "  Puerperal  Fever  as  a  Pri-
vate Pestilence,"  a  pamphlet  (1855) ;  "  Currents  and
Counter-Currents  in  Medical  Science"  (1861);  and
"  Border  Lines  in  some  Provinces  of  Medical  Sci-
ence "  (1862).  Several  of  these  have  been  reissued  in
one  volume  with  the  title  "Medical  Essays"  (1883).
His  successive  volumes  of  poetry  have  borne  the
titles  "Urania"  (1846);  "Astraea:  the  Balance  of
Illusions"  (1850);  "Songs  in  Many  Keys  "  (1861);
"  Songs  of  Many  Seasons  "  (1875) ;  and  "  The  Iron
Gate  "  (1880).  There  are  several  collected  editions,
and  some  of  the  pieces  have  been  issued  singly
with  sumptuous  illustrations.  When  the  "  Atlantic
Monthly"  was  established,  in  the  autumn  of  1857,
Dr.  Holmes  became  one  of  the  first  contributors.


HOLMES


HOLMES


241


and  by  many  readers  was  esteemed  the  most  brill-
iant of  all  that  notable  galaxy.  His  first  contribu-
tions were  in  the  form  of  a  series  of  conversational
papers  entitled  "  The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-
Table,"  in  which  were  included  some  of  tin  finest
of  his  poems.  The  "  Autocrat "  was  followed  by  a
similar  series,  "  The  Professor  at  the  Breakfast-
Table,"  and,  after  an  interval,  by  "  The  Poet  at  the
Breakfast-Table,"  each  of  which  on  its  completion
in  the  magazine  was  issued  in  book-form  (1859,
1860,  1872).  These  papers,  he  tells  us  in  his  pref-
ace, were  the  fulfilment  of  a  plan  that  was  con-
ceived twenty-five  years  before,  when  he  published
in  the  "  New  England  Magazine  "  two  articles  with
the  title  of  "  The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-Table."
Dr.  Holmes  also  wrote  two  novels,  which  were  first

Eublished  seriallv,  "  Elsie  Venner,  a  Romance  of
lestiny"  (2  vols.,  1861),  and  "The  Guardian
Angel "  (2  vols.,  1868),  which  are  remarkable  rather
as  character-studies  than  for  dramatic  power.  His
other  prose  works  are  "  Soundings  from  the  Atlan-
tic," a  collection  of  essays  (1864) ;  "  Mechanism  in
Thought  and  Morals "  (1871) ;  memoirs  of  John
Lothrop  Motley  (1879)  and  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson
(1884);  "A  Mortal  Antipathy"  (1885);  and  "Our
Hundred  Days  in  Europe  "  (1887).  Dr.  Holmes  has
been  successful  in  every  kind  of  literature  that  he
has  undertaken,  but  his  most  brilliant  and  popular
work  is  in  "  The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-Table,"
while  his  longest  lived  is  probably  in  his  poems.
In  these  the  expression  is  so  admirably  clear  that
the  reader  does  not  always  immediately  appreciate
the  depth  of  the  thought.  His  own  favorite  among
his  serious  poems  is  said  to  be  "  The  Chambered
Nautilus  " ;  but  "  The  Voiceless,"  "  Sun  and  Shad-
ow," and  several  of  his  patriotic  lyrics,  easily  take
rank  with  it.  Some  of  his  satirical  pieces,  like
I  The  Moral  Bully,"  are  as  sharp  as  the  most  mer-
ciless critic  could  desire,  while  many  of  his  purely
humorous  ones,  like  "The  Wonderful  One-Hoss
Shay,"  are  already  classic.  As  a  poet  of  occasions
it  is  doubtful  if  he  has  ever  had  an  equal. The

Eublishers  of  the  "Atlantic  Monthly"  gave  a
reakfast  in  his  honor  on  his  seventieth  birthday,
29  Aug.,  1879,  at  which  many  literary  celebrities
were  present,  and  he  read  his  poem  of  "  The  Iron
Gate, '  written  for  the  occasion.  His  life  has  been
written  by  Walter  S.  Kennedy  (Boston,  1883),  and
also  by  Emma  E.  Brown  (1884),  in  a  volume  to
which  is  appended  a  complete  bibliography  of  his

Subluxations. — Oliver  Wendell's  son,  Oliver  Wen-
ell,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  March,  1841,
was  educated  at  Harvard.  He  entered  the  Na-
tional service  as  lieutenant  in  the  20th  regiment
of  Massachusetts  infantry  in  1861,  was  wounded
severely  at  Ball's  Bluff,  at  Antietam,  and  at  the
second  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  and  was  mustered
out  with  the  rank  of  captain  in  June,  1864.  He
had  been  offered  a  commission  as  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  1863,  but  declined  promotion.  He  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1866,  and  practised
in  Boston.  In  1882  he  was  professor  in  the  law-
school  of  Harvard,  and  in  the  same  year  was  ap-
S»inted  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,
e  has  edited  Kent's  "Commentaries"  (Boston,
1873),  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Common  Law  "
(18S1)  and  of  numerous  articles  and  addresses.

HOLMES,  Andrew  Fernando,  physician,  b.
in  Cadiz,  Spain,  in  1797 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,
in  September,  1860.  His  father  was  on  his  way  to
Canada  when  the  vessel  in  which  he  sailed  was  cap-
tured by  the  French,  and  taken  as  a  prize  to  Cadiz,
where  Andrew  was  born.  The  family  reached  Can-
ada in  1801.  The  son  studied  medicine  with  a
physician  in  Montreal  and  at  the  universities  of

VOL.  III. — 16


Edinburgh  and  Paris,  returned  to  Canada  in  1819,
and  practised  in  Montreal.  In  1824  he  aided  in
founding  the  Montreal  school  of  medicine,  which,
after  the  establishment  of  McGill  university  in
1828,  became  the  medical  department  of  ttiat  in-
stitution. He  filled  the  chairs  of  materia  medica
and  chemistry  till  1836,  then  that  of  chemistry
alone  till  1842,  was  subsequently  professor  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  medicine,  and  from  1854
until  he  died  was  dean  of  the  faculty.  He  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  Natural  history  society  in
Montreal,  and  gained  a  reputation  as  a  naturalist.
His  herbarium  of  Canadian  plants  he  presented  to
the  museum  of  the  university.

HOLMES,  David,  governor  of  Mississippi,  b.
in  Frederick  county,  Va. ;  d.  inWashington,  Miss.,

20  Aug.,  1832.  He  represented  a  Virginian  dis-
trict in  congress  from  1797  till  1809,  when  he  was
appointed  governor  of  the  territory  of  Mississippi.
On  the  organization  of  the  state  government  he
was  elected  governor,  and  served  from  1817  till
1819.  In  the  following  year  he  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  from  Mississippi,  in  place  of  Walter
Leake,  resigned,  and  served  from  13  Nov.,  1820,
till  he  resigned  in  1825.

HOLMES,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newburg,
N.  Y.,  in  1810  ;  d.  in  Battle  "Ground,  Mich.,  in  1873.
He  entered  the  Methodist  ministry  in  1834,  and
was  connected  with  the  Oneida  and  afterward  with
the  southern  Illinois  conference.  In  1860  he  be-
came principal  of  the  Battle  Ground,  Mich.,  colle-
fiate  institute,  and  in  1867  of  the  Northwestern
ndiana  college.  From  1868  till  his  death  he  was
again  in  the  ministry  in  the  northwestern  Indiana
conference.  He  edited  "  The  Mirror  of  the  Soul "
and  "  The  Christian  Preacher,"  and  was  the  author
of  "  Pure  Gold  in  its  Native  Loveliness  "  (Auburn,
1851),  and  of  a  "  Discussion  upon  the  Atonement,
Universal  Salvation,  and  Endless  Punishment."

HOLMES,  Gabriel,  governor  of  North  Caro-
lina, b.  in  Sampson  county,  N.  C,  in  1769 ;  d.  near
Clinton,  N.  C,  26  Sept.,  1829.  He  was  educated
under  a  clergyman  in  Iredell  county,  N.  C,  and  at
Harvard,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  in  Clinton,  N.  C.  He  sat  in  the  legisla-
ture from  1793  till  1813.  In  1821  that  body  elected
him  governor  of  the  state,  and  at  the  close  of  his
term  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  congress,  and  re-
elected for  the  following  term,  serving  from  3  Dec,
1825,  till  3  March,  1829.  He  was  re-elected  a  sec-
ond time,  but  died  before  taking  his  seat. — His
son,  Theophilns  Hunter,  soldier,  b.  in  Sampson
county,  N.  C,  in  1804  ;  d.  near  Fayetteville,  N.  C,

21  June,  1880,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1829,  served  on  the  western  frontier,
and  as  lieutenant  and  captain  of  infantry  in  the
Florida  war,  the  occupation  of  Texas,  and  the  war
with  Mexico,  receiving  the  brevet  of  major  for  gal-
lantry in  the  engagements  before  Monterey.  He
was  commissioned  major  on  3  March,  1855,  took
part  in  the  Navajo  expedition  of  1858-'9,  and  was
engaged  as  superintendent  of  the  general  recruit-
ing service  when  the  civil  war  began.  He  went  on
leave  of  absence  to  North  Carolina,  resigned  his
commission  in  the  U.  S.  army  on  22  April,  1861,
and  was  at  once  made  a  brigadier-general  in  the
service  of  the  state.  He  organized  many  of  the
North  Carolina  regiments,  and  selected  their  com-
manding officers.  When  North  Carolina  joined
the  Confederacy  he  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-
general  by  the  Confederate  government.  He  com-
manded at  Aquia  Creek,  and  was  engaged  in  the
various  campaigns  of  northern  Virginia,  rising  to
be  major-general  in  the  Confederate  army.  Li
September,  1862,  he  was  transferred  to  the  com-


242


HOLMES


HOLMES


mand  of  the  trans-Mississippi  department,  with
headquarters  at  Little  Rock,  Ark.  He  was  tend-
ered a  commission  as  lieutenant-general  while
there,  and  at  first  declined,  but  accepted  when  Jef-
ferson Davis  pressed  it  upon  him  a  second  time.
In  March,  1863,  he  was  at  his  own  request  relieved
in  the  command  of  the  department  by  Gen.  E.
Kirby  Smith.  He  attacked  Helena,  Ark.,  on  3
July,  1863.  and  was  driven  back  with  heavy  losses.

HOLMES,  George  Frederick,  educator,  b'.  in
Demerara,  British  Guiana,  in  1820.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Durham  university,  England,  came  to  the
United  States  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  was  a
teacher  in  Virginia,  Georgia,  and  South  Carolina.
In  1842  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  South  Caro-
lina by  a  special  act  of  the  legislature  before  he
had  been  naturalized.  He  was  assistant  editor  of
the  "'  Southern  Review "  for  some  time.  He  be-
came a  professor  in  Richmond  college,  Va.,  in
1845,  in  1846  president  of  the  University  of  Missis-
sippi, and  in  1847  professor  of  history,  political
economy,  and  international  law  in  William  and
Mary  college.  In  1857  he  was  chosen  professor  of
history  and  literature  in  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia. He  is  the  author  of  a  series  of  text-books
that  were  used  in  southern  schools,  for  which  they
were  especially  designed.

HOLMES,  Isaac  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  6  April,  1796;  d.  there,  24  Feb.,
1867.  He  was  prepared  for  college  by  his  cousin,
Christopher  E.  Gadsden,  and  graduated  at  Yale  in
1815,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Charleston  in
1818,  and  became  a  successful  lawyer.  He  entered
the  legislature  in  1826,  and  during  the  nullification
crisis  of  1832-'3  was  a  leader  of  the  extreme  state-
rights  party,  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  South
Carolina  association.  The  proposition  that  the
state  should  nullify  the  tariff  first  emanated  from
him.  He  engaged  in  planting  for  a  time.  In  1838
he  was  sent  to  congress,  and  was  an  active  member
of  the  house  till  1850,  serving  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  commerce,  and  afterward  of  that  on
naval  affairs.  He  then  removed  to  California,  and
practised  law  from  1851  till  January,  1861,  when,
on  learning  of  the  passage  of  the  ordinance  of  se-
cession, he  returned  to  South  Carolina.  He  passed
through  Washington,  and,  in  several  interviews
with  William  H.  Seward  and  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,
endeavored  to  avert  the  civil  war.  After  the  close
of  hostilities  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  of
the  state  to  confer  with  the  Federal  government.
He  was  the  author  of  the  "  Recreations  of  George
Taletell,"  consisting  of  stories,  essays,  and  descrip-
tive sketches  (Charleston,  1822),  and,  in  conjunc-
tion with  Robert  J.  Turnbull,  published  a  volume
of  political  essays  in  favor  of  state  rights,  under
the  signature  of  "  Caroliniensis  "  (1826).

HOLMES,  John,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Ross-
shire,  Scotland,  in  March,  1789 ;  d.  in  1870.  He
emigrated  to  Nova  Scotia  in  1803,  and  sat  in  the
assembly  of  that  province  from  1836  till  1847,  and
from  1851  till  1858.  From  the  latter  date  he  was
a  legislative  councillor  until  1867,  when  he  became
a  senator  of  the  Dominion. — His  son,  Simon  H.,
journalist,  b.  at  East  River,  Pictou,  N.  S.,  in  1843,
was  educated  at  the  grammar-school.  New  Glas-
gow, and  at  Pictou  academy,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1865.  He  was  elected  to
the  provincial  parliament  for  Pictou,  N.  S.,  and
represented  it  from  1871  till  1882.  He  has  been
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  Pictou  "  Colonial
Standard  "  for  many  years.

HOLMES,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Kingston,  Mass.,
in  March,  1773 ;  d.  in  Portland.  Me.,  7  July,  1843.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1796,  studied  law,


was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1799,  and  settled  in  Al-
fred, Me.  He  practised  with  success,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  house  of  representatives
in  1802-'3,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  debates.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  from  1813
till  1817,  when  he  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
Democrat  from  Massachusetts,  and  served  until
the  admission  of  Maine  as  a  state.  He  was  a
member  of  the  convention  to  form  a  state  consti-
tution, and  chairman  of  the  committee  that  drafted
it,  and  was  elected  a  senator  in  congress  from
Maine  in  1820,  and  re-elected  for  a  full  term  the
following  year.  He  was  appointed  by  the  legisla-
ture a  commissioner  to  devise  and  report  a  system
of  government  for  the  state  prison  and  to  revise
the  criminal  code  of  the  state.'  On  the  resignation
of  Albion  K.  Parris  in  1827,  he  was  again  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  till  1833.  In  1835-'8
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives. In  1841  he  was  appointed  United  States
attorney  for  the  district  of  Maine.  He  published
"  The  Statesman,  or  Principles  of  Legislation  and
Law  "  (Augusta.  1840).

HOLMES,  John,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Windsor,  Vt.,  in  1799;  d.  in  Lorette,  near  Quebec,
Canada,  in  1852.  He  was  preparing  to  enter  the
ministry  of  the  Wesleyan  church,  when  he  became
a  convert  to  Roman  Catholicism.  He  subsequent-
ly studied  philosophy  and  theology  in  the  seminary
of  Montreal,  and  was  a  professor  for  some  time  in
Nicolet  college.  While  there  he  was  ordained
priest,  and  appointed  assistant  to  the  cure  of  Ber-
thier,  after  leaving  which  parish  he  was  a  mis-
sionary to  the  eastern  townships.  In  1828  he  en-
tered the  seminary  of  Quebec  as  professor,  was
elected  a  director,  and  soon  became  principal.  He
was  the  first  to  introduce  the  study  of  Greek  into
the  seminary,  and  created  a  sensation  by  the  intro-
duction of  dramatic  performances,  music,  and  dia-
logues in  public  examinations.  He  was  commis-
sioned in  1836,  by  the  provincial  government,  to
inquire  into  the  system  of  normal  schools  in  Eu-
rope and  the  United  States,  and  to  procure  teach-
ers and  apparatus  for  the  new  normal  school  at
Montreal,  which  was  opened  upon  his  return  to
Canada  in  1837.  The  insurrection  and  the  suspen-
sion of  the  constitution,  however,  soon  forced  its
projectors  to  close  the  institution,  and  it  was  not
reopened  until  twenty  years  afterward.  In  1838
a  domestic  affliction  led  him  to  live  thenceforth  in
seclusion,  and  he  appeared  only  to  deliver  a  course
of  Lenten  lectures,  which  was  published  as  "  Con-
ferences de  Notre  Dame  de  Quebec"  (1850).  He
published  also  a  "Manuel  abrege  de  geographic
moderne  "  (revised  ed.,  Quebec,  1870).

HOLMES,  John  McClellan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Livingston,  N.  Y.,  22  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  the  son
of  an  eminent  minister  of  the  Reformed  church,
and  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1853,  and  at  the
New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in  1857.  He
became  pastor  of  a  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in
1859,  of  the  Reformed  church  in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  in
1865,  and  in  1877  of  the  State  street  Presbyterian
church  in  Albany,  N.  Y.  He  was  for  several  years
a  member  of  the  educational  and  missionary  boards
of  the  Reformed  church,  president  of  the  general
synod  in  1876.  a  delegate  to  the  Pan-Presbyterian
council  at  Edinburgh  in  1877,  and  moderator  of
the  Presbyterian  synod  of  New  York  in  1884.  He
was  also  for  some  time  an  associate  editor  of  the
"Christian  Intelligencer,"  and  has  contributed
largely  to  the  religious  press.  Many  of  his  ser-
mons have  been  published.

HOLMES,  Mary  Jane,  author,  b.  in  Brook-
field,  Mass. Her  father  was  a  brother  of the


HOLMES


HOLT


243


Rev.  Joel  Hawes,  D.  D.  She  taught  in  a  district
school  at  the  age  of  thirteen.  She  married  Dan-
iel Holmes,  a  lawyer,  and,  after  their  marriage,
they  settled  in  Versailles,  Ky.  Her  first  novel,
"  Tempest  and  Sunshine  "  (New  York,  1854),  pic-
tured southern  society.  This  was  followed  by
"The  English  Orphans"  (1855).  These  were  re-
ceived with  moderate  favor  as  the  first  efforts  of
a  young  writer,  but  grew  in  popularity.  She
has  published  (1887)  twenty-eight  novels  and  col-
lections of  stories.  With  the  possible  exception
of  Mrs.  Harriet  B.  Stowe,  no  female  author  of
America  has  received  so  large  profits  from  her
copyrights.  Some  of  her  books  attained  a  sale
of  50,000  copies.  Her  stories  treat  of  domestic
life,  and,  without  having  an  avowedly  moral  pur-
pose, are  pure  in  tone  and  free  from  sensational
incidents.  Mrs.  Holmes  ultimately  made  Brock-
port,  N.  Y.,  her  residence.  Many  of  her  stories,
before  being  issued  in  book-form,  appeared  as  seri-
als in  the  New  York  "  Weekly."  She  has  pub-
lished, besides  the  volumes  already  mentioned,
"  The  Homestead  on  the  Hillside,  and  other  Tales  "
(Auburn,  1855) :  "  Lena  Rivers  "  (1856) ;  "  Meadow
Brook  "  (New  York,  1857) ;  "  Dora  Deane,  or  the
East  India  Uncle,"  and  "  Maggie  Miller,  or  Hagar's
Secret "  (1858) ;  "  Cousin  Maude  "  and  "  Rosa-
mond" (1860);  "Marian  Grev"  (1863);  "Hugh
Worthington  "  (1863) ;  "  Darkness  and  Davlight "
(1864) ;  "  The  Cameron  Pride,  or  Purified  by  Suf-
fering" (1867);  "The  Christmas  Font,"  a"  storv
for  young  folks  (1868) :  "  Rose  Mather,  a  Tale  of
the  War"  (1868);  "  Ethelvn's  Mistake"  (1869);
"Millbank"  (1871);  "Edna  Browning"  (1872);
"  West  Lawn,  and  the  Rector  of  St.  Mark's  "  (1874) ;

Mildred"  (1877);  "  Daisv  Thornton"  (1878);
"Forest  House"  (1879);  "  Chateau  d'Or  "  (1880);
I  Red  Bird  "  (1880) ;  "  Madeline  "  (1881) ;  "  Queenie
Hatherton"  (1883);  "Christmas  Stories"  (1884);
'Bessie's  Fortune "  (1885) ;  and  "  Gretchen  "  (1887).

HOLMES,  Nathaniel,  author,  b.  in  Peterboro,
N.  H.,  2  July,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1837,  studied  in  the  Harvard  law-school,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1839,

id  began  practice  in  St.  Louis.  He  was  circuit
attorney  for  that  city  in  1846,  and  one  of  the  judges
of  the  supreme  court  of  Missouri  in  1865-'8.  From
1868  till  1872  he  filled  the  Royall  professorship  of
*  m  in  Harvard. From  1857  to  1883  he  was  cor-

sponding  secretary  and  one  of  the  editors  of  the
|  Transactions  "  of  the  Academy  of  science  of  St.

juis. In  1883  he  retired  from  business  and  re-

lrned  to  Cambridge,  Mass. He  is  the  author  of

work  on  "  The  Authorship  of  Shakespeare,"  in
which  he  strongly  advocates  the  theory  that  Francis
Bacon  was  the  author  of  the  Shakespearian  dramas
(New  York,  1866 :  enlarged  ed.,  Boston,  1886).

HOLMES,  William  Henry,  geologist,  b.  in
Harrison  county,  Ohio,  1  Dec,  1846.  He  was
graduated  at  the  McNeely  normal  college  in  1870,
after  which,  for  two  years,  he  was  engaged  in  teach-
ing in  normal  schools.  In  1872  he  was  appointed
assistant  on  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  spent
eight  years  in  field-Work  and  explorations  in  the
Rocky  mountain  region  under  Dr.  Ferdinand  V.
Hayden,  and  later  under  Maj.  John  W.  Powell.
Subsequently  he  spent  a  year  abroad  in  travel  and
study,  and  in  1882  visited  Mexico  in  pursuit  of
archaeological  knowledge.  In  1881,  when  the  sur-
vey was  established  on  its  present  basis,  he  was
made  geologist  in  charge  of  the  division  of  illus-
trations. In  this  capacity  he  has  acquired  con-
siderable reputation  as  a  painter  in  water-colors,
and  has  furnished  numerous  illustrations  and  pano-
ramas of  the  scenery  of  the  far  west  that  have  been


used  in  the  reports  of  the  geological  survey.  Mr.
Holmes  has  edited  Hayden's  "  Atlas  of  Colorado,"
that  of  the  "  Yellowstone  Country,"  the  11th  and
12th  annual  reports  of  the  geological  survey,  and
other  geological  publications :  and  he  has  con-
tributed geological  reports  for  Hayden's  annual
reports  of  1874-'6  and  1878,  and  numerous  papers  on
aboriginal  American  art  and  archaeology  to  the
Smithsonian  institution,  which  have  been  published
in  the  annual  reports  of  the  bureau  of  ethnology.

HOLST,  Hermann  Ednard  von,  historian,  b.  in
Fellin,  Livonia,  19  June,  1841.  He  studied  history
in  the  universities  of  Dorpat  and  Heidelberg,  and
was  made  doctor  at  the  latter  in  1865.  In  1866  he
settled  in  St.  Petersburg,  but  in  consequence  of  a
pamphlet  on  an  attempt  on  the  life  of  the  emperor,
which  he  published  at  Leipsic  while  travelling
abroad,  his  return  to  Russia  was  forbidden.  He
decided  to  emigrate  to  the  United  States  in  July
of  the  same  year,  and  settled  in  New  York,  where,
in  the  autumn  of  1869,  he  became  assistant  editor,
under  Alexander  J.  Schem,  of  the  "  Deutsch-Ameri-
kanisches  Conversations-Lexicon."  His  German
work  on  "  Louis  XIV."  appeared  in  Leipsic  soon
after  he  arrived  in  the  United  States.  He  subse-
quently became  a  contributor  to  several  American
journals.  He  was  called  to  a  professorship  of  his-
tory in  Strasburg  university  in  1872,  and  in  1874
was  given  the  chair  of  modern  history  at  Freiburg.
Afterward  he  revisited  the  United  States,  and  lec-
tured at  Johns  Hopkins  university.  His  principal
work  is  "  Verfassung  und  Demokratie  der  verei-
nigten  Staaten  von  Amerika."  the  first  volume  of
which  appeared  in  Berlin  and  Diisseldorf  in  1873,
and  the  second  in  1878  ;  translated  by  J.  J.  Lalor
and  A.  B.  Mason  under  the  title  "  The  Constitu-
tional and  Political  Historv  of  the  United  States,
1750-1833  "  (5  vols.,  Chicago.  1876-'85).  He  is  also
the  author  of  the  life  of  John  C.  Calhoun  in  the
"American  Statesmen"  series  (Boston,  1882),  and
"  The  Constitutional  Law  of  the  United  States  of
America"  (Chicago,  1887).

HOLSTEIN,  or  DLCOUDRAY-HOLSTEIN,
La  Fayette  Villaume,  soldier,  b.  in  Germany  in
1763 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  23  April,  1839%  He
was  a  general  in  the  French  army  under  Napo-
leon, and,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  latter,  went
to  South  America,  where  he  served  under  Gen.
Simon  Bolivar,  but,  removing  to  the  United  States
afterward,  settled  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  he  be-
came a  teacher  of  languages  in  the  academy,  and
edited  "  The  Zodiac."  He  is  the  author  of  "  Recol-
lections of  an  Officer  of  the  Empire";  "  Histoire
de  Bolivar,"  continued  by  A.  Viollet  (Paris,  1831) ;
"Memoirs  of  Lafavette  "  (New  York,  1824);  and
"  The  New  French  Reader  "  (Albany,  1836).

HOLT,  John,  printer,  b.  in  Williamsburg.  Va.,
in  1721 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30  Jan.,  1784.  After
failing  as  a  merchant  and  serving  as  mayor  of  Will-
iamsburg, he  removed  to  New  York  in  1759,  and
with  James  Parker  established  "  The  Gazette  and
Post  Boy."  In  1766  he  founded  the  "  New  York
Journal,"  "  containing  the  freshest  advices,  Foreign
and  Domestick."  The  heading  of  this  paper  was
ornamented  with  the  king's  arms,  which  were  af-
terward discarded  for  the  famous  device  of  a  snake
cut  into  parts,  with  "  Unite  or  Die  "  for  a  motto,
and  in  1775  the  snake  appeared  joined  and  coiled,
with  the  tail  in  his  mouth,  forming  a  double  ring;
within  the  coil  was  a  pillar  standing  on  Magna
Charta  and  surmounted  by  the  liberty-cap.  In
1770  Holt  established  a  printing-press  in  Norfolk,
Va.,  which  after  the  Declaration  of  Independence
did  good  service  in  the  patriot  cause.  In  1775
Lord  Dunmore  made  Norfolk  the  rendezvous  of


244


HOLT


HOLTON


the  British  fleet,  sent  soldiers  and  sailors  into  the
town,  under  cover  of  the  squadron,  carried  away
Holt's  printing-press,  and  took  two  of  his  men  pris-
oners. Holt  induced  the  timid  corporation  of  Nor-
folk to  send  a  letter  of  remonstrance  to  Dunmore,
who  replied  that  he  had  done  them  good  service  by-
depriving  them  of  the  means  of  poisoning  their
minds  by  rebellious  doctrines,  and  that  cowardice
alone  prevented  their  protest  when  the  types  were
carried  to  the  fleet.  Holt  then  left  the  city  and
went  to  Williamsburg,  where  he  avenged  himself
by  writing  and  printing  a  severe  attack  on  Dun-
more.  Returning  to  New  York,  he  again  became
an  editor  of  the  "  Journal,"  but  was  obliged  to  fly
when  the  British  army  entered  in  September,  1776.
Taking  his  little  press  with  him.  he  resided  at  Fish-
kill,  Esopus,  Hudson,  and  other  retired  points  along
the  Hudson,  continuing  to  issue  his  paper  until  the
conclusion  of  peace.  While  in  Esopus  he  published
Gen.  Burgoyne's  proclamation  of  29  June,  1777,  and
in  Poughkeepsie  the  first  authentic  account  of  the
Wyoming  massacre,  which  he  received  from  the  fu-
gitives themselves.  Returning  to  New  York,  he
fiublished  his  paper  under  the  new  title  of  "  The
ndependent  Gazette,  or  New  York  Journal."
Isaiah  Thomas  says  of  him :  "  Holt  was  a  man  of
ardent  feeling,  and  a  high  churchman,  but  a  firm
Whig,  a  good  writer,  and  a  warm  advocate  for  the
cause  of  his  country."  His  tomb  may  still  be  seen
in  St.  Paul's  church-yard,  New  York  city.

HOLT,  John  Saunders,  author,  b.  in  Mobile,
Ala.,  5  Dec,  1826 ;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  27  Feb.,
1886.  He  removed  with  his  father,  when  an  in-
fant, to  Woodville,  Miss.,  and  was  educated  in  New
Orleans  and  Centre  college,  Danville,  Ky.  In  1846
he  joined  a  Mississippi  regiment  of  volunteers
under  Col.  Jefferson  Davis,  and  served  as  a  private
in  the  Mexican  war,  receiving  honorable  mention
for  bravery  at  Buena  Vista.  After  studying  law,
he  was  licensed  to  practise  in  Woodville,  Miss.,  in
1848,  and  resided  there  until  his  removal  to  New
Orleans  in  1851.  He  returned  to  Woodville  in
1857,  and  throughout  the  civil  war  served  as  lieu-
tenant in  the  Confederate  army.  At  its  close  he
resumed  the  practice  of  law.  His  novels,  which  are
intended  to  portray  various  phases  of  southern
character,  are  written  under  the  pen-name  of
"  Abraham  Page,"  and  are  entitled  "  The  Life  of
Abraham  Page,  Esq."  (Philadelphia,  1868);  "What
I  know  about  Ben  Eccles,  by  Abraham  Page "
(1869) ;  and  "  The  Quines  "  (1870).

HOLT,  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  Breckenridge  coun-
ty, Ky.,  6  Jan.,  1807.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Jo-
seph's college,  Bards-
town,  and  at  Centre  col-
lege, Danville,  and  in
1828  began  to  practise
law  at  Elizabethtown,
Ky.  He  removed  to
Louisville  in  1832,  was
attorney  for  the  Jeffer-
son circuit  in  1833,  and
in  1855  went  to  Port
Gibson,  Miss.,  where  he
attained  eminence  in
his  profession.  He  be-
came an  adherent  of
Richard  M.  Johnson,
H f\ A  and  a  speech  that  he

VI  J I f  -» \hf —  made  in  Johnson's  fa-

0*?  J V^OJt-A_ , vor in the National
Democi-atic  convention
of  1836  made  him  widely  known  as  an  orator. At
this  time  he  was  counsel  for  the  city  of  Vicksburg
in  a  celebrated  suit  involving  the  claim  of  the  heirs


of  Newit  Vick,  founder  of  the  city,  to  a  strip  of  land
along  the  river-front  that  Vick  had  devoted  to  the
public  use.  He  was  a  frequent  opponent  of  Sergeant
S.  Prentiss.  Holt  returned  to  Louisville  in  1842,  and
after  a  trip  to  Europe  was  appointed  commissioner
of  patents  by  President  Buchanan  in  1857.  He  be-
came postmaster-general  in  1859,  and  when  John
B.  Floyd  withdrew  from  the  cabinet  in  1860  he  as-
sumed charge  of  the  war  department.'  He  actively
co-operated  with  Gen.  Scott  in  providing  against
hostile  demonstrations  at  the  inauguration  of  Presi-
dent Lincoln  in  1861,  and  in  a  report,  which  was
afterward  published,  described  the  plot  that  had
been  made  to  seize  the  capital.  Although  he  had
been  a  Douglas  Democrat,  Mr.  Holt  now  gave  his
earnest  support  to  the  administration,  denounced
the  policy  of  "  neutrality  "  in  his  native  state,  and
advocated  the  Union  cause  there  and  elsewhere.  In
the  latter  part  of  1861  he  was  one  of  the  commis-
sion that  was  appointed  to  investigate  the  military
claims  against  the  Department  of  the  West.  Presi-
dent Lincoln  made  him  judge-advocate-general  of
the  army  on  3  Sept.,  1862,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
and  on  the  establishment  of  the  bureau  of  military
justice  in  1864  he  was  put  at  its  head  with  the
same  title,  but  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.
He  expressed  his  strong  approval  of  the  emancipa-
tion proclamation  of  1862,  and  on  26  Aug.,  1863,
addressed  an  opinion  to  Sec.  Stanton  in  which  he
approved  the  enlistment  and  subsequent  emanci-
pation of  those  negroes  who,  living  in  states  to
which  the  proclamation  did  not  refer,  were  still  in
slavery.  Judge  Holt  bore  a  conspicuous  part  in
various  courts-martial  and  military  commissions,
especially  in  that  which  tried  the  assassins  of  Presi-
dent Lincoln.  He  was  brevetted  major-general,  U.
S.  army,  on  13  March,  1865,  for  "  faithful,  meritori-
ous, and  distinguished  services  in  the  bureau  of
military  justice  during  the  war,"  and  on  1  Dec,
1875,  was  retired  at  his  own  request,  being  over
sixty-two  years  of  age.  Since  that  time  he  has  re-
sided in  Washington,  D.  C.

HOLTON,  Luther  Hamilton,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  South  Leeds,  Ont.,  in  October,  1817 ;  d.
14  March,  1880.  He  removed  to  Montreal  in  1826,
where  he  engaged  in  business,  and  was  for  many
years  a  member  of  the  mercantile  firm  of  Hooker
and  Holton.  Before  entering  politics  he  was  a
member  of  the  corporation  of  Montreal,  repeated-
ly president  of  the  Board  of  trade,  harbor  commis-
sioner, director  of  the  City  bank,  and  held  other
offices.  Mr.  Holton  represented  Montreal  in  the
Canadian  assembly  from  1854  till  1857,  when  he
was  defeated.  He  was  a  member  for  Victoria  di-
vision in  the  legislative  council  of  Canada  from
September,  1862,  till  May,  1863,  when  he  resigned
on  being  appointed  minister  of  finance,  and  was
elected  for  Chateaugay,  which  he  represented  con-
tinuously until  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the
executive  council  of  Canada  from  2  to  6  Aug.,  1858,
in  the  Brown-Dorion  or  "  short  administration,"
and  from  May,  1863,  till  March,  1864,  in  the  Sand-
field  -  Macdonald  -  Dorion  administration,  holding
the  portfolio  of  commissioner  of  public  works  in
the  first  and  minister  of  finance  in  the  latter  min-
istry. He  represented  Montreal  Centre  in  the  par-
liament of  Quebec  (in  which  he  led  the  English  op-
position) from  the  general  election  of  1871  till  16
Jan.,  1864,  when  he  retired. He  was  honorary

S resident  of  the  Reform  association  of  the  "  Parti
rational  "  of  Montreal,  a  governor  of  McGill  uni-
versity, and  a  member  of  the  Royal  institution  for
the  advancement  of  learning,  and  was  a  govern-
ment director  of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway  from
November,  1852,  till  July,  1857.


HOLTON


HOME


245


HOLTON,  Samuel,  statesman,  b.  in  Danvers,
Mass.,  9  June,  1738;  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1816.  For
many  years  he  was  an  eminent  physician  of  Dan-
vers, a  member  of  the  legislature  previous  to  the
Revolution,  and  one  of  the  most  zealous  patriots
of  his  day.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Essex  coun-
ty convention  in  1774,  served  in  the  Provincial
congresses  of  1774-'5,  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee of  safety  of  July,  1776,  and  of  the  superior
executive  council.  He  was  a  delegate  to  frame
the  confederation  of  1777,  a  delegate  to  congress
in  1778-'83,  and  again  in  1793-*5,  and  a  member
of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1789.  He
was  judge  of  probate  from  1796  till  1815,  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  twenty-seven  years,  and  a  coun-
cillor of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society.

HOLYOKE,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  25  June,  1689;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1
June,  1769.  His  grandfather,  Rev.  Elizur  Holyoke,
was  a  representative  to
the  general  court.  Ed-
ward was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1705,  be-
came a  tutor  there  in
1712,  and  a  fellow  of  the
corporation  the  next
year.  Having  prepared
himself  for  the  minis-
try, he  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  at  Mar-
blehead,  Mass.,  officiat-
ing there  twenty -one
years.  In  1737  he  was
elected  president  of
Harvard.  At  the  first
visit  of  George  White-
ield  to  the  college.  Dr.  Holyoke  commended
him  in  his  convention  sermon  of  1741,  but  on  the
publication  of  Whitefield's  journal  in  1742,  in
which  he  reflected  on  the  morals  of  the  college
and  the  want  of  religious  feeling  among  the  fac-
ulty. Dr.  Holyoke  published  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  The  Testimony  of  the  President,  Professors,  and
Students  of  Harvard  against  the  Rev.  George
Whitefield  and  his  Conduct,"  in  which  he  declared
Whitefield  to  be  "  an  enthusiast,  an  uncharitable
person,  and  deluder  of  the  people."  and  "  an  itiner-
ant and  extempore  preacher."  Dr.  Holyoke  was
designated  in  the  will  of  Paul  Dudley  to  deliver
the  first  Dudleian  lecture,  and  spoke  on  "  Natural
Religion,"  but  refused  to  publish  the  discourse.
He  is  the  author  of  three  volumes  of  "  Sermons  "
(Cambridge,  1736,  1737,  and  1774),  and  the  first
poem  in  "Pietas  et  Gratulatio  "  (Cambridge,  1761).
— His  son,  Edward  Augustas,  physician,  b.  in
Boston,  1  Aug.,  1728  ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  21  March,
1829.  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1746,  studied
medicine,  and  settling  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1749,
was  a  practitioner  there  for  eighty  years.  Through-
out his  career  he  kept  up  his  classical  studies,  and
was  versed  in  scientific  and  liberal  branches.  After
his  one  hundredth  year  he  began  a  manuscript  in
which  he  "  proposed  to  note  some  of  the  changes
in  the  manners,  dress,  dwellings,  and  employments
of  the  inhabitants  of  Salem,"  and  at  ninety-two  he
performed  a  difficult  surgical  operation  successful-
ly. On  his  one  hundredth  birthday  fifty  physi-
cians of  Boston  and  Salem  gave  him  a  public
dinner,  at  which  he  appeared  with  a  firm  step,
smoked  his  pipe,  and  gave  an  appropriate  toast.
His  voluminous  diaries,  which  he  had  kept  from
his  youth,  were  bequeathed  to  the  Massachusetts
medical  society,  of  which  he  was  a  founder  and
first  president. A  memoir  of  him  was  published


by  the  Essex  medical  society  (1839).— His  son,
Samuel,  musician,  b.  in  Boxford.  Mass..  15  Oct.,
1762 ;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  7  Feb.,  1820,  went  with
his  family  to  Salem  soon  after  his  birth.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1789.  At  the  age  of
fourteen  he  composed  the  hymn-tune  "  Arnheim,"
which  is  still  much  sung.  His  first  collection
of  music,  "  Harmonica  Americana,"  was  issued  in
Boston  in  1791.  "Fuguing  pieces"  were  omitted
on  account  of  the  "  trifling  effect  produced  by  that
sort  of  music."  His  other  collections  were  "  The
Massachusetts  Compiler"  (see  Holden,  Oliver)
(1795);  "The  Instrumental  Assistant"  (2  vols.,
Exeter,  N.  H.,  1806-'7) ;  and  "  The  Columbian  Re-
pository of  Sacred  Harmony  "  (1809).

HOMANS,  John,  phvsician.  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1793;  d.  there,  1*7  April,  1868.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1812,  and  at  the  medical
department  in  1815,  and  practised  in  Worcester
and  in  Brookfield,  Mass.  In  1829  he  settled  in
Boston,  for  several  years  was  president  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts historical  society. — His  son,  Charles
Dudley,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  5  Dec,  1826 ;  d.
in  Mount  Desert,  Me.,  2  Sept.,  1886.  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1846,  and  at  the  medical  department
in  1849.  He  settled  in  Boston,  and  was  surgeon
of  the  Boston  city  hospital  from  its  foundation.
He  was  president  of  the  Massachusetts  medical
society  in  1884-'6.  of  the  Charitable  eye  and  ear
infirmary,  and  of  the  Boston  humane  society.

HOME,  Daniel  Douglas,  spiritualist,  b.  near
Edinburgh,  Scotland.  20  March,  1833;  d.  in  Au-
teuil,  France,  21  June,  1886.  He  was  adopted  by
an  aunt,  whom  he  accompanied  to  the  United
States  in  1840.  It  is  claimed  that  spiritualistic
manifestations  attended  him  from  his  infancy,  but
his  own  earliest  recollection  dates  from  a  vision  in
his  fourteenth  year  of  a  deceased  schoolmate.  At
seventeen  he  became  celebrated  as  a  "medium."
He  resided  at  Lebanon,  Conn.,  Newburg  and  Troy,
N.  Y.,  and  at  Springfield,  Mass.,  where  the  most
remarkable  of  his  spiritualistic  manifestations
took  place.  Besides  the  table-moving,  writing,
and  playing  on  musical  instruments,  these  mani-
festations were  said  to  have  included  the  material-
ization of  spirits,  the  elongation  and  shortening  of
his  own  body,  and  his  handling  fire  without  pain.
He  claimed  to  have  performed  remarkable  cures,
and  to  be  impervious  to  disease.  In  1853  he  went
to  New  Y7ork  and  studied  medicine,  but  did  not
practise.  Removing  to  London,  he  remained  there
several  years,  making  frequent  visits  to  the  con-
tinent, where  he  was  presented  at  the  courts  of
Russia,  Germany,  the  Vatican,  and  France.  In
1856  he  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church,
but  was  expelled  in  1863  for  spiritualistic  prac-
tices. His  visit  to  Russia  was  made  with  the  elder
Dumas,  who  devoted  columns  in  the  newspapers,
and  even  a  book,  to  his  praise.  In  1858  he  mar-
ried a  Russian  lady  of  rank  and  wealth,  who  died
in  1862.  leaving  a  son,  who  is  said  to  inherit
his  father's  peculiar  power.  In  1863  Home  went
to  Italy  to  study  art,  visited  Florence,  and  was
befriended  by  Elizabeth  Barrett  Browning,  Mrs.
S.  C.  Hall,  Mary  Howitt,  and  many  other  liter-
ary persons,  all  of  whom  testified  to  his  hon-
esty, and  were  witnesses  of  many  inexplicable
phenomena.  Three  years  later  a  wealthy  English-
woman, Mrs.  Jane  Lyons,  as  a  reward  for  his
services,  placed  £27,000  in  the  hands  of  trustees
for  his  benefit,  and  on  his  adding  Lyons  to  his
name  increased  the  gift  to  £33,000.  A  few  years
afterward  she  demanded  the  return  of  her  money,
and  when  Home  refused  to  give  it  up  he  was  ar-
rested, and  after  a  trial  lost  his  case. He  again


246


HOMER


nONEYWOOD


married  a  Russian  lady  in  1871,  but  the  alliance
proved  unhappy,  and  he  died  harmlessly  insane.
Prof.  William  Crookes,  of  London,  and  Victorien
Sardou,  of  Paris,  devoted  much  time  to  the  inves-
tigation of  the  phenomena  he  produced,  and  pub-
lished papers  asserting  that  his  practices  were  not
the  effect  of  jugglery.  Robert  crowning's  poem
entitled  "  Mr.  Sludge,  the  Medium,"  is  understood
to  be  a  study  of  Home.

HOMER,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  October,  1759 ;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,  13
Feb.,  1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1777,
and  in  1782  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Newton,  where  he  remained  till
his  resignation  in  1839.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Brown  university  in  1826.
He  published,  besides  occasional  sermons,  a  "  De-
scription and  History  of  Newton,"  in  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  collections,  vol.  v.  (1798).  From
1824  till  the  end  of  his  life  he  devoted  his  attention
to  investigating  the  sources  of  the  common  Eng-
lish version  of  the  Bible.  By  the  examination  of
the  labors  of  the  earlier  English  translators  and  of
Luther  and  the  German  reformers,  he  reached  the
conclusion  that  the  work  of  King  James's  trans-
lators was  to  a  large  extent  a  compilation.  He  did
not  publish  the  results  of  his  biblical  studies,  but
superintended  the  preparation  of  an  edition  of
Teal's  "  Columbian  Bible,"  adding  notes  and  intro-
ductions to  the  several  books.

HOMER,  William  Bradford,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  31  Jan.,  1817;  d.  in  South  Berwick,
Me.,  22  March,  1841.  His  intellect  was  remarka-
bly developed  at  an  early  age,  and  at  eleven  he
was  acquainted  with  Latin,  modern  Greek,  and
French,  speaking  the  last  two  languages  with  flu-
ency. He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1836,  and
at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1840,  and  in
the  latter  year  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  in  South  Berwick,  Me.,  continuing
in  this  charge  until  his  death.  His  "  Writings,"
with  an  introductory  essay  and  memoir,  were  edited
by  Prof.  Edwards  A.  Park  (Boston,  1849).

HOMER,  Winslow,  artist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
24  Feb.,  1836.  In  1854  he  was  placed  by  his  father
with  a  lithographer  to  learn  the  business,  and  re-
mained two  years,  producing  among  other  works
a  design  that  embraced  the  portraits  of  the  entire
senate  of  Massachusetts.  He  then  engaged  in
drawing  on  the  block  for  wood-engravers,  and,  his
work  attracting  favorable  comment,  he  was  invited
to  remove  to  New  Yoi"k  by  a  publishing  house,  for
whom  he  made  many  drawings.  In  1860-'l  he
studied  in  the  night-school  of  the  Academy  of  de-
sign, and  had  a  month's  instruction  in  landscape-
painting.  In  1863  he  exhibited  for  the  first  time,
at  the  Academy,  two  pictures  on  war  subjects —
"Home,  Sweet  Home,  and  "The  Last  Goose  at
Yuletown."  These  pictures  made  a  strong  impres-
sion on  the  public.  In  1865  he  exhibited  "  Prison-
ers at  the  Front."  The  characters  in  this  scene  are
all  portraits,  and  at  the  Paris  salon  of  1867  was
one  of  the  few  American  pictures  that  received  fa-
vorable comment.  He  spent  the  year  1867  in  Paris,
studying  without  a  master  from  life  models,  but
received  a  great  impulse  from  the  paintings  of
John  La  Farge.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  in  1864,  and  an  academician
the  following  year.  Mr.  Homer's  pictures  have  the
merit  of  genuine  motive  and  aim.  He  paints  life
as  he  sees  it,  and  is  rigidly  faithful  to  his  own  per-
ceptions. Since  1867  he  has  resided  in  New  York.
He  exhibited  "  Snap  the  Whip  "  and  "  The  Ameri-
can Type"  at  the  Philadelphia  exposition  of  1876,
and  "  Snap  the  Whip  "  and  the  "  Country  School-


Room  "  at  the  Paris  salon  of  the  next  year.  Among
his  most  noted  pictures  are  the  negro  studies  "  Eat-
ing Watermelon  "  and  the  "  Cotton-Pickers."  and
the  "Song  of  the  Lark,"  "The  Four-Leaved  Clo-
ver," "  Dad's  Coming,"  "  In  the  Fields."  "  The  Tryst-
ing-Place,"  and  "  Flowers  for  the  Teacher."  He
has  recently  exhibited  at  the  National  academy
"  The  Life-Line  "  (1884)  and  "  Under-tow  "  (1887).

HOMES,  Henry  Augustus,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  10  March,  1812;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  3
Nov.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1830,
subsequently  studied  theology,  followed  oriental
studies  in  Paris,  France,  and  was  ordained  there
in  1835  as  a  missionary  of  the  "  Eglise  Reformee  "
to  Turkey.  He  served  as  a  missionary  of  the
American  board  at  Constantinople  in  1836-'50,  and
was  in  the  diplomatic  service  of  the  United  States
at  Constantinople  in  1851-'3.  In  1854  he  was  ap-
pointed assistant  librarian  in  the  general  library  of
the  state  library  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1868  be-
came the  senior  librarian  and  chief  of  the  staff  in
the  same  library.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Need
of  the  Yezeedees  of  Mesopotamia  "  (1842) ;  "  Obser-
vations on  the  Design  and  Import  of  Medals  "  (Al-
bany, 1864);  "Our  Knowledge  of  California  and
the  Northwest "(1870);  "The  Palatine  Emigration
to  England  in  1709  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Water-Supply  of
Constantinople"  (1876);  "The  Future  Develop-
ment of  the  New  York  State  Librarv"  (1878);
"The  Pompey  (New  York)  Stone"  (18*81);  "The
Correct  Arms  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (1883) ;
and  translated  from  the  Turkish  "  The  Alchemy  of
Mohammed  Ghazzali "  (1873).

HOMES,  Mary  Sophie  Shaw,  author,  b.  in
Frederick,  Md.,  about  1830.  She  removed  with
her  mother  to  New  Orleans  after  the  death  of  her
father,  Thomas  Shaw,  when  a  mere  child,  and  was
educated  there.  Her  first  husband,  Norman  Rog-
ers, died  in  the  second  year  after  their  marriage,
and  in  1864  she  became  the  wife  of  Luther  Homes.
She  first  attracted  public  attention  in  1851  as  a
writer  of  essays,  sketches,  and  poems  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Millie  Mayfield,"  and  afterward  pub-
lished a  volume  of  verse,  entitled  "  Progression,  or
the  South  Defended  "  (1868).  A  collection  of  her
fugitive  poems  has  also  appeared,  with  the  title
"A  Wreath  of  Rhymes"  (Philadelphia,  1870).

HOMES,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  the  north
of  Ireland  in  1663 ;  d.  in  Chilmark,  Martha's  Vine-
yard, Mass.,  20  June,  1746.  He  was  well  educated,
and,  coming  to  New  England  in  1686,  taught  three
years  on  Martha's  Vineyard.  He  then  returned  to
Ireland,  and  was  ordained  minister  at  Strabane  in
1692,  but  returned  to  Martha's  Vineyard  in  1714
and  became  a  pastor  there.  His  son,  Capt.  Robert,
married  a  sister  of  Benjamin  Franklin.  William
Homes  published  sermons  on  "  The  Sabbath,"  on
"  Public  Reading  of  the  Scripture,"  "  Church  Gov-
ernment" (1732),  "Secret  Prayer"  and  "Govern-
ment of  Christian  Families  "  (1747).

HONE,  Philip,  merchant,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1781 ;  d.  there,  4  May,  1851.  He  was  a  sueceafl
ful  merchant  in  New  York,  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Mercantile  librarv  association  of  that  city,  and
was  mayor  in  1825-f6,  winning  by  his  conduct  as
an  upright  magistrate  praise  from  the  highest  as
well  as  the  lowest  of  his  constituents.  President
Taylor  afterward  appointed  him  naval  officer  of
New  York.  He  was  a  man  of  fine  social  qualities,
and  of  a  noble  and  generous  character.  Hone's
marble  bust,  furnished  at  the  request  of  the  asso-
ciation, stands  in  the  hall  of  the  New  York  mer-
cantile library.

HONE!  WOOD,  Saint  John,  poet,  b.  in  Leices-
ter, Mass.,  7  Feb.,  1763 ;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  Y.,  1  Sept.,


I


HOOD


HOOD


247


1798.  His  father,  an  English  physician  who  had
settled  in  Leicester,  was  killed  at  Ticonderoga  in
1776  while  surgeon  in  the  army,  leaving  his  son
destitute.  He  was  educated  by  friends,  and  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1782.  In  1783-4  he  taught
m  an  academy  in  Schenectady,  X.  Y.,  after  which
he  studied  law  in  Albany,  and  practised  in  Salem,
N.  Y.,  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  was
one  of  the  presidential  electors  that  chose  John
Adams  as  the  successor  of  Washington.  His  poems,
which  treat  of  Washington's  declension  of  a  third
term,  Shays's  rebellion,  and  other  political  topics,
were  published  after  his  death  (Xew  York,  1801).

HOOD,  George,  author,  b.  about  1815;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  18  May,  1869.  He  was  business  mana-
ger of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  music,  and  au-
thor of  a  "  History  of  Music  in  Xew  England "
{Boston,  1846).  This  was  the  first  work  published
in  this  country  that  contained  a  connected  history
of  psalmody  from  the  landing  of  the  Pilgrims.
The  work  also  contained  sketches  of  reformers  and
of  the  early  psalmists.

HOOD,  James  Walker,  A.  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Kennett  township,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  30  May,  1831.
His  family  was  included  in  the  thirteen  that  found-
ed a  separate  colored  Methodist  church  in  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  in  1813.  Subsequently  his  father  lived
upon  a  farm  owned  by  Ephraim  Jackson,  to  whom
he  verbally  bound  his  children.  In  1860  James
was  made  deacon  and  sent  as  a  missionary  to
Nova  Scotia,  serving  there  again  after  being  or-
dained elder  in  1862.  In  1863  he  was  stationed  in
Bridgeport,  Conn.,  and  in  that  year  sent  to  Xorth
Carolina  as  the  first  colored  missionary  to  the
freedmen  of  the  south.  He  was  a  member  of  the
reconstruction  conventions  of  Xorth  Carolina  in
1867-'8,  and  assistant  superintendent  of  public  in-
struction from  1868  till  1871.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church
in  1872,  and  presided  at  one  session  of  the  Centen-
nial conference  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1885.  He
has  devoted  his  attention  to  church  work,  building
five  hundred  churches  in  twenty  years,  and  has
held  many  offices  in  benevolent  associations.  Lin-
coln university,  Lincoln,  111.,  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1887.  Dr.  Hood  has  edited  "  The  Xe-
gro  in  the  Christian  Pulpit,"  a  volume  of  sermons
<Raleigh,  X.  C,  1884).

HOOD,  John  Bell,  soldier,  b.  in  Owenville,
Bath  co.,  Ky.,  1  June,  1831 ;  d.  in  Xew  Orleans,
La.,  30  Aug.,  1879. He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.

military  academy  in
1853,  and,  after  serv-
ing two  years  in  Cal-
ifornia, was  trans-
ferred in  1855  to  the
2d  cavalry,  of  which
Albert  Sidney  John-
ston was  colonel  and
Robert  E.  Lee  lieu-
tenant-colonel. In
the  fight  at  Devil's
Run  with  the  Co-
manche and  Lipian
Indians,  in  July,
1857,  he  was  severely
wounded  in  a  hand-
to  -  hand  encounter
with  a  savage.  He
was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  in  1858,  and  was  cavalry  instructor  at
the  military  academy  in  1859-60.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  resigned  his  com-
mission, and,  entering  the  Confederate  army,  rose
to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and,  after  a  short  service


C^<r.


in  the  peninsula,  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-
eral of  the  Texas  brigade.  He  was  then  ordered
back  to  the  peninsula,  was  engaged  at  West
Point,  and,  while  leading  his  men  on  foot  at
Gaines's  Mill,  was  shot  in  the  body.  In  this  battle
his  brigade  lost  more  than  half  its  number,  and
Hood  was  brevetted  major-general  on  the  field.
He  served  in  both  Maryland  campaigns,  was  en-
gaged in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run  and  those
of  Boonesborough,  Fredericksburg,  and  Antietam,
and  was  a  second  time  severely  wounded  at  Get-
tysburg, losing  the  use  of  his  arm.  Two  months
later  he  re-joined  his  command,  and  was  ordered
to  Tennessee  to  re-enforce  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg.
During  the  second  day's  fight  at  Chickamauga,
seeing  the  line  of  his  brigade  waver,  he  rode  to
the  front,  and  demanded  the  colors.  The  Texans
rallied  and  charged,  and  Hood,  at  the  head  of  the
column,  was  again  shot  down.  This  wound  neces-
sitated the  loss  of  his  right  leg,  and  while  in  hos-
pital he  was  offered  a  civil  appointment,  which  he
refused,  saying:  "Xo  bomb-proof  place  for  me;
I  propose  to  see  this  fight  out  in  the  field."  Six
months  later  he  returned  to  duty,  and  in  the  spring
of  1864  commanded  a  corps  in  Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnston's  army,  fighting  through  the  retreat  from
Dalton  to  Atlanta.  In  obedience  to  an  order  of
Jefferson  Davis  he  succeeded  Johnston  in  the  com-
mand on  8  July,  1864,  and,  after  several  days  of
stubborn  fighting,  was  completely  outflanked  by
Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  and  compelled  to  evacu-
ate Atlanta,  leaving  Sherman  in  the  rear,  and  en-
abling him  to  make  his  march  to  the  sea.  Hood  then
began  a  counter-movement  into  Tennessee.  He
compelled  the  evacuation  of  Decatur  in  Xovember,
crossed  the  Tennessee,  and  on  the  30th  of  this
month  was  defeated  by  Gen.  John  M.  Schofield  at
Franklin.  On.  16  Dec.  he  was  again  disastrously
defeated  at  Xashville  by  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas,
and  after  this  battle,  at  his  own  request,  was  re-
lieved of  command  and  succeeded  by  Gen.  Richard
Taylor.  On  the  termination  of  the  war  he  engaged
in  business  as  a  commission-merchant  in  Xew  Or-
leans, and  was  also  president  of  the  Louisiana
branch  of  the  Life  association  of  America,  acquir-
ing a  competency,  which  was  afterward  lost  in
trade.  During  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  of  1879
his  wife  and  eldest  child  died  within  a  few  hours
of  each  other,  and  Hood  also  succumbed  to  the  dis-
ease. He  is  the  author  of  "  Advance  and  Retreat,
Personal  Experiences  in  the  United  States  and
Confederate  Armies  "  (Xew  Orleans,  1880).

HOOD,  Samuel,  Viscount,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  Butleigh,  Somersetshire,  England,  12  Dec,
1724;  d.  in  Bath,  27  Jan.,  1816.  He  entered  the
navy  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  became  a  post-
captain  in  1756.  In  1759,  when  in  command  of
the  "  Vestal."  attached  to  the  expedition  against
Quebec,  he  captured  the  French  frigate  "  Bel-
lona  "  after  an  action  of  four  hours.  On  his  re-
turn to  England  he  was  given  the  command  of  the
"Africa,"  of  sixty-four  guns.  From  14  Xov.,
1768,  till  13  July.  1769,  he  was  at  Boston,  then  oc-
cupied by  British  troops,  as  "  commander-in-chief
of  all  the  men-of-war  in  these  parts."  During  this
time  he  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  in-
quiry in  the  affair  of  the  "  Rose  "  frigate,  of  which
occasion  John  Adams  said  that  "he  had  never
taken  such  pains  before  or  since  in  any  trial  as  he
did  on  this  to  clear  the  accused."  In  1778  he  was
made  a  baronet,  in  1780  rear-admiral  of  the  blue,
and  the  same  year  joined  Rodney  in  the  West
Indies.  He  fought  a  drawn  battle  with  De  Grasse,
near  Chesapeake  bay,  5  Sept.,  1781,  but  could  not
prevent  its  blockade  nor  the  surrender  of  the  Brit-


248


HOOD


HOOKER


ish  army.  In  January.  1782.  the  French  having
invested  the  island  of  St.  Christopher,  Hood  went
to  its  relief,  and,  having  lured  De  Grasse  from  the
road  of  Basse-Terre  to  join  battle,  he  slipped  into
the  vacant  anchorage,  from  which  the  French
were  unable  to  force  him.  The  surrender  of  the
island  to  the  French  in  February,  however,  ren-
dered Hood's  success  useless,  and  he  in  consequence
retreated  at  once  to  sea.  In  the  battle  of  12
April,  which  resulted  in  the  capture  of  De  Grasse,
his  co-operation  was  warmly  acknowledged  by
Rodney  in  his  letter  to  the  admiralty.  When
Rodney  returned  to  England,  Hood  was  left  in
chief  command  until  the  peace  of  1783.  He  was
created  an  Irish  peer  in  1782  under  the  title  of
Baron  Hood  of  Catherington,  elected  to  parlia-
ment in  1784,  lost  his  seat  on  being  made  lord  of
the  admiralty  in  1788,  but  was  re-elected  in  1790.
He  was  distinguished  in  the  war  with  France  in
1793,  but  soon  afterward  retired  from  active  ser-
vice, and  in  1796  was  appointed  governor  of  Green-
wich hospital  and  raised  to  the  English  peerage,
with  the  title  of  Viscount  Hood  of  Whitley.

HOOD,  Samnel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Moyle,  County
Donegal,  Ireland,  about  1800 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  about  1875.  He  emigrated  to  Philadelphia
in  1826,  and  became  a  member  of  the  bar  of  that
city.  He  published  "  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the
Law  of  Decedents  in  Pennsylvania"  (Philadel-
phia, 1847),  and  "  A  Brief  Account  of  the  Society
of  the  Friendly  Sons  of  St.  Patrick,"  prepared  for
the  Hibernian  society  of  Philadelphia  (1844),  and
contributed  to  periodicals.

HOOKE,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Southamp-
ton, England,  in  1601 :  d.  in  London,  21  March,
1678.  He  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1620,  was  a
minister  at  Exmouth,  Devonshire,  and  came  to  this
country  about  1636.  He  was  pastor  of  the  church
in  Taunton,  Mass.,  soon  after  the  settlement  of
that  town  in  1637,  and  remained  there  about  seven
years.  He  afterward  was  pastor  at  New  Haven
from  1644  till  1656,  when  he  returned  to  England.
Hooke  was  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Oliver  Crom-
well, had  married  his  cousin,  and  became  his  do-
mestic chaplain.  He  also  had  conferred  upon  him
the  mastership  of  Savoy  hospital,  Westminster.
He  published  "  Discourse  on  the  Witnesses "  and
"  New  England's  Tears  for  Old  England's  Fears  "
(1640).  Two  of  his  sermons  are  reprinted  in  "  The
Ministry  of  Taunton."

HOOKER,  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  Berlin,
Conn.,  12  March,  1779;  d.  in  New  Haven,  19
March,  1863.  He  was  descended  from  Thomas
Hooker,  the  founder  and  first  minister  of  Hart-
ford, Conn.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1820,
received  his  medical  diploma  in  1823,  and  subse-
quently practised  at  New  Haven.  In  1838  he  was
appointed  professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in
Yale,  and  he  held  this  chair  until  his  death.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  and  directors  of  the  Con-
necticut state  hospital,  and  several  times  a  dele-
gate to  the  National  medical  association.  He  was
a  contributor  to  medical  journals.

HOOKER,  Charles  Edward,  lawyer,  b.  in
Union  district,  S.  C,  in  1825.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  law-school  in  1846,  and  afterward  prac-
tised at  Jackson,  Miss.  He  was  elected  district
attorney  of  the  River  district  in  1850,  and  in  1859
a  member  of  the  Mississippi  legislature,  but  re-
signed his  seat  on  entering  the  Confederate  army.
He  was  wounded  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,
and,  having  been  promoted  to  the  rank  of  colonel
of  cavalry,  was  assigned  to  duty  on  the  military
court  that  was  attached  to  Geri.  Leonidas  Polk's
command. He was  elected  attorney-general of


Mississippi  in  1865,  re-elected  in  1868,  and.  to-
gether with  the  other  civil  officers  of  the  state,  was
removed  by  the  military  authorities.  He  was
afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  served
from  6  Dec,  1875,  till  3  March,  1883,  and  was
again  chosen  in  1886.

HOOKER,  Edward,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Farm-
ington,  Hartford  co.,  Conn.,  25  Dec,  1822.  He  is
descended  from  Rev.  Thomas  Hooker.  Edward
was  educated  at  Farmington  academy,  and  at  the
age  of  fourteen  entered  the  merchant  marine,
where  he  remained  until  he  entered  the  navy
as  acting  master,  19  July,  1861,  on  the  gun-boat
"  Louisiana,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  and  was  severely  wounded,  5  Oct.,  1861.
He  was  on  service  on  that  gun-boat  in  the  Burn-
side  expedition,  and  commanded  it,  in  the  absence
of  the  chief  officer,  at  Washington,  N.  C,  5  Sept.,
1862.  For  his  gallant  conduct  in  this  action  he
was  promoted  to  acting-volunteer  lieutenant,  20
Sept.,  1862.  He  was  in  command  of  the  steamer
"  Victoria  "  in  1863,  and  captured  the  brig  "  Minna  "
and  the  steamer  "Nicholai  I."  off  Wilmington,
N.  C.  He  had  command  of  the  boats  on  the  Rap-
pahannock during  the  advance  of  Gen.  Grant,  and
cleared  the  river  of  torpedoes,  opening  it  to  trans-
ports. He  was  promoted  to  acting  volunteer  lieu-
tenant-commander in  January,  1865,  was  naval
store-keeper  in  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  from  Oc-
tober, 1865,  till  October.  1867,  commanded  the
store-ship  "  Idaho  "  in  1867-'9,  and  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant-commander  in  the  regular  navy,
18  Dec,  1868.  He  was  inspector  of  yards  and
docks  at  the  navy-yard,  New  York,  in  1870,  and  in
1884  was  retired  with  the  rank  of  commander.

HOOKER,  Edward  William,  clergyman,  b.
in  Goshen,  Conn.,  24  Nov.,  1794;  d.  in  Fort  At-
kinson, Wis.,  31  March,  1875.  He  was  the  direct
descendant  of  Thomas  Hooker  and  Jonathan  Ed-
wards. He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1814,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1817.  In'
1821  he  became  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church
in  Green's  Farms,  Conn.,  and  after  holding  this
charge  eight  years  edited  the  "  Journal  of  Hu-
manity," at  Andover,  Mass.,  one  of  the  first  tem-
perance papers  in  the  country,  and  was  also  gen-
eral agent  of  the  American  temperance  society.
He  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Ben-
nington, Vt.,  from  1832  till  1844,  when  he  became
professor  of  sacred  rhetoric  and  ecclesiastical  his-
tory in  East  Windsor  theological  seminary.  From
1856  till  1862  he  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Fair  Haven,  Vt.,  after  which  he  spent
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  retirement.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Williams  in  1840.
Having  studied  sacred  music  from  an  early  age,
Dr.  Hooker  presented  a  report  on  the  subject  to
the  general  convention  of  ministers  in  Vermont  in
1840.  This  was  attacked  by  a  writer  in  Boston
through  the  "  New  England  Puritan,"  and  led  to
a  series  of  articles  exposing  the  impositions  of
compilers  of  music,  who  had  made  alterations  in
the  new  editions  of  their  music-books,  rendering
the  previous  editions  useless.  _  This  controversy
attracted  much  attention  at  the  time.  Dr.  Hooker
possessed  a  musical  library,  and  published  essays
and  tracts  on  sacred  music  He  was  the  author  of
"  A  Plea  for  Sacred  Music  " ;  a  "  Memoir  of  Mrs.
Sarah  L.  Huntington  Smith  "  (1845) ;  and  "  The
Life  of  Thomas  Hooker  "  (Boston,  1849).

HOOKER,  Herman,  author,  b.  in  Poultney,
Vt.,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  July,  1865.
He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college  in  1825,
studied  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1825-7,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a  Presby-


HOOKER


HOOKER


249


terian,  but  subsequently  took  orders  in  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church.  Failing  health  com-
pelled him  to  retire  from  the  ministry,  and  he
became  a  bookseller  in  Philadelphia,  also  devot-
ing himself  to  literature.  He  made  Nashotah
seminary  a  residuary  legatee,  and  that  institution
thus  received  about  $10,000  at  his  death.  His
principal  works  are  "  The  Portion  of  the  Soul "
(Philadelphia,  1835) ;  "  Popular  Infidelity  "  (1836) ;
"  Family  Book  of  Devotion  "  (1836) ;  "  The  Uses  of
Adversity  and  the  Provisions  of  Consolation"
(1846) ;  "  Thoughts  and  Maxims  "  (1847) :  and  "  The
Christian  Life  a  Fight  of  Faith  "  (1848),  and  also
contributed  to  various  periodicals.

HOOKER,  Horace,  author,  b.  in  Berlin,  Conn.,
in  1793 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  17  Dec,  1864.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1815,  and  also  studied
at  Andover  theological  seminary.  Many  years  be-
fore his  death,  in  connection  with  Rev.  Thomas  H.
Gallaudet,  he  essayed  the  preparation  of  religious
books  for  the  young.  He  was  for  more  than
twenty  years  secretary  of  the  Connecticut  mission-
ary society,  and  was  for  several  years  chaplain  of
the  insane  retreat  at  Hartford.  As  a  writer  he  was
distinguished  for  the  elegance  and  purity  of  his
style.  Among  his  publications  are  the  "  Youth's
Book  of  Natural  Theology,"  and  a  series  of  twelve
volumes  on  "  Bible  History."

HOOKER,  Isabella  Beecher,  philanthropist,
b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  22  Feb.,  1822.  She  is  the
youngest  daughter  of  Lyman  Beecher,  and  was
educated  at  her  sister  Catherine's  schools  in  Cin-
cinnati and  Hartford.  In  1841  she  married  John
Hooker,  a  successful  lawyer  of  Hartford,  Conn.,
and  ever  since  has  been  a  careful  student  of  social,
political,  and  religious  questions.  In  middle  life
she  became  a  convert  to  spiritualism.  Her  work
in  later  life  developed  into  a  series  of  "  conversa-
tions," which  were  originally  confined  to  Hartford,
but  which  now  extend  to  New  York,  Boston,  and
other  cities.  Her  method  consists  generally  in  the
reading  of  a  short  essay,  after  which  she  illustrates
the  subject  by  familiar  conversation.  Mrs.  Hooker
is  well  known  at  the  woman's  clubs,  the  meetings
of  the  philanthropic  societies,  and  in  quarters  where
the  advocates  of  woman's  rights  and  the  more  re-
fined and  intelligent  believers  in  spiritualism  are
accustomed  to  meet.  She  has  published  "  Woman-
hood :  its  Sanctities  and  Fidelities  "  (Boston,  1873).
HOOKER,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Hadlev,  Mass.,
13  Nov.,  1814;  d.  in  Garden  City.  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,
1879.  After  a  good  elementary  education  he  was
appointed  a  cadet  in
the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he
was  graduated  in
1837  with  Braxton
Bragg,  Jubal  Early,
John  Sedgwick,  and
Edward  D.  Town-
send.  He  was  ap-
pointed a  2d  lieuten-
ant in  the  1st  artil-
lery, and  after  serv-
ing in  the  Florida
war  was  sent  with
his  regiment  to  the
Maine  frontier,  on
account  of  the  dis-
puted boundary  con-
troversy. On  1  Nov.,
1838,  he  was  pro-
moted to  a  1st  lieutenancy.  After  continued  ser-
vice with  his  regiment,  he  was  appointed  adjutant  of
the  military  academy,  1  July,  1842,  but  soon  after-


y./^-z^^


ward,  having  been  offered  the  adjutancy  of  his  own
regiment,  accepted  it,  and  retained  it  until  11  May,
1846.  He  served  with  distinction  in  the  Mexican
war  from  1846  till  1848,  and  in  the  former  year
was  appointed  a  captain  in  the  adjutant-general's
department.  He  was  attached  successively  to  the
staffs  of  Gens.  Persifer  F.  Smith.  Thomas  L.
Hamer,  William  0.  Butler,  and  Gideon  I.  Pillow.
He  was  particularly  distinguished  in  the  siege  and
assault  of  Monterey,  under  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor,
and  received  the  brevet  of  captain.  He  took  part
in  the  movements  from  Vera  Cruz  to  the  city  of
Mexico,  and  for  his  gallantry  in  a  spirited  affair  at
the  National  bridge  on  11  Aug.,  1847,  was  brevet-
ted  major.  He  was  favorably  mentioned  in  the
despatches  announcing  the  series  of  actions  and
victories  in  the  valley  of  Mexico — Contreras,  Chu-
rubusco,  Molino  del  Rev,  Chapultepec,  and  the
capture  of  the  city.  For  the  decisive  action  of
Chapultepec  he  received  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  being  thus  among  the  very  few  to  whom
were  given  three  brevets  during  the  war.  After  a
year's  sojourn  at  the  east  he  was  sent,  on  9  July,
1849,  as  assistant  adjutant-general  to  the  Division
of  the  Pacific,  where  he  served  until  24  Nov.,  1851.
By  regular  lineal  promotion  he  had  become  a  cap-
tain in  his  regiment  on  29  Oct.,  1848;  but  this
post  he  declined  and  vacated,  since  he  could  not
hold  both,  in  order  to  retain  his  captaincy  in  the
adjutant-general's  department.  From  1851  till
1853  he  was  on  leave  of  absence.  Being,  like  many
others,  smitten  with  the  "  California  fever,"  he  re-
signed from  the  army  on  21  Feb.,  1853,  and  from
that  time  until  1861  lived  a  precarious  and  not
very  successful  life.  At  first  he  was  a  farmer  in
Sonora  county,  Cal.  In  1858  he  was  appointed
superintendent  of  military  roads  in  Oregon,  and
had  other  government  surveying.  From  1859  till
1861  he  was  colonel  of  California  militia,  expecting
the  cloud  of  war  soon  to  burst.  Thus  by  his  needs,
his  training,  and  his  forecast  he  was  ready  to  avail
himself  of  the  opportunity  that  soon  presented  it-
self to  his  uncommon  military  talents.  Still  young,
tall,  handsome,  cool,  brave,  and  dashing,  he  was  at
once  a  soldier  and  a  general,  the  beau-ideal  of  a
leader  of  men.  The  government  made  haste  to
accept  his  services,  which  he  had  promptly  offered,
and  he  was  appointed  on  17  May,  1861,  a  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  The  actual  time  of  issuing
his  commission  was  in  August,  but  it  was  dated
back  to  give  him  a  claim  to  higher  command.  He
saw  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  without  participating
in  it.  He  was  employed  in  the  defences  of  Wash-
ington, 12  Aug.,  1861,  and  then  on  the  eastern
shore  of  the  lower  Potomac,  and  was  appointed  in
April,  1862,  to  the  command  of  the  2d  division  in
the  3d  corps,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  under  Heintz-
elman,  and  fought  in  that  capacity  during  the
peninsular  campaign.  He  was  distinguished  at
the  siege  of  Yorktown,  5  April  to  4  May,  and  was
appointed  a  major-general  of  volunteers  on  the  day
after  the  evacuation,  5  May.  In  the  battle  of  Will-
iamsburg his  single  division  held  the  whole  Con-
federate army  in  check,  and  lost  2,228  men,  killed
or  wounded,  "while  30,000  National  troops  looked
on  and  gave  no  assistance  until,  when  all  his  men
had  been  engaged,  and  he  was  obliged  to  retire,
Kearny  and  Hancock  came  to  his  relief.  He  was
also  distinguished  at  the  battles  of  Fair  Oaks,
Frazier's  Farm.  Glendale.  and  Malvern,  where  so
much  depended  upon  defeating  the  enemy  while
the  change  of  base  was  being  executed.  At  the
close  of  the  campaign,  Hooker  was  employed,  still
as  a  division  commander,  in  the  new  movement
under  Gen.  John  Pope,  against  Gen.  Lee's  Army  of


250


HOOKER


HOOKER


northern  Virginia,  and  fought  with  skill  and  valor
at  Bristoe  Station,  27  Aug.,  Manassas.  29  and  30
Aug..  and  Chantilly.  where  he  held  the  enemy  in
check  with  the  gallant  Kearny,  who  was  killed
there.  From  the  soldiers  who  had  admired  his
cool  and  dashing  courage  under  fire  he  received
the  nickname  of  "  Fighting  Joe,"  and  when  he
appeared  on  the  field  the  men  were  strengthened
and  inspired.  Especially  had  his  rapid  defeat  of
Ewell,  27  Aug.,  at  Manassas  compelled  Jackson  to
evacuate  Manassas,  and  relieved  the  army  from  a
very  critical  situation.

When  Pope  had  failed  and  was  hurled  back  un-
der the  defences  of  Washington,  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  was  restored  to  McClellan,  and  Hooker
was  promoted  to  the  command  of  the  1st  corps.
He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  Maryland  cam-
paign, and  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  South
Mountain,  14  Sept.,  1862,  where  he  carried  the
mountain-sides  on  the  right  of  the  gap,  as  Reno
carried  those  on  the  left,  the  enemy  precipitately
retreating.  At  the  battle  of  Antietam,  17  Sept.,
he  again  did  more  than  his  share  of  the  fighting.
His  corps  lay  on  the  right,  resting  on  Antietam
creek,  with  Mansfield  in  rear  and  Sumner  on  his
left.  At  dawn  he  crossed  the  creek  and  attacked
the  Confederate  left  flank ;  but  that  unbalanced
field  caused  him  to  be  confronted  with  overpower-
ing numbers,  and  his  losses  were  extremely  heavy.
He  was  shot  through  the  foot  and  carried  from  the
field.  Had  the  movements  of  the  left  wing  been
as  vigorous,  had  others  obeyed  orders  as  promptly
and  fought  as  bravely  as  he,  the  victory  would  have
been  much  more  decisive.  For  his  conduct  in  this
action  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  in  the
regular  army,  to  date  from  20  Sept.,  1862.  His
wound  only  kept  him  out  of  the  field  until  10
Nov.,  when  he  rejoined  the  army  for  the  campaign
on  the  Rappahannock,  with  Fredericksburg  as  the
objective  point.  The  slow  and  cautious  movement
of  McClellan  in  pursuit  of  Lee  after  Antietam  had
caused  him  to  be  relieved  of  the  command,  which
was  conferred  upon  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside.  In
the  new  organization  for  the  advance  on  Freder-
icksburg the  army  was  formed  into  three  grand
divisions,  the  command  of  the  centre,  40,000  men,
being  given  to  Hooker.  The  principal  attack  was
made  on  13  Dec.  Burnside  had  expected  to  sur-
prise Lee,  but  failed  in  this,  and  the  assault  re-
sulted in  the  discomfiture  of  the  National  army.
In  the  criminations  and  controversies  of  generals,
Hooker's  conduct  in  the  field  had  impressed  Mr.
Lincoln  with  a  favorable  estimate  of  his  abilities,
and  when,  at  his  own  request,  Burnside  was  re-
lieved of  the  command,  Hooker  was  appointed,  by
an  order  of  25  Jan.,  to  succeed  him.  The  letter
that  was  addressed  to  Gen.  Hooker  by  President
Lincoln,  when  he  appointed  him  to  the  command,
is  so  remarkable  for  its  keen  insight  into  character
and  careful  study  of  the  situation  that  it  seems
proper  to  insert  it  here :

"  I  have'placed  you  at  the  head  of  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  Of  course  I  have  done  this  upon
what  appear  to  me  sufficient  reasons,  and  yet  1
think  it  best  for  you  to  know  that  there  are  some
things  in  regard  to  which  I  am  not  quite  satisfied
with  you.  I  believe  you  to  be  a  brave  and  skilful
soldier,  which  of  course  I  like.  I  also  believe  you
do  not  mix  politics  with  your  profession,  in  which
you  are  right.  You  have  confidence  in  yourself,
which  is  a  valuable  if  not  indispensable  quality.
You  are  ambitious,  which,  within  reasonable
bounds,  does  good  rather  than  harm ;  but  I  think
that  during  Gen.  Burnside's  command  of  the  army
you  have  taken  counsel  of  your  ambition,  and


thwarted  him  as  much  as  you  could,  in  which  you
did  a  great  wrong  to  the  country  and  to  a  most
meritorious  and  honorable  brother  officer.  I  have
heard,  in  such  a  way  as  to  believe  it.  of  your  re-
cently saying  that  both  the  army  and  the  govern-
ment needed  a  dictator.  Of  course  it  was  not  for
this,  but  in  spite  of  it,  that  I  have  given  you  the
command.  Only  those  generals  who  gain  suc-
cesses can  set  up  dictators.  What  1  now  ask  of
you  is  military  success,  and  I  will  risk  the  dictator-
ship. The  government  will  support  you  to  the
utmost  of  its  ability,  which  is  neither  more  nor
less  than  it  has  done  and  will  do  for  all  command-
ers. I  much  fear  that  the  spirit  which  you  have
aided  to  infuse  into  the  army,  of  criticising  their
commander  and  withholding  confidence  from  him,
will  now  turn  upon  you.  I  shall  assist  you  as  far
as  I  can  to  put  it  down.  Neither  you  nor  Napo-
leon, were  he  alive  again,  could  get  any  good  out
of  an  army  while  such  a  spirit  prevails  in  it.  And
now,  beware  of  rashness!  Beware  of  rashness!
But  with  energy  and  sleepless  vigilance  go  forward
and  give  us  victories."

The  hopes  of  the  country  were  high  that  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  now  had  a  general  that  would  lead
it  to  glorious  victory.  Hooker  reorganized  it,  aban-
doned the  cumbrous  machinery  of  grand  divisions,
returned  to  the  corps  system,  and  formed  a  new
plan,  of  the  success  of  which  he  was  very  sanguine.
He  said  he  had  "  the  finest  army  on  the  planet,"
and  that  no  power,  earthly  or  heavenly,  could  save
Lee  from  destruction.  After  some  unimportant
movements  he  sent  Stoneman's  cavalry  to  the  ene-
my's rear,  and  then,  crossing  the  Rappahannock  at
several  fords,  with  the  ultimate  intention  of  turn-
ing Lee's  left,  while  Sedgwick  should  make  a  dem-
onstration on  Fredericksburg,  instead  of  attacking
Lee,  he  took  post  at  Chancel  lorsville,  where  he
awaited  Lee's  attack.  This  came  with  unexpected
force  and  unexampled  rapidity.  Sedgwick's  attack
upon  the  Fredericksburg  heights  had  been  success-
ful, but  Jackson,  by  a  vigorous  flanking  move-
ment, turned  the  National  right,  and  threw  it  back
in  great  confusion  upon  the  centre;  there  was
want  of  concert  of  action,  and  thus  the  battle,
although  well  planned,  was  lost.  In  the  very  heat
of  the  conflict  occurred  an  accident  that  entailed
serious  results.  Gen.  Hooker  was  leaning  against  a
pillar  on  the  piazza  of  the  Chancellor  house,  which
was  struck  by  a  cannon-ball.  He  was  stunned,
and  for  some  time  senseless,  and  could  not  recover
his  judgment  so  as  to  continue  the  command  or
to  transfer  it  to  a  subordinate.  Jackson  was  mor-
tally wounded,  and  for  two  days  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  held  its  ground.  The  command  devolved
upon  Gen.  Couch,  of  the  2d  corps,  who  withdrew
the  forces  to  the  north  side  of  the  river.  While
the  Confederate  general,  elated  by  this  unexpected
victory,  was  moving  northward  with  bold  schemes
of  invasion,  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  took  up  a
line  extending  from  Washington  to  Baltimore,  hop-
ing and  expecting  that  Lee  would  again  give  bat-
tle in  Maryland.  In  this  they  were  disappointed.
It  soon  became  evident  that  Lee  was  going  to  in-
vade Pennsylvania  by  way  of  Chambersburg.  The
Army  of  the  Potomac  marched  northward,  parallel
with  Lee's  route,  and  looking  for  the  best  place  to
thwart  him.  Perceiving  the  inferiority  of  his
army,  Hooker  demanded  that  the  11,000  troops
under  French  at  Harper's  Ferry  should  be  added
to  his  force.  This  was  refused,  and  for  this  reason
ostensibly  Hooker  sent  in  his  resignation  of  the
command.  In  this  condition  of  affairs,  without  as-
signing any  reason,  the  president  issued  an  order,
under  date  of  27  June,  1863,  relieving  Hooker  from


HOOKER


HOOKER


251


the  command  and  conferring  it  upon  Gen.  George
G.  Meade,  the  commander  of  the  5th  corps,  who
conducted  it  to  Gettysburg,  fought  Lee  there,  and
drove  him  back  across  the  Potomac.  In  his  fare-
well order  to  the  troops,  Gen.  Hooker  acquiesced
cheerfully  in  the  action  of  the  government,  like  a
soldier  and  a  patriot,  and  gave  the  true  significance
of  the  order :  "  Impressed,"  he  says.  "  with  the  be-
lief that  my  usefulness  as  the  commander  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  is  impaired,  I  part  from  it,
yet  not  without  the  deepest  emotion."  He  went
to  Baltimore,  where  he  remained  about  two  months.
But  so  accomplished  a  general  could  not  be  spared,
and  on  24  Sept.  he  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  11th  and  12th  army  corps,  which  were  con-
solidated later,  and  constituted  the  20th  corps.
With  these  troops  he  was  sent  to  the  south  for  the
relief  of  Chattanooga,  first  under  Rosecrans  and
afterward  under  Grant.  From  Wauhatchie  he
marched  into  Lookout  valley  on  27  and  28  Oct.,
and  thus  aided  in  opening  communications  for
supplies,  so  that  the  army  was  thoroughly  provis-
ioned by  two  steamers,  with  only  eight  miles  of
wagoning.  When  Grant's  plans  were  in  order  for
the  final  movement,  so  that  his  line  was  complete
from  the  northern  end  of  Lookout  Mountain  to
the  northern  end  of  Missionary  Ridge,  Hooker
made  a  bold  attack  on  the  former,  and  carried  it
on  24  Nov.,  fighting  what  has  been  picturesquely
called  "the  battle  above  the  clouds."  He  then
marched  across  to  strengthen  the  National  right,
and  shared  in  the  grand  attack  on  Missionary
Ridge,  by  which  Bragg  was  defeated  and  driven
away  in  confusion.  In  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  he
fought  him  at  Ringgold  on  the  27th,  where  he  met
with  stubborn  resistance.

When  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  organized  his
army  for  the  invasion  of  Georgia,  Hooker  was  re-
tained in  command  of  the  20th  corps,  and  gained
new  laurels  at  Mill  Creek  Gap,  Resaca,  Dallas,  and
Pine  Mountain.  He  took  part  in  the  attack  on
Atlanta,  and  in  the  capitulation  in  the  latter  days
of  August.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson,  who  com-
manded the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  was  killed  in
one  of  the  movements  around  Atlanta,  22  July.
1864.  Hooker  had  expected  to  succeed  him,  but
was  disappointed.  The  president,  at  the  sugges-
tion of  Gen.  Sherman,  appointed  Gen.  Oliver  0.
Howard  to  that  post.  Sherman  regarded  Hooker
as  one  that  interfered  in  the  actions  of  others  and
questioned  the  orders  of  his  superiors.  Hooker  con-
sidered himself  ill-treated,  and  by  his  own  request
was  relieved  of  his  command,  30  July,  and  was
placed  upon  waiting  orders  until  28  Sept.  But  his
services  were  not  forgotten.  For  the  part  he  took
in  the  movements  under  Grant  and  Sherman  he
was  brevetted  a  major-general  in  the  regular  army,
under  date  of  13  March,  1865.  After  the  close  of
the  war  in  1865,  Hooker  was  put  in  charge  of  the
Department  of  the  East,  with  his  headquarters  in
New  York  city.  In  August.  1866,  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Department  of  the  Lakes,  with  head-
quarters at  Detroit.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the
volunteer  service,  1  Sept.,  1866,  and  was  for  some
time  on  a  board  for  the  retirement  of  officers.
Having  been  struck  with  paralysis  and  incapaci-
tated for  further  active  duty,  he  was,  at  his  own
request,  placed  on  the  retired  list,  15  Oct.,  1868,
with  the  full  rank  of  a  major-general.  He  lived
subsequently  in  New  York  and  in  Garden  City,
L.  I.,  where  he  was  buried.  Hooker  was  a  brave
soldier,  a  skilful  military  organizer,  with  an  over-
plus of  self-esteem,  which  led  him  to  follow  the  dic-
tates of  his  ambition,  sometimes  without  regard  to
the  just  claims  of  others;  but  his  military  achieve-


ments and  unwavering  patriotism  so  overshadowed
his  few  faults  that  he  is  entitled  to  great  praise.

HOOKER,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mark-
field,  Leicestershire,  England,  in  1586 ;  d.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  7  July,  1647.  He  studied  theology  in
Cambridge,  where  he  became  a  fellow  of  Emman-
uel college.  In  1626  he  was  made  lecturer  and  as-
sistant to  a  clergyman  in  Chelmsford,  but  in  1630
was  silenced  by  Archbishop  Laud  for  non-con-
formity, though  he  adhered  steadfastly  to  the  doc-
trine of  the  Church  of  England,  and  objected  only
to  its  ceremonies.  He  continued  to  reside  near
Chelmsford  for  a  few  months,  and  taught  school
in  Little  Braddon,  having  John  Eliot,  afterward
the  apostle  to  the  Indians,  for  his  assistant ;  but,
as  he  was  still  persecuted,  he  fled  in  the  same  year
to  Holland,  where  he  remained  till  1633.  preaching
in  Delft  and  Rotterdam.  He  was  engaged  as  as-
sistant to  Dr.  William  Ames,  with  whom  he  wrote
"A  Fresh  Suit  against  Human  Ceremonies  in
God's  Worship."  In  1633  he  emigrated  to  New
England  with  John  Cotton,  Samuel  Stone,  and
others  in  the  ship  "  Griffin."  The  danger  of  being
pursued  and  arrested  was  such  that  Cotton  and
Hooker  were  obliged  to  conceal  themselves  until
they  were  in  mid-ocean.  They  arrived  in  Boston,
3  Sept.,  1633,  and  settled  in  Newtown  (now  Cam-
bridge), Mass.  At  a  fast  that  was  observed  by  the
church  on  11  Oct.,  1633,  Hooker  was  chosen  pastor
of  the  eighth  church  that  was  formed  in  the  colo-
ny of  Massachusetts.  In  June,  1636,  he  removed
with  his  entire  congregation  to  the  banks  of  the
Connecticut,  where  they  founded  the  town  of  Hart-
ford. Hooker's  influence  was  very  great,  and
whenever  he  preached  in  Boston  he  attracted  large
audiences.  He  was  identified  with  all  the  impor-
tant political  and  religious  movements  of  the  colo-
ny, and  was  one  of  the  moderators  of  the  first  New
England  synod  that  was  held  in  Cambridge  in  the
case  of  Mrs.  Anne  Hutchinson.  His  death,  which
was  caused  by  a  prevalent  epidemic,  was  consid-
ered a  public  loss.  Gov.  Winthrop  says:  "That
which  made  the  stroke  more  sensible  and  grievous,,
both  to  them  and  to  all  the  country,  was  the  death
of  that  faithful  servant  of  the  Lord,  Mr.  Thomas
Hooker,  pastor  of  the  church  of  Hartford ;  who,
for  piety,  prudence,  wisdom,  zeal,  learning,  and
what  else  might  make  him  serviceable  in  the  place
and  time  he  lived  in,  might  be  compared  with  men
of  greatest  note ;  and  he  shall  need  no  other  praise  ;
the  fruits  of  his  labors  in  both  Englands  shall  pre-
serve an  honorable  and  happy  remembrance  of  him
forever."  He  published  many  volumes  of  sermons
and  polemical  works,  the  principal  of  which  are
"The  Survey  of  the  Sum  of  Church  Discipline"
(1648);  "The  Application  of  Redemption  by  the
Effectual  Work  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  Christ
for  the  Bringing  Home  of  Lost  Sinners  to  God "
(1657:  2d  ed.,  London,  1659);  and  "The  Poor
Doubting  Sinner  drawn  to  Christ "  (7th  ed.,  Bos-
ton, 1743).  A  selection  of  his  works  and  a  memoir
of  his  life  were  published  bv  his  descendant,  Rev.
Edward  W.  Hooker  (Boston,  1849).— His  son,
Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  1632:  d.  6  Nov.,  1697,
was  graduated"  at  Harvard  in  1653,  and  ordained
pastor  of  the  church  in  Farmington,  Conn.,  in  July,
1661.  He  was  a  fellow  of  Harvard,  and  in  1662
was  one  of  a  committee  of  four  to  treat  with  New
Haven  in  reference  to  a  union  with  Connecticut.

HOOKER,  Worthington,  physician,  b.  in
Springfield,  Mass..  3  March,  1806 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  6  Nov.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1825,  and  received  his  medical  degree  at  Harvard
in  1829.  when  he  settled  in  Norwich,  and  practised
his  profession. From  1852  till  his  death  he  was


252


HOOPER


HOOPER


professor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in
Yale.  In  1864  he  was  made  vice-president  of  the
American  medical  association,  and  as  a  member  of
committees  made  several  important  reports.  He
is  the  author  of  a  series  of  scientific  books  for  the
young,  and  of  several  professional  works,  includ-
ing '"Physician  and  Patient,"  (New  York,  1849);
"Homoeopathy,  an  Examination  of  its  Doctrines
and  Evidences  "  (1852) ;  "  Human  Physiology  for
Colleges  and  Schools  "  (1854) ;  "  Rational  Therapeu-
tics "  (1857) ;  "  The  Child's  Book  of  Nature  "  (1857) ;
and  "  The  Child's  Book  of  Common  Things  "  (1858).

HOOPER,  Edward,  engraver,  b.  in  London,
England,  24  May,  1829 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  13
Dec,  1870.  He  was  educated  in  London.  From
1850  till  his  death  he  was  a  member  of  the  wood-
engraving  firm  of  Bobbett  and  Hooper,  and  pro-
duced several  water-colors  that  were  remarkable
for  their  accuracy  of  drawing  and  harmony  of
color.  He  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Ameri-
can water-color  society,  and  exhibited  his  produc-
tions at  the  Academy  of  design.

HOOPER,  Edward  James,  agriculturist,  b.  in
England  in  1803.  He  settled  in  the  United  States
in  1820,  edited  the  "  Western  Parmer  and  Gardener  "
for  several  years,  contributed  to  various  agricultural
journals  for  more  than  twenty  years,  and  published
a  "  Dictionary  of  Agriculture  "  (Cincinnati,  1842).

HOOPER,"  John,  botanist,  b.  in  Oxford,  Eng-
land, in  1802 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  26  April,  1869.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1839,  and  devoted
himself  to  natural  science.  In  conjunction  with
Prof.  Jacob  W.  Bailey  of  West  Point,  and  Prof.
William  H.  Harvey  of  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  he
made  many  researches  in  the  study  of  marine  algae,
of  which  he  accumulated  a  valuable  collection.
This  he  bequeathed  to  the  Long  Island  historical
society,  of  which  he  was  a  charter  member.

HOOPER,  Johnson  J.,  lawyer,  b.  in  North
Carolina  about  1815 :  d.  in  Alabama  in  1863.  At  an
early  age  he  removed  to  Alabama,  where  he  became
solicitor  of  the  9th  circuit,  holding  that  office
from  1849  till  1863.  In  1861  he  was  secretary  of
the  provisional  Confederate  congress.  He  also
edited  at  one  time  a  Whig  journal,  and  published
"Adventures  of  Capt.  Simon  Suggs  "  (Philadelphia,
1845),  and  "  Widow  Rugby's  Husband,  and  other
Tales  of  Alabama"  (1851).

HOOPER,  Lucy,  poet,  b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,
4  Feb.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1  Aug.,  1841.
She  was  carefully  educated  by  her  father,  after
whose  death  her  family  removed  to  Brooklyn  in
1831.  In  early  life  she  contributed  poems  to  the
"  Long  Island  Star,"  which  were  published  in  a
volume  that  also  contained  a  prize  essay  on  "  Do-
mestic Happiness  "  (1840).  During  her  last  illness
she  prepared  a  work  entitled  "  The  Lady's  Book  of
Poetry  and  Flowers  "  (New  York,  1845).  An  edition
of  her  works,  with  a  memoir  by  John  Keese,  was
published  in  1842,  and  subsequently  her  "  Complete
Poetical  Works  "  appeared  (New  York,  1848).

HOOPER,  Lucy  Hamilton,  poet,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  20  Jan.,  1835.  She  is  the  daughter  of
B.  Muse  Jones,  a  Philadelphia  merchant,  and  in
1854  married  Robert  M.  Hooper,  who  is  now  (1887)
U.  S.  vice-consul-general  in  Paris.  In  conjunc-
tion with  Charles  G.  Leland  she  edited  "  Our
Daily  Fare,"  the  daily  chronicle  of  the  Philadel-
phia sanitary  fair  in  1864.  She  was  assistant  edi-
tor of  "  Lippincott's  Magazine  "  from  its  founda-
tion until  she  went  to  Europe  in  1870.  In  1874
she  settled  in  Paris,  and  since  has  been  correspond-
ent for  various  journals  in  this  country.  She
has  published  "  Poems,  with  Translations  from  the
German  "  (Philadelphia,  1864) ;  another  volume  of


"  Poems  "  (1871) ;  a  translation  of  "  Le  Nabob,"  by
Alphonse  Daudet  (Boston,  1879) ;  and  "  Under  the
Tricolor,"  a  novel  (Philadelphia,  1880).

HOOPER,  Robert  Lettice,  jurist.  He  was
chief  justice  of  New  Jersey  from  1724  till  1728,  and
again  from  1729  till  his  death  in  1739.  He  resided
in  Perth  Amboy  and  was  a  warden  in  St.  Peter's
church. — His  son,  Robert  Lettice,  b.  in  1709  ;  d.
in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  25  April,  1785,  purchased  prop-
erty in  Trenton  in  1751,  and  was  deputy  quarter-
master-general in  1778.  On  12  July,  1782,  he  issued
an  address  to  "  prevent  trade  and  intercourse  with
the  enemy,"  and  was  a  member  of  the  first  com-
mittee of  nine,  19  July,  1782,  and  chairman  of  the
second  committee,  on  22  July,  to  carry  this  object
into  effect. — His  son,  Robert  Lettice,  was  elected
president  of  the  legislative  council  in  1785.

HOOPER,  Samuel,  merchant,  b.  in  Marblehead,
Mass.,  3  Feb.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  13
Feb.,  1875.  After  receiving  a  common-school  edu-
cation he  entered  at  an  early  age  the  counting-
house  of  his  father,  who  was  engaged  in  European
and  West  Indian  trade.  As  agent  of  this  enter-
prise the  son  visited  Russia,  Spain,  and  the  West
Indies.  About  1832  he  became  junior  partner  in
the  mercantile  house  of  Bryant,  Sturgis,  and  Co.,
in  Boston,  where  he  remained  for  ten  years,  and
then  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  William  Ap-
pleton  and  Co.,  who  were  engaged  in  the  China
trade.  He  was  much  interested  in  the  iron  busi-
ness and  its  relation  to  questions  of  political
economy,  and  possessed  shares  in  the  mines  and
furnaces  near  Port  Henry,  Lake  Champlain,  and
in  the  Bay-State  rolling-mills,  South  Boston.  In
1851  he  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  house  of
representatives,  where  he  served  three  years,  declin-
ing a  re-election,  and  in  1857  became  state  senator,
but  refused  a  renomination  on  account  of  his  bus-
iness enterprises.  In  1860  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, as  a  Republican,  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  resignation  of  William  Appleton,  and  was
re-elected  at  each  successive  biennial  election  until
his  death.  He  served  on  the  committees  on  ways
and  means,  on  banking  and  currency,  arid  on  the
war  debts  of  the  loyal  states.  The  success  of  the
national  loan  of  April,  1861,  was  greatly  due  to  his
efforts.  In  1869  Chief- Justice  Chase  wrote  a  letter
attributing  the  success  of  the  bill  that  provided  for
the  national  banking  system  to  the  "  good  judg-
ment, persevering  exertions,  and  disinterested
patriotism  of  Mr.  Hooper."  In  1866  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Philadelphia  loyalists'  convention.  He
presented  $50,000  to  Harvard,  in  1866,  to  found  a
school  of  mining  and  practical  geology  in  close
connection  with  the  Lawrence  scientific  school,
and  in  that  year  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  from
the  university.  He  wrote  two  pamphlets  on  cur-
rency, which  became  well  known  for  their  broad
and  comprehensive  treatment  of  this  subject.  His
house  in  Washington,  which  was  noted  for  its
hospitality,  was  the  headquarters  of  Gen.  George
B.  McClellan  in  1861-'2.

HOOPER,  William,  clergyman,  b.  near  Kelso,
Scotland,  in  1702 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  14  April,
1767.  He  was  graduated  at  Edinburgh  university,
and  came  to  New  England  a  short  time  before  he
was  appointed  pastor  of  the  West  Congregational
church  in  Boston,  Mass.,  which  charge  he  held
from  18  May,  1737,  till  19  Nov.,  1746.  He  then  be-
came an  Episcopalian,  and  went  to  England  to  re-
ceive orders.  On  his  return  in  1747  he  was  ap-
pointed rector  of  Trinity  church,  Boston,  which
post  he  occupied  till  his  death.  He  published  sev-
eral sermons,  including  one  with  the  title  "  The
Apostles neither Impostors nor Enthusiasts"


HOOPER


HOPE


253


tf"-  J&eMr--^


(1742). — His  son,  William,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  17  June,
1742 ;  d.  in  Hillsborough,  N.  C,  in  October,  1790,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1760.  He  studied
law  under  James  Otis,  and  in  1767  settled  in  Wil-
mington, N.  C.
He  soon  attained
a  high  legal  rep-
utation, held
many  important
public  offices,
and  was  noted
for  his  social
qualities  and
hospitality.  In
1770  he  took  an
active  part  in  be-
half of  the  gov-
ernment against
the  insurgents
that  were  known
as  "  regulators,"
a  body  composed
of  the  lowest
class,  who  finally  attempted  to  seize  the  govern-
ment. By  William  Hooper's  advice  the  militia
of  the  province  were  called  out,  and  after  a  severe
battle  succeeded  in  quelling  the  rioters,  who  num-
bered about  3,000.  Hooper  represented  Wilming-
ton in  the  general  assembly  of  1773,  in  which
he  signalized  himself  by  his  opposition  to  the
arbitrary  measures  of  the  crown,  and  published
a  series  of  successful  essays  under  the  signature
of  "  Hampden,"  opposing  one  of  the  government's
bills.  He  was  elected  to  the  Continental  congress
of  1774,  and  placed  on  two  important  committees,
that  to  draw  up  a  statement  of  colonial  rights,
and  that  to  examine  and  report  the  statutes  affect-
ing trade  and  manufactures.  He  was  again  elect-
ed to  congress  in  1775,  was  appointed  chairman  of
a  committee  to  report  an  address  to  the  inhabitants
of  Jamaica,  and  served  on  various  important  com-
mittees. In  January,  1776,  he  was  associated  with
Franklin  and  Livingston  on  the  committee  that
recommended  the  erection  of  a  monument  to  Gen.
Montgomery.  During  the  spring  of  1776  he  was
speaker  of  the  conventions  of  Hillsborough  and
Halifax,  N.  C,  and  wrote  an  eloquent  address  to
the  British  people.  After  signing  the  Declaration
of  Independence  on  4  July,  1776,  and  serving  on
the  committees  for  regulating  the  post-office,  the
treasury,  secret  correspondence,  appeals  from  the
admiralty  courts,  and  the  laws  relating  to  captures,
he  was  again  elected  to  congress,  but  resigned  his
seat  on  account  of  the  embarrassed  condition  of
his  private  affairs.  He  resided  at  his  country-
seat  at  Masonboro  sound,  about  eight  miles  from
Wilmington,  until  he  was  compelled  to  seek  safety
in  flight,  owing  to  the  occupation  of  that  place  by
the  British.  After  the  evacuation  in  November,
1781,  he  returned,  but  shortly  afterward  removed
to  Hillsboro.  In  1786  he  was  appointed  by  con-
gress one  of  the  judges  of  a  special  commission,  to
settle  a  boundary  dispute  between  New  York  and
Massachusetts.  He  also  filled  public  offices  in  the
state  until  he  retired  from  active  life  in  1787.

HOOPER,  William  Henry,  merchant,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Dorchester  co.,  Md.,  25  Dec,  1813.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  and  for
several  years  was  a  merchant  on  the  eastern  shore
of  Maryland.  He  emigrated  to  Illinois  in  1835,
and  until  1849  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits
on  the  Mississippi.  In  1850  he  removed  to  Utah,
where  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  act-
ing secretary  of  the  territory. He  was  a  delegate


to  congress  from  1859  till  1861.  and  was  elected
U.  S.  senator  from  Utah  under  the  proposed  state
organization  of  "  Deseret "  in  1862.  He  again  was
a  delegate  to  congress  in  1865.  and  served  until
1873,  after  which  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pur-
suits in  Salt  Lake  Citv.

HOOPES,  Josiah/botanist,  b.  in  West  Chester,
Pa.,  9  Nov.,  1832.  He  was  educated  in  the  public
and  private  schools  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1853
he  established  a  nursery  at  West  Chester,  which  is
now  one  of  the  most  extensive  in  the  country.  He
has  travelled  much  at  home  and  abroad  in  search
of  new  and  rare  plants,  and  was  one  of  the  found-
ers, and  for  seven  years  president,  of  the  Horticul-
tural association  of  Pennsylvania,  is  a  member  of
numerous  scientific  societies,  and  was  a  trustee  of
the  West  Chester  state  normal-school  for  thirteen
years.  He  has  published  "  Book  of  Evergreens,"
a  treatise  on  the  cone-bearing  plants  of  the  world,
which  is  a  standard  authority  (New  York,  1868),  and
has  been  for  many  years  a  correspondent  of  the  New
York  "  Tribune  "  and  the  Philadelphia  "  Press."

HOPE,  James,  artist,  b.  near  Abbotsford,  Scot-
land, 29  Nov.,  1818.  He  accompanied  his  father
to  Canada  when  a  boy,  and  was  brought  up  on  a
farm.  After  his  father's  death  James  went  to  Fair
Haven.  Vt.,  in  1840  was  a  student  and  afterward
a  teacher  in  Castleton,  Vt.,  seminary,  and  in  1848
decided  to  become  an  artist.  In  1853  he  opened  a
studio  in  New  York,  was  elected  associate  acade-
mician in  1865,  and  since  1872  has  resided  at  Wat-
kin's  Glen,  N.  Y.  His  pictures  include  "  The  Army
of  the  Potomac,"  "  Rainbow  Falls,"  "  The  Gem  of
the  Forest,"  and  "  The  Forest  Glen."

HOPE,  James  Barron,  poet,  b.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,
23  March,  1827 ;  d.  there,  15  Sept.,  1887.  He  was
educated  at  William  and  Mary,  and  previous  to
1861  was  a  lawyer  and  commonwealth  attorney  in
Elizabeth  City  county.  He  had  won  some  literary
distinction  from  a  series  of  poems  that  he  published
in  a  Baltimore  periodical  under  the  pen-name  of
"  the  late  Henry  Ellen,  Esq."  After  serving
throughout  the  civil  war  as  quartermaster  and
captain  in  the  Confederate  army,  he  settled  in  Nor-
folk, Va.,  was  superintendent  of  public  schools,  and
edited  the  Norfolk  "  Landmark,"  a  daily  newspaper.
On  the  one  hundredth  anniversarv  of  the  surrender
of  Lord  Cornwallis  at  Yorktown,  19  Oct.,  1881,  Mr.
Hope,  on  the  invitation  of  a  joint  committee  of  the
U.  S.  senate  and  house  of  representatives,  delivered
an  address  entitled  "Arms  and  the  Man,"  after-
ward published  with  other  poems  (Norfolk,  1882).
His  writings  include  "Leoni  di  Monota"  (Phila-
delphia, 1857);  "Elegiac  Ode,  and  Other  Poems"
(Norfolk,  1875) ;  and  "  Under  the  Empire  "  (1878).

HOPE,  Matthew  Boyd,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mifflin
county,  Pa.,  31  July,  1812 ;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
17  Dec,  1859.  After  a  course  of  study  at  Jeffer-
son college,  Pa.,  he  was  graduated  at  Princeton
theological  seminarv  in  1834,  and  in  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1836.  In  April  of  the  latter  year  he  was  ordained
as  an  evangelist,  and  sent  by  the  board  of  missions
of  the  Presbyterian  church  to  Singapore,  India.
Failure  of  health  necessitated  his  return  after  two
years,  and  in  1838-9  he  was  corresponding  secre-
tary of  the  Pennsylvania  colonization  society  of
the  Presbyterian  church.  He  was  secretary  of  the
Presbyterian  board  of  education  till  1842.  and  its
corresponding  secretary  from  1842  till  1846,  when
he  was  elected  professor  of  rhetoric  at  Princeton,
and  in  1854  was  given  in  addition  the  chair  of  po-
litical economy,  in  which  he  continued  until  his
death.  He  was  a  contributor  to  the  religious  press,
and  is  the  author  of  a  "  Treatise  on  Rhetoric  '


254


nOPKINS


HOPKINS


HOPKINS,  Arthur  F.,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1796 ;  d.  in  Mobile  in  February,  1866.  He  removed
to  Alabama  early  in  life,  and  became  a  prominent
Whig  politician,  practised  law  successively  in
Huntsville,  Tuscaloosa,  and  Mobile  for  many  years,
was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  superior  court  of  the
state,  and  during  his  later  years  was  president  of
the  Mobile  and  Ohio  railroad.

HOPKINS,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  Shrews-
bury, England,  in  1600 ;  d.  in  London  in  March,
1657.  He  was  an  eminent  merchant  of  London,
emigrated  to  Boston  in  1637,  and  soon  afterward
removed  to  Hartford,  Conn.,  where  he  was  chosen
magistrate  in  1639,  and  governor  of  the  colony
every  even  year  from  1640  till  1654,  alternating
with  John  Haynes.  He  assisted  in  forming  the
union  of  the  colonies  of  New  England  in  1643,  but
on  the  death  of  his  elder  brother  he  returned  to
England,  became  warden  of  the  fleet,  commissioner
of  the  admiralty,  and  member  of  parliament.  He
did  not  lose  his  interest  in  the  colonies,  but  at  his
death  left  much  of  his  estate  to  New  England,
giving  £1,000  to  the  grammar-schools  of  Hartford,
New  Haven,  and  Hadley,  the  income  from  which
is  still  appropriated  to  their  use,  and  £500  that,  by
a  decree  of  chancery  in  1710,  was  paid  to  Harvard.
This  money  was  invested  in  real  estate  in  a  town-
ship that  was  bought  from  the  "  praying  Indians  "
in  1700,  and  called  Hopkinton  in  honor  of  the
donor.  What  is  known  as  "  Gov.  Eaton's  Code  of
Laws"  was  sent  to  England  and  printed  under
Gov.  Hopkins's  supervision  shortly  after  his  return
to  that  country.  —  His  great-grandson,  Daniel,
clergyman,  b.  in  Waterbury,  Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1734;
d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  14  Dec,  1814,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1758,  taught  in  Salem  from  1766  till
1788,  in  1775  was  a  member  of  the  Provincial  con-
gress, and  in  1788  one  of  the  council.  From  No-
vember, 1788,  until  his  death  he  was  pastor  of  the
3d  Congregational  church  of  Salem.  In  1809  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth.  A
volume  of  his  works,  with  a  memoir  by  Edward
A.  Park,  has  been  published  (Andover,  1854).

HOPKINS,  Erastus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hadley,
Mass.,  7  April,  1810 ;  d.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  24
Jan.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1830,  studied  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1833,  and  was  graduated  at  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1834.  He  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  on  Beach  Island,  S.  C,  in  1835,
and  of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,
in  1837-41,  and  then  removed  to  Northampton,
Mass.,  where  he  was  for  seven  years  president  of
the  Connecticut  river  railroad  company,  and  for
many  years  represented  that  town  in  the  legis-
lature, being  particularly  active  in  the  Free-soil
and  early  Republican  movements.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  "The  Family  a  Religious  Institution"
(Troy,  1840),  and  several  political  and  religious  ar-
ticles in  periodicals. — His  brother,  Samuel,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Hadley,  Mass.,  11  April,  1807;  d.  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  11  Feb.,  1887,  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1827,  and  at  Andover  theological
seminary  in  1831.  He  officiated  successively  as
pastor  of  various  Presbyterian  churches,  and,  after
retiring  from  active  work,  resided  in  Milton,  N.  Y.,
and  afterward  at  Northampton,  Mass.  He  pub-
lished, besides  contributions  to  periodicals,  "The
Youth  of  the  Old  Dominion  "  (Boston,  1857)  and
" History  of  the  Puritans "  (1859-60).

HOPKINS,  Esek,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Scituate,
R.  I.,  in  1718 ;  d.  in  North  Providence,  R.  I.,  26
Feb.,  1802.  When  the  Revolutionary  war  began
he  was  commissioned  by  Gen.  Francis  Cook  as
brigadier-general,  and  in  December,  1775,  he  was


commissioned  by  the  Continental  congress  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  navy,  and  was  officially  ad-
dressed by  Washington  as  "Admiral  Hopkins."
In  February,  1776,  he  put  to  sea  with  the  first
squadron  that  was  sent  out  by  the  colonies,  con-
sisting of  four  ships  and  three  sloops.  The  fleet
sailed  for  the  Bahamas,  and  captured  the  forts  at
New  Providence,  with  eighty  cannon  and  a  large
quantity  of  ordnance  stores  and  ammunition.  On
his  return  off  Block  island,  he  took  the  British
schooner  "  Hawke  "  and  the  bomb-brig  "  Bolton,"
and  was  complimented  officially  by  the  president
of  congress  for  this  success.  Two  days  afterward
he  attacked  the  "Glasgow,"  of  29  guns,  which
escaped,  and  Hopkins  was  censured.  In  June,  1776,
he  was  ordered  by  congress  to  appear  before  the
naval  committee  to  reply  to  charges  preferred
against  him  for  not  annoying  the  enemy's  ships  on
the  southern  coast.  He  was  defended  by  John
Adams  and  acquitted,  but  unavoidable  delays  in
getting  his  ships  ready  for  sea  at  a  later  period
gave  his  enemies  another  opportunity  for  com-
plaint. He  neglected  a  citation  to  appear  in  Phila-
delphia, and  on  2  Jan.,  1777,  was  dismissed  from
the  service.  He  then  settled  near  Providence,,
exerted  throughout  a  long  life  an  immense  politi-
cal influence  in  Rhode  Island,  and  was  for  many
years  a  member  of  the  general  assembly. — His  son,
John  Burroughs,  naval  officer,  was  one  of  the
first  captains  of  the  Revolutionary  navy,  being
commissioned  22  Dec,  1775.  He  commanded  the
"  Cabot "  in  the  expedition  to  the  Bahamas  in  1776,
and  in  April,  1779,  sailed  from  Boston  in  com-
mand of  a  squadron,  and  captured,  with  small  loss-
to  his  own  fleet,  seven  vessels  laden  with  stores,  200-
men,  and  twenty-four  British  officers.

HOPKINS,  John  Henry,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  30  Jan.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Rock  Point,
Vt.,  9  Jan.,  1868. He  came  to  this  country  with
his  parents  in  1801,  and  received  a  large  part  of
his  education  from  his  mother. Contrary  to  his
own  desire,  he
was persuaded
to  engage  in  the
iron  business  in
western Penn-
sylvania, first
at Bassenheim
near  Economy,
and  afterward,
in partnership
with James
O'Hara,  in  Li-
gonier valley.
But the  peace
with England
ruined  the  iron
business, and
the  furnace  was
blown  out,  Mr.
O'Hara  paying

all  the  indebtedness,  of  which  Mr.  Hopkins  in  later
years  repaid  his  half.  He  then  studied  law — his
original  preference — and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  Pittsburg  in  1818,  where  he  rapidly  rose  to  the
first  rank  in  business  and  influence.  He  became  a
vestryman  and  communicant  in  Trinity  parish,
which  was  then  very  feeble,  and,  on  a  vacancy  in
the  rectorship,  was  elected  at  a  parish  meeting  to
fill  it  when  he  was  not  even  a  candidate  for  or-
ders, and  entirely  ignorant  of  its  action.  He  con-
sidered this  a  cail  from  above,  and  gave  up  an  in-
come of  over  $5,000  a  year  for  $800  in  the  minis-
try. He  was  ordained  deacon,  24  Dec,  1823,  after
a  candidacy  of  a  little  over  two  months,  and  priest


<^^or&>T~ ■/?  /&s/<^fK>4


HOPKINS


HOPKINS


255


scarcely  five  months  later.  He  was  architect  of  a
new  building  for  Trinity  church,  and  presented
137  candidates  for  confirmation  at  Bishop  White's
only  visitation  beyond  the  mountains  in  1825.  In
1826  he  would  have  been  elected  assistant  bishop
of  Pennsylvania  but  for  his  peremptory  refusal  to
vote  for  himself.  During  the  seven  years  of  his
rectorship  he  founded  seven  other  churches  in
western  Pennsylvania,  and  brought  seven  young
men  into  the  ministry,  besides  three  others  that
were  ordained  shortly  after  he  left.  His  desire  to
found  a  theological  seminary  at  Pittsburg  was  not
approved  by  his  bishop,  and  when  he  was  invited
to  Boston  as  assistant  minister  of  Trinity  church,
and  to  help  in  founding  a  seminary  there,  he  ac-
cepted, and  left  Pittsburg  in  1831.  In  1832  he  was
elected  the  first  bishop  of  Vermont,  and  was  con-
secrated on  31  Oct.  He  soon  established  the  Ver-
mont Episcopal  institute  at  Burlington,  but  the
financial  panic  of  1837-'8  ended  the  work  in  dis-
aster, leaving  him  penniless.  From  the  beginning
of  his  episcopate  he  was  also  rector  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Burlington,  and  so  continued  for  twenty-
seven  years.  The  building  was  twice  enlarged  in
accordance  with  his  designs.  In  1854  he  revived
Vermont  Episcopal  institute,  raising  the  money  by
personal  solicitation,  and  left  it  solidly  established.
On  the  death  of  Bishop  Brownell  in  1865  he  be-
came the  seventh  presiding  bishop  of  his  church  in
the  United  States,  and  as  such  attended  the  first
Lambeth  conference  in  1867 — an  assembly  which
he  had  been  the  first  to  suggest  as  early  as  1851 —
and  took  an  active  part  in  its  most  important  de-
liberations. Shortly  after  his  return  he  died  after
an  illness  of  two  days,  which  was  brought  on  by
exposure  to  severe  weather  in  holding  a  visita-
tion, at  the  request  of  the  Bishop  of  New  York,
in  Plattsburg.  Bishop  Hopkins  was  an  accom-
plished painter,  both  in  water-color  and  in  oils,  a
musician  and  composer,  a  poet,  and  an  architect,
having  been  one  of  the  first  to  introduce  Gothic
architecture  into  this  country.  He  was  an  extem-
poraneous speaker  of  great  readiness,  force,  and
fluency ;  but  was  specially  remarkable  for  a  singu-
lar independence  of  character,  being  perfectly  will-
ing to  stand  alone  when  he  felt  convinced  that  he
was  in  the  right.  He  was  a  voluminous  author,
beginning  in  his  fortieth  year.  Among  his  works
are  "  Christianitv  Vindicated  "  (New  York,  1833) ;
"The  Primitive"  Creed "  (1834);  "The  Primitive
Church"  (1835);  "Essay  on  Gothic  Architecture,"
with  plates  (1836) ;  "  The  Church  of  Rome  in  her
Primitive  Purity  compared  with  the  Church  of
Rome  at  the  Present  Day  "  (1837) ;  "  Twelve  Can-
zonets," words  and  music  (1839) :  two  "  Letters  to
Bishop  Kenrick"  (1843);  "The  Novelties  which
disturb  our  Peace"  (1844);  "The  History  of  the
Confessional"  (1850);  "The  End  of  Controversy
Controverted,"  a  refutation  of  Milner's  "End  of
Controversy  "  (3  vols.,  1854) ;  "  The  American  Citi-
zen" (1857);  "A  Scriptural,  Historical,  and  Ec-
clesiastical View  of  Slavery  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Law  of
Ritualism"  (1866);  "The  Historv  of  the  Church
in  Verse  "  (1867) ;  "  The  Pope  not"  the  Antichrist "

S868);  and  many  pamphlets.  —  His  son,  John
enry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,
1820;  d.  near  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  23  Aug.,  1891,  was
graduated  in  1839,  and  at  the  General  theological
seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1850.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1850,
founded  the  "  Church  Journal "  in  February,  1853,
and  was  its  editor  and  proprietor  till  May,  1868.
He  took  an  active  part  in  the  erection  of  the  dio-
cese of  Pittsburg  in  1865,  and  those  of  Albany  and
Long  Island  in  1868,  and  in  1867  accompanied  his


father  to  the  Lambeth  conference.  He  was  or*
dained  priest  in  1872,  became  in  that  year  rector  of
Trinity  church,  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1876  of
Christ  church,  Williamsport,  Pa.  Racine  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1873.  Dr.  Hop-
kins was  the  author  of  many  pamphlets  and  re-
view articles ;  published  a  life  of  his  father  (1868) ;
"  The  Canticles  Noted  "  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  Car-
ols, Hvmns,  and  Songs "  (4th  ed.,  1887) ;  and
"  Poem's  by  the  Wayside  "  (1883) ;  and  edited  his
father's  "The  Pope  not  the  Antichrist  "  (1863);
"The  Collected  Works  of  Milo  Mahan,"  with  a
memoir  (3  vols.,  1875) ;  and  "  The  Great  Hymns  of
the  Church,"  by  Bishop  Young,  of  Florida  (1887).
— Bishop  Hopkins's  second  son,  Edward  Augus-
tas, merchant,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  29  Nov.,  1822,
after  studying  for  one  year  in  the  University  of
Vermont,  then  for  a  few  months  in  Kenyon  col-
lege, Ohio,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman.
After  five  years  he  resigned,  and  was  appointed
special  commissioner  to  report  whether  the  repub-
lic of  Paraguay  was  entitled  to  the  recognition  of
her  independence  by  the  United  States.  On  his
favorable  report,  that  independence  was  recognized,
and  he  was  sent  as  the  first  U.  S.  consul  at  Asun-
cion, Paraguay,  in  1853,  being  at  the  same  time
general  agent  of  an  American  company  for  manu-
facturing and  mercantile  purposes.  The  act  of
the  Paraguayan  government  in  breaking  up  this
company  in  September,  1854,  was  one  of  the
causes  of  the  U.  S.  expedition  against  Paraguay
not  long  afterward.  Mr.  Hopkins  was  the  first  to
introduce  into  the  La  Plata  valley  saw-mills,  rail-
roads, and  telegraphs,  and  for  more  than  a  quarter
of  a  century  he  has  been  the  chief  advocate  of
American  influence  there.  He  prepared  the  book
of  statistics  for  the  Argentine  Republic  that  ac-
companied their  contribution  to  the  Centennial
exhibition  in  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  through
his  agency  many  of  the  features  of  the  educa-
tional and  land  systems  of  the  United  States  have
been  introduced  into  the  Argentine  Republic. —
Another  son,  Caspar  Thomas,  journalist,  b.  in
Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  18  May,  1826,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1847,  and  the
same  year  established  "  The  Vermont  State  Agri-
culturist." He  went  to  California  in  1849,  and  in
1861  established  the  California  insurance  company,
the  first  insurance  company  on  the  Pacific  coast,
was  its  secretary  till  1866,  and  afterward  its  presi-
dent till  1884,  when  he  retired  on  account  of  im-
paired health.  He  was  secretary  of  the  San  Fran-
cisco chamber  of  commerce  from  1868  till  1870,
and  was  one  of  its  principal  organizers.  He  was
promoter  and  president  of  the  California  immi-
grant union  in  1870;  has  been  president  of  the
Pacific  social  science  association  of  San  Francisco,
secretary  of  the  first  musical  society  on  the  Pacific
coast,  and  was  the  first  organist  who  ever  took
charge  of  a  Protestant  choir  in  California.  In  ad-
dition to  numerous  magazine  articles  and  pam-
phlets, he  published  a  "  Manual  of  American
Ideas"  (1872).— Another  son,  Charles  Jerome,
musician,  b.  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  4  April.  1836,  was
educated  at  home,  and  passed  one  year  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Vermont.  He  early  developed  a  talent
for  music,  but,  with  the  exception  of  home  in-
struction, was  self-taught.  He  was  for  five  years
a  professor  at  Cooper  Union,  New  York  city,  and
for  twenty-eight  years  an  organist  and  choir-mas-
ter in  Burlington  and  New  York  city.  He  has  trav-
elled extensively  throughout  the  United  States,  and
has  given  concerts  and  lecture-concerts  in  one  hun-
dred and  twelve  cities.  He  founded  the  New  York
orpheon  free  classes  for  choir-boys  in  1866,  origi-


256


HOPKINS


HOPKINS


nated  piano  lecture-concerts  for  lyceums  in  1867,
and  was  the  first  musician  in  America  that  trained
children  to  sing  Handel's  "  Hallelujah  Chorus."  In
1874  his  orchestral  music  was  played  at  the  Crystal
Palace,  London,  a  distinction  never  before  enjoyed
by  an  American  musician,  and  in  1885  his  chamber
music  was  rendered  at  Liszt's  house  at  Weimar,
Germany.  In  addition  to  songs,  secular  and  sacred,
two  symphonies,  and  three  operas,  he  has  pub-
lished" "  First  Book  of  Church  Music"  (1860);
a  class-book  of  notation  study  (1865);  and  "Sec-
ond Book  of  Church  Music  "  (1867). — Another  son,
Frederick  Vincent,  physician,  b.  in  Burlington,
Vt.,  23  May,  1839,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Vermont  in  1859.  and  studied  medicine.  He
was  surgeon  and  professor  of  geology  in  Louisiana
state  university,  in  charge  of  the  geological  survey
of  that  state  from  1868  till  1874,  surgeon  to  the
New  Almaden  and  Sulphur  Bank  quicksilver  mine
in  1876-82,  and  since  then  has  practised  medicine
in  San  Francisco.  He  has  originated  a  method  of
killing  the  bacilli  of  tuberculosis  and  leprosy  by
half-inch  sparks  from  a  Ruhmkorff  coil.  In  ad-
dition to  articles  published  in  newspapers,  he  has
written  four  reports  on  the  "  Geology  of  Louisiana  "
in  the  "  Reports  of  the  Louisiana  State  Univer-
sity "  (Baton  Rouge,  1870-'3),  and  a  report,  in  con-
junction with  Prof.  Eugene  W.  Hilgard,  on  borings
made  by  the  engineer  department  of  the  U.  S.
army  between  the  Mississippi  river  and  Borgne
lake  (Washington,  1878).

HOPKINS,  Johns,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Anne
Arundel  county,  Md.,  19  May,  1795;  d.  in  Balti-
more, 24  Dec,  1873.  His  parents  were  Quakers,
and  their  son  was  trained  to  a  farming  life,  but
received  a  fair  education.  At  seventeen  years  of
age  he  went  to  Baltimore,  became  a  clerk  in  his
uncle's  wholesale  grocery-store,  and  in  a  few  years
accumulated  sufficient  capital  to  establish  himself
in  the  grocery  trade  with  a  partner.  Three  years
later,  in  1822,  he  founded,  with  his  two  brothers,
the  house  of  Hopkins  and  Brothers.  He  rapidly
added  to  his  fortune  until  he  had  amassed  large
wealth.  Retiring  from  business  as  a  grocer  in
1847,  he  engaged  in  banking  and  railroad  enter-
prises, became  a  director  in  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio
railroad  company,  and,  in  1855,  chairman  of  its
finance  committee.  Two  years  afterward,  when
the  company  was  seriously  embarrassed,  he  volun-
teered to  endorse  its  notes,  and  risked  his  private
fortune  in  its  extrication.  He  was  one  of  the  pro-
jectors of  a  line  of  iron  steamships  between  Balti-
more and  Bremen,  and  built  many  warehouses
in  the  city.  In  March,  1873,  he  gave  property  val-
ued at  $4,500,000  to  found  a  hospital  which,  by  its
charter,  is  free  to  all,  regardless  of  race  or  color,
presented  the  city  of  Baltimore  with  a  public  park,
and  gave  $3,500,000  to  found  the  Johns  Hopkins
university,  which  was  first  proposed  by  him  in
1867,  and  was  opened  in  1876.  It  embraces  schools
of  law,  medicine,  science,  and  agriculture,  and
publishes  the  results  of  researches  of  professors
and  students.  At  his  death  he  left  a  fortune  of
$10,000,000,  including  the  sums  set  apart  for  the
endowment  of  the  university  and  hospital,  which
were  devised  to  the  trustees  in  his  will.

HOPKINS,  Josiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pittsford.
Vt.,  25  April,  1786 :  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  27  June,
1862.  He  studied  with  the  minister  of  his  parish,
and  subsequently  with  Rev.  Lemuel  Haynes,  the
colored  preacher,  was  licensed  as  a  Congregational
minister  in  1810,  and,  after  a  year's  labor  as  a  mis-
sionary in  western  Vermont,  was  settled  as  a  pastor
at  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1811.  He  remained  there
nineteen  years,  teaching  theology  most  of  the  time


in  addition  to  his  pastoral  duties.  In  1830  he  ac-
cepted the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church
in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  which  he  resigned  in  1848  in
consequence  of  failing  health.  While  residing  in
New  Haven  he  prepared  for  his  classes  "  The
Christian  Instructor,  a  theological  text-book  con-
taining a  summary  and  defence  of  Christian  doc-
trines, which  passed  through  many  editions.

HOPKINS,  Lemuel,  poet,  b.  in  Waterbury,
Conn.,  19  June,  1750;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  14
April,  1801.  He  was  a  farmer's  son,  and  after  ob-
taining a  good  education  studied  medicine  at  Wal-
lingford,  served  for  a  short  time  as  a  volunteer  in
the  Revolutionary  army,  and  practised  at  Litchfield
from  1776  till  1784,  when  he  removed  to  Hartford.
He  was  noted  for  independence  of  thought  and
various  talents,  and  was  singular  in  appearance
and  manners.  His  death  was  hastened  by  repeated
bleedings,  which  he  ordered  for  the  purpose  of
averting  an  expected  attack  of  pulmonary  disease.
He  was  one  of  the  coterie  called  the  Hartford  wits,
consisting,  besides  himself,  of  John  Trumbull,
David  Humphreys,  Richard  Alsop,  Joel  Barlow,
Theodore  Dwight,  and  others,  who  were  associated
in  the  authorship  of  "  The  Anarchiad,"  a  series  of
essays  modelled  after  the  English  work  called  "  The
Rolliad,"  and  having  for  their  object  the  advocacy
of  an  efficient  federal  constitution.  Dr.  Hopkins
projected  this  work,  consisting  of  pretended  ex-
tracts from  what  purported  to  be  an  ancient  he-
roic poem  in  English  that  had  been  discovered  in
the  interior  of  the  American  continent.  He  had
the  largest  share  in  writing  the  essays,  which  were
mostly  composed  in  concert.  He  afterward  wrote
parts  of  the  series  of  satirical  papers  called  "  The
Echo  "  and  "  The  Political  Greenhouse,"  and  con-
tributed also  to  "The  Guillotine."  For  several
years  he  wrote  satirical  "  New- Year's  Verses  "  for
a  political  newspaper  of  Hartford.  In  early  life
he  was  an  adherent  of  the  French  infidel  philoso-

ghy,  but  later  he  became  a  diligent  student  of  the
iible,  and  employed  his  powers  of  wit  and  sarcasm
in  "  The  Anarchiad  "  and  other  satirical  .writings
in  defence  of  the  Christian  theology.  He  is  said
to  have  written  for  Barlow  the  version  of  the  137th
psalm,  beginning  "  Along  the  banks  where  Babel's
current  flows."  Among  the  best  known  of  his  po-
ems are  "  The  Hypocrite's  Hope  "  and  an  elegy  on
"  The  Victim  of  a  Cancer  Quack."  Some  of  his
verses  appear  in  the  collection  of  "  American  Po-
ems" edited  by  Elisha  Smith  (Litchfield,  1793),
and  in  Charles  W.  Everest's  "  Poets  of  Connecti-
cut" (Hartford,  1843).

HOPKINS,  Mark,  educator,  b.  in  Stockbridge,
Mass.,  4  Feb.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Williamstown,  Mass.,  17
June,  1887.  He  was  a  grandson  of  Col.  Mark,  of
the  Revolutionary  army,  a  graduate  of  Yale,  and
the  first  lawyer  in  Berkshire  county,  who  was  a
younger  brother  of  Dr.  Samuel,  the  theologian,
and  married  a  half-sister  of  Ephraim  Williams,  the
founder  of  Williams  college.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1824,  with  the  valedictory,  was  u
tutor  in  that  college  in  1825-'7,  studied  medicine
at  the  same  time,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Berk-
shire medical  school  in  1829.  He  began  practice
in  New  York  city,  but  in  1830  was  called  to  the
chair  of  moral  philosophy  and  rhetoric  at  Will-
iams. He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1832.  In
1836  he  succeeded  Dr.  Edward  D.  Griffin  as  presi-
dent of  the  college,  which  post  he  held  until
1872,  when  he  resigned,  though  retaining  the  chair
of  moral  and  intellectual  philosophy,  which  was
established  for  him  in  1836,  and  that  of  Chris-
tian theology,  which  he  assumed  in  1858.  The
pastorate  of  the  college  church,  on  which  he  en-


HOPKINS


HOPKINS


257


-c/Z/a^^  JHrfWZ™'


tered  in  1836,  he  retained  till  1883. He  became
president  of  the  American  board  of  commissioners
for  foreign  missions  in  1857. He  received  the  de-
cree of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1837,  and  Har-
vard in  1841,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  the  state
of  New  York  in  1857,
and  from  Harvard  at
its  250th  anniversary
in  1886. President
Hopkins  had  a  large
influence  for  good,
and  was much be-
loved by  his  pupils,
many  of  whom  be-
came eminent  men,
among  them  James
A.  Garfield. He  was
one  of  the  most  acute
students  of  moral  sci-
ence that  this  coun-
try has produced
since  Jonathan  Ed-
wards. The  last and  fullest expression  of  his
philosophical  system  is  found  in  the  works  en-
titled "The  Law  of  Love  and  Love  as  a  Law"
and "An  Outline  Study  of  Man,"  both  exten-
sively used  as  college  text-books,  and  the  latter
illustrating  his  methods  in  the  class-room. Will-
iams college  grew  through  his  efforts  to  a  famous
;and  powerful  institution  of  learning. Of  more
than  1,760  graduates  living  at  the  time  of  his
•death,  he  had  taught  all  but  thirty. His  first  lit-
erary essay  was  an  article  on  "  Mystery  "  which  ap-
peared in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  and
Arts"  in  1828,  and  attracted  wide  attention. He
-delivered  a  course  of  Lowell  lectures  which  were
published  under  the  title of  "Lectures  on the
Evidences  of  Christianity  "  (Boston,  1846 :  new  ed.,
1864). These  lectures  are  used  as  a  text-book  in
many  colleges. His  subsequent  publications  are
"Miscellaneous  Essays and  Discourses"  (1847);
•"Lectures  on  Moral  Science  "(1862),  originally  de-
livered before  the  Lowell institute ; "  Baccalau-
reate Sermons  and  Occasional  Discourses"  (1863);
"  The  Law  of  Love,  and  Love  as  a  Law  ;  or,  Chris-
tian Ethics  "  (1869) ;  "  An  Outline  Studv  of  Man  "
.(New  York,  1873);  "  Strength  and  Beauty"  (1874),
which  was  reissued  m  a  revised  form  under  the
title  "  Teachings  and  Counsels  "  (1884) :  and  "  Scrip-
tural Idea  of  Man  "  (1883). His  published  annual
baccalaureate  sermons  were  widely  read. "The
Law  of  Love,"  in  which  his  theories  of  morals  were
presented,  was  reviewed  by  Dr.  James  McCosh.  and
•a  controversy  between  the  two  philosophers  resulted.
— His  brother,  Albert,  astronomer,  b.  in  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  14  July,  1807 ;  d.  in  Williamstown,
Mass.,  24  May,  1872.  "  He  entered  Williams  in  the
.junior  year  and  was  graduated  in  1826,  subsequent-
ly devoting  a  year  to  the  study  of  agriculture  and
•engineering, 'in  1827  he  was  elected  tutor,  and
in  1829  professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  phi-
losophy in  Williams,  and  went  to  Europe  in  1834
for  the  purpose of  selecting  philosophical and
•chemical  apparatus  for  the  college. In  1835  he
began  on  his  own  responsibility  the  building  of  an
^astronomical observatory  in Williamstown,  the
first  that  was  ever  established  in  connection  with
■an  American college. This building, though
•equipped  with  a  telescope  and  other  instruments  of
but  moderate  power,  under  Prof.  Hopkins's  man-
agement, made  many  discoveries  which  aided  in
establishing  a  high  reputation  for  American  scien-
tists. In  1869  David  Dudley  Field  endowed  a  memo-
rial professorship  of  astronomy  in  Williams  with
vol.  in. — 17


$25,000.  stipulating  that  the  proceeds  should  be  se-
cured to  Prof.  Hopkins  during  his  life.  From  1835
till  1840  he  also  gave  instruction  in  the  French  lan-
guage. He  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Berk-
shire Congregational  association  in  1837,  and  for
many  years  was  stated  supply  to  churches  in  Will-
iamstown and  South  Williamstown,  and  much  of
the  time  was  acting  college  pastor.  In  1846  he
built,  largely  from  his  own  means,  a  chapel  at
White  Oaks,  a  previously  neglected  district  of  the
town,  where  he  performed  missionary  work,  and  in
1868  organized  a  church  there.  Prof.  Hopkins
was  a  skilful  botanist,  and  was  the  first  to  organ-
ize scientific  expeditions  from  colleges,  founding
in  this  connection  a  natural  history  society  and
an  Alpine  club  at  Williams.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Jefferson  college  in  1859,  and
was  elected  corresponding  fellow  of  the  Royal  so-
ciety of  Great  Britain,  to  whose  transactions  he
was  an  occasional  contributor  of  papers  on  astro-
nomical and  philosophical  subjects. — Albert's  wife,
Louisa  Payson,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  24  Feb..  1812;
d.  24  Jan.,  1862,  was  the  daughter  of  Rev.  Edward
Payson,  and  married  Prof.  Hopkins  in  1842.  She
contributed  articles  to  Kitto's  "  Biblical  Cyclopae-
dia," "  The  New  York  Review,"  and  other  periodi-
cals, and  composed  several  question-books  for  the
Massachusetts  Sunday-school  union.  Mrs.  Hop-
kins also  wrote  numerous  works  for  children  which
have  been  admired  for  their  excellent  method  of
illustrating  the  Bible  and  its  doctrines.  They  in-
clude "The  Pastor's  Daughter,  or  The  Way  of
Salvation  Explained  "  (New  York,  new  ed.,  1863) ;
"Lessons  on  the  Book  of  Proverbs,"  "The  Young
Christian  Encouraged."  "  Henry  Langdon,  or
What  was  I  made  for?"  (1846);'  "The  Guiding
Star,  or  The  Bible  God's  Message,"  a  sequel  to
"  Henry  Langdon  "  (Boston,  1851) ;  "  The  Silent
Comforter :  a  Companion  for  the  Sick-Room "
(1874) ;  and  "  Payson's  Select  Thoughts."

HOPKINS,  Moses  Aaron,  clergyman,  b.  in
Montgomery  county,  Va,,  25  Dec,  1846 ;  d.  in
Monrovia,  Liberia.  3  Aug..  1886.  He  was  of  Afri-
can descent,  and  born  in  slavery,  but  escaped  dur-
ing the  civil  war  and  became  a  cook  in  the  Fed-
eral army,  and  afterward  on  Mississippi  steam-
boats and  at  Pittsburg,  Pa.  He  began  to  learn
the  alphabet  when  nearly  twenty  years  old,  studied
at  Avery  college,  Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  and  at  Lin-
coln university,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1874,
and  then  studied  theology  at  Auburn  seminary,
N.  Y.,  of  which  he  was  the  first  colored  graduate.
After  receiving  ordination  as  an  evangelist  at  Bal-
timore in  1877,  he  was  settled  as  a  pastor  in  Frank-
linton,  N.  C.  and  acquired  a  wide  influence  over
the  people  of  his  race  as  a  minister  and  educator.
He  took  an  independent  position  on  political  ques-
tions, and  in  1885  was  appointed  17.  S.  minister
resident  and  consul-general  to  Liberia.

HOPKINS,  Samuel,  theologian,  b.  in  Water-
bury,  Conn.,  17  Sept..  1721 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  20
Dec,  1803.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1741,  and  trained  in  theology  by
Jonathan  Edwards.  In  1743  he  was  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  church  at  Housatonnuc  (afterward  Great
Barrington),  Mass.,  but  in  January.  1769,  he  was
dismissed  because  his  church  was  reduced  in  num-
bers. On  11  April,  1770.  he  was  settled  over  a
church  in  Newport,  R.  I.  In  December,  1776,
when  the  British  took  possession  of  Newport,  he
retired  to  Great  Barrington.  During  the  summer
of  1777  he  preached  to  a  large  congregation  at
Newburyport,  Mass.,  and  subsequently  at  Canter-
bury and  Stamford,  Conn.  In  the  spring  of  1780,
after  the  evacuation  of  Newport  by  the  British,  he


258


HOPKINS


HOPKINS


returned,  but  found  his  congregation  diminished
and  impoverished.  For  the  remainder  of  his  life
he  was  obliged  to  depend  on  the  weekly  contribu-
tions of  his  hearers  and  the  assistance  of  friends.
In  January,  1799,  paralysis  deprived  him  of  the
use  of  his  limbs.  He  was  an  early  advocate  of  the
emancipation  of  negro  slaves,  freed  his  own,  and
originated  the  idea  of  sending  the  liberated  slaves
to  Africa  to  act  as  agents  of  civilization.  The
agitation  that  was  begun  by  him  led  to  organized
political  action  in  Rhode  Island  and  the  passing  of
a  law,  in  1774,  forbidding  the  importation  of  ne-
groes into  the  colony,  followed  after  the  Revolution
by  an  act  of  the  legislature  declaring  all  children
of  slaves  that  should  be  born  subsequent  to  1  March,
1785,  to  be  free.  He  was  the  author  of  the  modifi-
cations of  the  Calvinistic  theology  that  came  to  be
known  as  Hopkinsianism.  He  believed  that  the
inability  of  the  unregenerate  is  owing  to  moral  and
not  to  natural  causes,  and  that  sinners  are  free
agents  and  deserving  of  punishment,  though  all
acts,  sinful  as  well  as  righteous,  are  the  result  of
the  decrees  of  providence.  The  essence  of  sin,  he
thought,  consisted  in  the  disposition  and  intention
of  the  mind.  Dr.  Hopkins  was  an  exceedingly
modest  and  devout  man,  and  exemplified  the  dis-
position of  unselfishness  and  benevolence  which  he
regarded  as  the  basis  of  a  Christian  life.  He  was
the  original  of  one  of  the  principal  characters  in
Harriet  Beecher  Stowe's  "  Minister's  Wooing."
His  theological  theories,  which  created  an  epoch  in
the  development  of  religious  thought  in  New  Eng-
land, were  first  presented  from  the  pulpit,  and
were  developed,  with  some  modifications,  after  his
death,  by  his  friends,  Stephen  West,  Nathaniel
Emmons,  and  Samuel  Spring.  Among  his  pub-
lished sermons  are  "  Sin,  through  Divine  Interpo-
sition, an  Advantage  to  the  Universe;  and  yet
this  is  no  Excuse  for  Sin  or  Encouragement  to
it "  (1759) ;  "  An  Inquiry  whether  the  Promises
of  the  Gospel  are  made  to  the  Exercises  and  Do-
ings of  Persons  in  the  Unregenerate  State ''  (1765) ;
"  The  True  State  and  Character  of  the  Unregener-
ate" (1769);  and  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of
True  Holiness  "  (1773).  His  "  Dialogue  Showing
it  to  be  the  Duty  and  Interest  of  the  American
States  to  Emancipate  all  their  African  Slaves "
appeared  in  1776.  His  theological  views  were  ex-
pounded in  "  A  System  of  Doctrines  Contained  in
Divine  Revelation  "  (1793).  He  published  a  "  Life
of  President  Edwards"  and  lives  of  Susannah
Anthony  (1796),  and  Mrs.  Osborn  (1798).  A  dia-
logue on  the  nature  and  extent  of  true  Christian
submission,  an  address  to  professing  Christians,  and
sketches  of  his  own  life  were  included  in  a  collec-
tion of  his  works  published  by  Dr.  Stephen  West
(Stockbridge,  1805).  A  subsequent  edition  of  his
collected  writings  contains  a  memoir  by  Dr.  Ed-
wards A.  Park  (Boston,  1852).  A  "Treatise  on
the  Millennium,"  originally  published  with  the
"  System  of  Divinity,"  was  reissued  in  1854.

HOPKINS,  Samuel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Albemarle
county,  Va.,  about  1750;  d.  in  Henderson.  Ky.,  in
October,  1819.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  Conti-
nental army,  fought  with  distinction  at  Princeton,
Trenton,  Monmouth,  and  Brandywine,  and  at  the
battle  of  Germantown  his  battalion  of  light  in-
fanty  was  nearly  annihilated,  while  he  was  severely
wounded.  He  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  10th
Virginia  regiment  at  the  siege  of  Charleston,  and
after  the  death  of  Col.  Richard  Parker  became  its
colonel,  and  served  as  such  till  the  end  of  the  war.
He  was  made  a  prisoner,  with  the  other  officers,  at
the  surrender  of  Charleston  on  20  May.  1780.  While
they  were  conveyed  in  a  British  vessel  to  Virginia


he  complained  to  the  captain  of  the  harsh  treat-
ment and  starvation  to  which  they  were  subjected,
and  threatened  to  raise  a  mutiny  on  the  ship  unless
they  were  treated  as  officers  and  gentlemen.  This
bold  language  secured  for  the  sufferers  proper  care
during  the  rest  of  the  voyage.  In  1797  he  settled
on  Green  river  in  Kentucky,  and  served  for  sev-
eral sessions  in  the  legislature  of  that  state.  In
October,  1812,  he  led  2.000  mounted  volunteers
against  the  Kickapoo  villages  on  the  Illinois  river,
but  the  party  was  misled  by  the  guides,  and,  after
wandering  for  several  days  about  the  prairie,  re-
turned against  the  wishes  and  commands  of  the
officers.  In  November  he  led  a  band  of  infantry
up  the  Wabash,  and  destroyed  several  deserted
villages,  but  lost  a  part  of  his  force  by  an  ambus-
cade. The  Indians  declined  a  combat,  and  he  was
compelled  by  the  severe  cold  to  return  to  Vincennes,
after  destroying  a  town  on  Wildcat  creek ;  but  im-
mediately afterward  the  Indians  sued  for  peace.
Gen.  Hopkins  was  elected  a  representative  in  con-
gress from  Kentucky,  and  took  his  seat  on  26  June,
1813.  After  the  conclusion  of  his  term,  which
ended  on  2  March,  1815,  he  retired  to  his  farm  in
Hopkins  county,  which  was  named  for  him.

HOPKINS,  Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Hadley,
Mass.,  11  April,  1807;  d.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,
10  Feb.,  1887.  His  great-grandfather,  the  Rev.
Samuel,  of  West  Springfield,  Mass.,  who  was  mar-
ried to  a  sister  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  published
"  Historical  Memoirs  Relating  to  the  Housatunnuk
Indians  "  (1753).  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1827,  studied  theology  in  the  Andover  semi-
nary, was  ordained  at  Montpelier,  Vt..  on  26  Oct.,

1831,  was  pastor  there  four  years,  and  afterward
seven  at  Saco,  Me.,  and  after  1844  preached  for
several  years  as  stated  supply  at  Standish,  Me.  He
published  "  Lessons  at  the  Cross,"  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Samuel  Hartley  "  (Boston,  1853) ;  and
the  same  year  a  second  edition  under  his  own  name.
He  was  also  the  author  of  "  The  Youth  of  the  Old
Dominion,"  based  on  colonial  annals  (1856) ;  and
"  The  Puritans  and  Queen  Elizabeth  "  (1860),  which
passed  through  several  editions.  He  wrote  an
essay  on  the  signification  of  certain  Hebrew  words,
which  Prof.  Edwards  A.  Park  began  to  publish  in
the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra " ;  but  after  two  instal-
ments had  appeared  the  publication  was  discon-
tinued on  account  of  the  conclusions  that  were  sug-
gested by  his  researches.

HOPKINS,  Samuel  Miles,  jurist,  b.  in  Salem,
Conn.,  9  May,  1772 ;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  9  March,
1837.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1791,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1793,  and  began  practice  in  Oxford,
N.  Y.  In  1794  he  removed  to  New  York  city,
where  he  became  a  successful  lawyer.  He  served
in  congress  as  a  representative  from  New  York  in
1813-'15.  and  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of
representatives  in  1820-'7.  From  1821  to  1831  he
resided  in  Albany,  and  from  1832  to  1836  he  was  I
judge  of  the  New  York  state  circuit  court.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1828.
He  published  a  volume  of  "  Chancery  Reports  I
(New  York,  1827),  various  papers  on  the  subjects
of  the  state  and  national  legislatures,  crime,  and
prison  discipline,  and  a  treatise  on  "  Temperance  "
(Geneva,  1836).— His  son,  Samuel  Miles,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Geneseo,  N.  Y.,  8  Aug.,  1813,  studied  at
Yale  and  at  Amherst,  where  he  was  graduated  in

1832,  spent  two  years  at  Auburn  theological  semi-
nary, and  completed  his  course  at  Princeton  in  1 836.
He  was  ordained  in  1840,  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian
churches  at  Corning,  Fredonia,  and  Avon,  and  in
1847  became  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  and
church  polity  in  Auburn theological  seminary


mary.


i


HOPKINS


HOPKINS


259


Amherst  conferred  the  degree  of  D.  D.  on  him  in
1854.  He  published  a  "  Manual  of  Church  Polity  "
(Auburn,  1878),  and  "  Liturgv  and  Book  of  Com-
mon Prayer  "  (New  York,  1883).

HOPKINS,  Stephen,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  7  March,
1707 ;  d.  there,  13  July,  1785. He  was  brought  up

as  a  farmer,  and
inherited  an  es-
tate in  Scituate.
He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assem-
bly in  1732-'3
and  1735-8,  and
in  1736  was  ap-
pointed a  justice
of  the  peace  and
one  of  the  jus-
tices of  the  court
of  common  pleas.
He  was  the  first
town  -  clerk  of
Scituate.  Dur-
f  j  y .  ing his whole

\  I  a  land-surveyor.

In  1741  he  was
again  chosen  to  represent  the  town  of  Scituate  in
the  assembly,  and  was  elected  speaker.  In  1742  he
sold  his  farm  and  removed  to  Providence,  where  he
made  a  survey  of  the  streets  and  lots,  and  afterward
began  business  as  a  merchant  and  ship-builder.  The
same  year  he  was  sent  to  the  assembly  from  Provi-
dence, and  was  again  chosen  speaker.  In  1751  he
was  elected  for  the  fourteenth  time  to  the  general
assembly,  and  later  in  the  year  appointed  chief
justice  of  the  superior  court.  He  was  a  delegate
from  Rhode  Island  to  the  convention  that  met  at
Albany  in  1754  for  the  purposes  of  concerting  a
plan  of  military  and  political  union  of  the  colonies
and  arranging  an  alliance  with  the  Indians,  in
view  of  the  impending  war  with  France.  He  was
one  of  the  committee  that  drafted  a  plan  of  co-
lonial union,  which  was  accepted  by  the  conven-
tion, but  objected  to  in  the  various  colonies  and  in
Great  Britain.  In  1755  Mr.  Hopkins  was  elected
governor  of  the  colony,  and  held  that  office,  with
the  exception  of  two  years,  when  he  was  defeated
by  his  political  rival,  Samuel  Ward,  until  1764.
After  Ward  had  occupied  the  governor's  chair  for
two  years,  Hopkins  was  again  elected  in  1 767 ;  but
in  October  of  that  year  he  renounced  further  can-
didature for  the  sake  of  uniting  the  contending
factions  and  putting  an  end  to  a  party  strife  that
distracted  the  colony.  While  he  was  governor,
Hopkins  had  a  controversy  with  William  Pitt,
prime  minister  of  England,  in  relation  to  the  con-
traband trade  with  the  French  colonies.  He  was
one  of  the  earliest  and  most  strenuous  champions
of  colonial  rights  against  the  encroachments  of
the  English  parliament.  In  1765  he  wrote  a  pam-
phlet entitled  "The  Grievances  of  the  American
Colonies  Candidly  Examined,'"  which  was  printed
by  order  of  the'  general  assembly,  and  reissued  in
London  the  next  year.  In  1765  he  was  elected
chairman  of  a  committee  appointed  at  a  special
town-meeting  held  in  Providence  to  draft  instruc-
tions to  the  general  assembly  on  the  stamp-act.
The  resolutions  reported  and  adopted  were  nearly
identical  with  those  that  Patrick  Henry  introduced
into  the  house  of  burgesses  of  Virginia.  In  1770
he  was  again  elected  to  the  general  assembly.  He
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  committee  on  cor-
respondence the  following  year,  and  was  succes-


sively re-elected  to  the  assembly  till  1775.  While
holding  a  seat  in  the  assembly,  and  afterward  in
the  Continental  congress,  he  filled  the  office  of
chief  justice  of  Rhode  Island  as  well,  being  ap-
pointed for  the  second  time  to  that  station  in
1770.  In  1773  he  emancipated  his  slaves,  and  in
1774  brought  forward  a  bill  in  the  assembly  which
prohibited  the  importation  of  negroes  into  the
colony.  He  was  elected,  with  Samuel  Ward,  to
represent  Rhode  Island  in  the  general  congress  in
August,  1774,  and  was  appointed  on  the  first  two
committees'.  In  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution
he  was  one  of  the  committee  of  safety  of  the  town
of  Providence,  and  in  May,  1775,  was  elected  to
the  2d  congress.  In  the  3d  congress  he  had  Will-
iam Ellery  as  his  colleague.  The  signature  of
Hopkins  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence  is
written  with  a  trembling  hand  for  the  reason  that
he  had  suffered  for  several  years  from  a  paralytic
affection  which  prevented  him  from  writing  ex-
cept by  guiding  the  right  hand  with  the  left,
though  in  early  life  he  had  been  famed  for  the
elegance  of  his  penmanship.  He  was  a  delegate
from  Rhode  Island  to  the  commission  that  was
appointed  by  the  New  England  states  to  consult
on  the  defence  of  their  borders  and  the  promotion
of  the  common  cause,  and  presided  over  the  meet-
ings in  Providence  in  1776  and  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  in  1777.  He  was  not  a  member  of  the  con-
gress in  1777,  but  in  the  following  year  was  a  dele-
gate for  the  last  time.  Mr.  Hopkins  was  a  pow-
erful and  lucid  speaker,  and  used  his  influence  in
congross  in  favor  of  decisive  measures.  He  wor-
shipped with  the  Friends,  but  professed  religious
views  so  latitudinarian  that  he  was  called  by  his
enemies  an  infidel.  His  knowledge  of  the  busi-
ness of  shipping  made  him  particularly  useful  in
congress  as  a  member  of  the  naval  committee  in
devising  plans  for  fitting  out  armed  vessels  and
furnishing  the  colonies  with  a  naval  armament,
and  in  framing  regulations  for  the  navy.  He  was
also  a  member  of  the  committee  that  drafted  the
articles  of  confederation  for  the  government  of  the
states.  In  1777  he  was  an  active  member  of  the
general  assembly  of  Rhode  Island.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  town  library  of  Providence  in  1750,
which  was  burned  in  1758,  but  re-established
through  his  instrumentality.  Besides  the  work  al-
ready mentioned,  he  was  the  author  of  a  "  History
of  the  Planting  and  Growth  of  Providence."  which
appeared  in  the  Providence  "  Gazette "  in  1765.
See  "  Stephen  Hopkins,  a  Rhode  Island  Statesman,"
by  William  E.  Foster  (Providence,  1884).

HOPKINS,  Theodore  Weld,  clergyman,  b.
in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  5  Jan.,  1841.  His  father,  who
had  left  Lane  seminary  on  anti-slavery  grounds,
settled  in  Oberlin,  Ohio,  in  1848.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1864,  taught  a  musical  school
near  Providence,  R.  I.,  for  a  year,  was  assistant  in
the  Central  high-school  in  CleVeland  for  four  years,
and  then  studied  theology  in  the  seminary  at
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1873.
He  was  at  once  called  to  the  chair  of  church  his-
tory in  the  Congregational  theological  seminary  at
Chicago,  111.  This  post  he  resigned  in  1880,  with
the  intention  of  devoting  himself  to  literary  work,
but  in  1881  he  accepted  the  pastorate  of  the  Cen-
tral Presbyterian  church  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.  He
is  the  author  of  an  historical  essay  on  "  The  Doc-
trine of  Inspiration"  (printed  privately)  and  has
contributed  numerous  articles  to  reviews.

HOPKINS,  William  Fenn,  educator,  b.  in
Connecticut  in  1802;  d.  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  13
July,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1825,  assigned  to  the  artillery,  and


260


HOPKINSON


HOPKINSON


employed,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  as  assistant
professor  in  1826-7,  and  from  1827  till  1835  as  act-
ing professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and  ge-
ology. He  resigned  in  1836  and  engaged  in  mer-
cantile pursuits,  declining  the  professorship  of
mathematics  in  Jefferson  college,  La.,  in  1837.  In
1843  he  became  principal  of  Norfolk  academy,  Va.,
and  in  1846  adjunct-superintendent  and  professor
of  natural  sciences  in  the  Western  military  insti-
tute at  Georgetown,  Ky.,  having  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel. In  1849  he  was  chosen  president
and  mathematical  professor  in  the  Masonic  uni-
versity of  Tennessee  at  Clarksville,  Tenn.,  which
post  he  exchanged  the  same  year  for  that  of  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy  in
William  and  Mary  college,  Va.  In  1850  he  was
appointed  professor  of  natural  and  experimental

fmilosophy  in  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  at  Annapo-
is,  Md.,  where  he  remained  until  four  months  be-
fore his  death,  when  he  received  the  appointment
of  U.  S.  consul  to  Jamaica.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Hobart,  in  1853.

HOPKINSON,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  London,
England,  6  April,  1709 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5
Nov.,  1751.  He  was  the  son  of  a  London  mer-
chant, studied  law,  and  emigrated  to  Pennsylvania
in  1731.  He  became  deputy  to  Charles  Reed,
clerk  of  the  orphan's  court  of  Philadelphia  county,
and  on  the  death  of  Reed  was  appointed  his  suc-
cessor. He  was  also  master  of  the  rolls  from  20
June,  1736,  till  1741,  deputy  prothonotary,  and
afterward  prothonotary  of  Philadelphia  county.
For  several  years  he  was  judge  of  the  admiralty,
became  a  member  of  the  provincial  council  on  13
May,  1747,  and  two  years  later  a  county  justice.
He  participated  in  all  the  public  enterprises  of  the
time,  was  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the  library
company,  one  of  the  original  trustees  of  the  Col-
lege of  Philadelphia,  and  also  the  first  president  of
the  Philosophical  society.  His  attainments  in
natural  philosophy  were  recognized  by  Benjamin
Franklin,  who  remarked :  "  The  power  of  points  to
throw  off  the  electrical  fire  was  first  communicated
to  me  by  my  ingenious  friend,  Mr.  Thomas  Hop-
kinson." — His  son,  Francis,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  21  Sept.,
1737;  d.  9  May,  1791,  was  educated  at  the  Col-
lege of  Philadelphia,  studied  law  under  Benjamin
Chew,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1761. In

that  year  he  acted  as
secretary  at  a  treaty
with  the  Indians,
which  he  commem-
orated in  "  The
Treaty,"  a  poem,
published  soon  af-
terward. From
February,  1764,  till
May,  1765,  he  was
librarian  and  secre-
tary of  the  Phila-
■  delphia  library.  In
May,  1766,  he  sailed
for  Europe,  and  af-
ter spending  a  few
weeks  in  Ireland
went  to  London,
where  he  remained
for  a  year,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  visits
to  his  cousin,  the  Bishop  of  Worcester.  In  Lon-
don he  was  associated  with  John  Penn,  Benja-
min West,  Lord  North,  and  others  of  distinction,
and  endeavored,  without  success,  to  secure  an  ap-
pointment as  one  of  the  commissioners  of  customs
for  North  America. After  his  return  to  Philadel-


~7^aS  <&A<^i>i+


phia  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  also  kept
a  store  for  some  time.  He  was  a  member  of  the
two  societies  which  united  in  1769  to  form  the
American  philosophical  society  at  Philadelphia,
was  a  director  of  the  library  company  from  1771
till  1773,  and  in  March,  1772,  became  collector  of
customs  at  New  Castle,  from  which  office  he  was
afterward  removed  owing  to  his  republican  princi-
ples. He  was  for  ,several  years  a  resident  of  Bor-
dentown,  N.  J.,  was  a  member  of  the  provincial
council  of  that  state  from  1774  until  the  Revolu-
tion, and  in  June,  1776,  was  chosen  one  of  its  dele-
gates to  the  Continental  congress.  He  served  on
the  committee  of  that  body  to  draft  articles  of  con-
federation, voted  in  favor  of  declaring  the  colo-
nies independent,  and  was  one  of  the  signers  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence.  Under  the  newly
established  government  he  was  appointed  the  head
of  the  navy  department,  and  was  also  treasurer  of
the  Continental  loan  office.  In  January,  1778,  he
wrote  "  The  Battle  of  the  Kegs,"  a  humorous  bal-
lad, descriptive  of  the  alarm  that  was  caused  by  a
futile  attempt  of  patriots  in  Bordentown  to  de-
stroy the  British  shipping  at  Philadelphia  by
means  of  torpedoes  enclosed  in  kegs  and  floated
down  the  Delaware.  During  the  war  he  supported
the  patriot  cause  by  various  productions  in  prose
and  verse,  and  powerfully  influenced  public  senti-
ment in  favor  of  independence.  He  was  judge  of
admiralty  for  Pennsylvania  in  1779-'89,  and  was
U.  S.  district  judge  for  that  state  from  1790  till
his  death.  He  was  impeached  by  the  assembly  of
Pennsylvania  for  alleged  misdemeanors  while  act-
ing as  judge  of  admiralty,  but  was  acquitted  of  all
charges.  Mr.  Hopkinson  was  not  only  familiar
with  science  as  it  then  existed,  but  was  also  skilled
in  painting  and  music,  and  composed  airs  for  his
own  songs.  The  most  important  of  his  political
writings  are  "The  Pretty  Story"  (Philadelphia,
1774);  "The  Prophecy "  (1776);  and  "The  Politi-
cal Catechism"  (1777).  His  poems  include  "The
New  Roof,  a  Song  for  Federal  Mechanics,"  and
among  his  best  essays  are  "The  Typographical
Mode  of  conducting  a  Quarrel "  and  "  Thoughts  on
Diseases  of  the  Mind."  After  his  death  appeared
"  The  Miscellaneous  Essays  and  Occasional  Writ-
ings of  Francis  Hopkinson  "  (Philadelphia,  1792). —
Francis's  son,  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  12  Nov.,  1770;  d.  there,  15  Jan.,  1842,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1786,  and  was  afterward  a  trustee  of  that  institu-
tion. He  studied  law,  and  began  practice  at  Easton,
Pa.,  in  1791,  but  soon  afterward  returned  to  Phila-
delphia. He  was  leading  counsel  for  Dr.  Benja-
min Rush  (q.  v.)  in  his  suit  against  William  Coblmt
in  1799,  and  wTas  also  one  of  the  counsel  for  the  de-
fendents  in  the  insurgent  trials  before  Judge  Sam-
uel Chase  in  1800.  Subsequently,  when  the  latter
was  impeached  before  the  U.  S.  senate,  he  chose
Mr.  Hopkinson  to  conduct  his  defence.  He  was  a
Federalist  politically,  and  was  elected  in  1814  a
representative  in  congress  from  Philadelphia,  serv-
ing one  term,  and  approving  the  rechartering  of
the  U.  S.  bank.  In  1823  he  resumed  the  practice
of  law,  and  in  1828  he  was  appointed  by  President
John  Quincy  Adams  U.  S.  judge  for  the  eastern
district  of  Pennsylvania,  which  office  he  held  until
his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  of
1837  to  revise  the  constitution  of  Pennsylvania,
and,  as  chairman  of  its  committee  on  the  judiciary,
contended  unsuccessfully  for  the  life  tenure  of  the
judges.  He  was  for  many  years  president  of  the
Academy  of  fine  arts  and  vice-president  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  was  long  a  confi-
dential friend  of  Joseph  Bonaparte,  who  then  re-


HOPPER


HOPPIN


261


-S^^y^


sided  at  Bordentown,  and  managed  Bonaparte's
affairs  during  his  absence.  Mr.  Hopkinson  was
the  author  of  various  addresses  and  articles  on
legal  and  ethical  subjects,  but  he  is  best  known  as
the  author  of  the  national  song,  "  Hail,  Columbia,"
which  he  wrote  in  the  summer  of  1798  for  the  bene-
fit of  an  actor  and  former  school-mate  named  Fox,
to  an  air  entitled  "  The  President's  March,"  com-
posed in  1789  by  a  German  named  Feyles.  This
song,  inciting  national  pride,  probably  helped  to
avert  entanglement  in  the  European  conflict.

HOPPER,  Isaac  Tatem,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Deptford  township,  Gloucester  co.,  N.  J.,  3  Dec,
1771 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  May,  1852. He  learned

the  tailor's  trade  of
_____^  an  uncle  in  Phila-

/^f  ^  delphia. He early

joined  the  Quakers,
and  afterward  be-
came a  believer  in
the  doctrines  taught
by  Elias  Hicks,
whose  followers  were
subsequently  known
as  Hicksites.  When
he  was  young,  Phila-
delphia was  infest-
ed by  slave  kidnap-
pers, who  committed
many  outrages.  Un-
der these  circum-
stances the  Pennsyl-
vania abolition  soci-
ety, of  which  Mr.  Hopper  became  an  active  and
leading member,  was frequently  called upon to

Erotect  the  rights  of  colored  people,  and  in  time
e  became  known  to  every  one  in  Philadelphia  as
the  friend  and  adviser  of  the  oppressed  race  in  all
emergencies.  He  wasxone  of  the  founders  and  the
secretary  of  a  society  for  the  employment  of  the
poor ;  overseer  of  the  Benezet  school  for  colored
children  ;  teacher,  without  recompense,  in  a  free
school  for  colored  adults  ;  inspector  of  the  prison,
without  a  salary  ;  member  of  a  fire  company,  and
guardian  of  abused  apprentices.  When  pestilence
was  raging,  he  was  devoted  to  the  sick,  and  the
poor  were  continually  calling  upon  him  to  plead
with  importunate  landlords  and  creditors.  He
was  not  unfrequently  employed  to  settle  estates  in-
volved in  difficulties,  which  others  were  disinclined
to  undertake,  and  he  had  occasional  applications
to  exert  his  influence  over  the  insane,  for  which  he
had  a  peculiar  tact.  Although  he  was  a  poor  man
with  a  large  family,  his  house  was  for  many  years
a  home  for  impoverished  Quakers,  and  he  trans-
acted much  business  for  the  Society  of  Friends.  In
1829  he  removed  to  New  York  to  take  charge  of  a
book-store  established  by  the  Hicksite  Quakers.
In  the  autumn  of  1830,  being  called  to  Ireland  on
business  connected  with  his  wife's  estate,  he  availed
himself  of  the  opportunity  to  visit  England.  In
both  countries  he  was  at  first  treated  somewhat
cavalierly  by  the  orthodox  Quakers,  and  pointed
out  as  the  one  "who  has  given  Friends  so  much
trouble  in  America."  His  candor  and  amiability,
however,  soon  removed  these  unfavorable  impres-
sions, and  he  had  no  occasion  ultimately  to  com-
Elain  of  his  reception.  On  his  return  to  New  York,
e  threw  himself  heart  and  soul  into  the  work  of
the  Prison  association,  whose  aims  and  plans  of
action  were  entirely  in  accordance  with  his  views.
To  render  such  practical  aid  as  would  enable  the
repentant  to  return  to  society,  by  engaging  in  some
honest  calling,  he  devoted  the  greater  part  of  his
time  and  attention. No  disposition  was  too  per-


verse for  his  efforts  at  reform ;  no  heart  so  hard
that  he  did  not  try  to  soften ;  no  relapses  could
exhaust  his  patience,  which,  without  weak  waste
of  means,  continued  "  hoping  all  things "  while
even  a  dying  spark  of  good  feeling  remained.  In
the  spring  of  1841,  the  demand  for  Hicksite  books
ha  ring  greatly  diminished,  Friend  Hopper  became
treasurer  and  book-agent  for  the  Anti-slavery  so-
ciety. Although  he  had  reached  the  age  of  seventy,
he  was  as  vigorous  as  a  man  of  fifty.  In  1845  he
relinquished  these  offices,  and  devoted  the  rest  of
his  life  entirely  to  the  work  of  the  Prison  associa-
tion. In  his  labors  he  was  greatly  assisted  by  a
married  daughter,  Abby  H.  Gibbons,  who  was  as
vigilant  and  active  in  behalf  of  women  discharged
from  prison  as  was  her  father  in  behalf  of  men.
Through  her  exertions,  an  asylum  was  founded  for
these  unfortunates,  which  was  called  the  "  Isaac  T.
Hopper  Home."  The  aged  philanthropist  fre-
quently had  occasion  to  visit  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Jto
represent  the  association  and  to  address  the  legis-
lature. Judge  Edmonds  thus  refers  to  one  of  these
occasions  :  "  His  eloquence  was  simple  and  direct,
but  most  effective.  If  he  was  humorous,  his  audi-
ence were  full  of  laughter;  if  solemn,  a  death-like
stillness  reigned ;  if  pathetic,  tears  flowed  all
around  him."  He  had  often  to  plead  for  the  par-
don of  prisoners,  and  Gov.  John  Young,  of  New
York,  once  said  to  him :  "  Friend  Hopper,  I  will
pardon  any  convict  whom  you  say  you  conscien-
tiously believe  I  ought  to  pardon."  The  career  of
this  untiring  benefactor  is  best  summed  up  in  the
words  of  one  of  his  own  sect :  "  The  Bible  requires
us  to  love  our  neighbors  as  well  as  ourselves ;  and
Friend  Hopper  has  loved  them  better ! "  His  life
was  written  by  Lydia  Maria  Child  (Boston.  1853).

HOPPIN,  William  Jones,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  21  April,  1813.  He  studied  at
Yale  and  at  Middlebury  college,  Yt.,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1832,  and  then  pursued  the  law  course
at  Harvard,  obtaining  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  in  1835.
He  frequently  visited  Europe,  contributed  articles
on  art  subjects  to  American  and  European  periodi-
cals, and  edited  the  "  Bulletin  "  of  the  American
art  union.  He  also  wrote  several  dramatic  pieces,
which  were  acted.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Centurv  association,  usuallv  called  the  Centurv
club,  of  New  York,  in  1846.  From  1876  to  1886
he  was  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  legation  at  London,
at  various  times  acting  as  charge  d'affaires. — His
brother,  Thomas  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  15  Aug.,  1816.  early  showed  artistic
talents,  and  studied  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  Paris
under  Delaroche,  After  his  return  to  the  United
States,  in  1837,  he  took  up  his  residence  in  New
York  city,  where  he  made  the  designs  of  the  four
evangelists  which  compose  the  great  chancel  win-
dow of  Trinity  church.  A  figure  of  a  dog  that  was
modelled  by  him  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  first
piece  of  sculpture  cast  in  bronze  in  the  United
States.  He  has  produced  statues  and  groups  in
plaster;  also  many  etchings  in  outline  and  other
pictures  illustrating  American  life  and  history,  and
has  drawn  and  engraved  on  wood. — Another  broth-
er, Augustus,  artist  and  author,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  13  July,  1828.  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1848,  studied'  law,  and  practised  for  a  short  time
in  Providence,  but  his  love  of  art  impelled  him  to
abandon  the  law.  After  spending  the  years  1854
and  1855  in  study  and  observation  in  the  galleries
of  Europe,  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  de-
voted himself  to  drawing  on  wood,  and  by  his
spirited  and  graceful  rendering  gained  a  high
reputation  as  an  illustrator  of  books.  Among  the
works  for  which  he  drew  designs  are  "


The  Poti-


262


HOPPIN


HORAN


phar  Papers"  (1853);  " Nothing  to  Wear "  (1857),
one  of  the  earliest  publications  of  George  W.  Carle-
ton,  for  which  the  publisher  began  to  draw  the
designs,  but  turned  them  over  to  his  friend,  Mr.
Hoppin,  who  made  the  drawings  on  wood  ;  "  Mrs.
Partington's  Sayings  " ;  and  "  The  Autocrat  at  the
Breakfast  Table."  His  first  publication  was  a  bro-
chure, entitled  "  Carrot  Pomade,"  with  illustrations
(New  York,  1864).  After  a  journey  to  Europe  and
the  east  in  1871  he  published  a  series  of  illustrated
sketch-books,  bearing  the  titles  '"On  the  Nile"
(Boston,  1871) ;  "  Ups  and  Downs  on  Land  and
Water:  the  European  Tour  in  a  Series  of  Pic-
tures "  (1871) ;  and  "  Crossing  the  Atlantic  "  (1872).
During  the  Boston  musical  festival  he  was  the
artist  for  a  series  of  illustrated  papers  entitled
"Jubilee  Days,"  which  were  afterward  collected
into  a  volume  (1872).  His  other  books  are  a  hu-
morous illustrated  volume  called  "Hay  Fever"
(1§73) ;  a  work  of  fiction  called  "  Recollections  of
Auton  House,"  with  illustrations  by  the  author,
under  the  pen-name  of  "  C.  Auton  "  (1881) ;  "  A
Fashionable  Sufferer,"  also  illustrated  (1883) ;  and
"  Two  Compton  Boys "  (1885).  He  is  also  the
author  of  an  anonymous  romance  "  Married  for
Fun"  (Boston,  1885).  — Their  cousin,  William
Warner,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  1  Sept.,  1807 ;  d.
there  19  April,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1828,  and  at  the  law  school  in  1830.  After  serv-
ing in  the  municipal  boards  of  Providence  he  was
sent  to  the  state  senate  in  1853,  and  in  1854  was
elected  governor.  He  was  re-elected  in  1855  and
1856,  and  was  nominated  for  a  fourth  term,  but
declined.  In  1856,  when  assured  of  election  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  he  withdrew  in  favor  of  his  friend,
James  F.  Simmons,  and  in  1858  he  was  a  candidate
for  the  same  office,  but  was  defeated  by  Henry  B.
Anthony.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  peace  con-
ference in  1861,  and  in  1866  he  was  again  returned
to  the  state  senate.  While  a  member  of  that  body
he  procured  the  passage,  against  much  opposition,
of  the  ten-hour  law  for  labor.  He  became  a  regis-
ter in  bankruptcy  in  1872,  and  in  1875  sat  in  the
lower  house  of  the  legislature.  Many  of  his
speeches  and  messages  have  been  published. — Will-
iam Warner's  brother,  James  Mason,  educator,  b.
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  17  Jan.,  1820,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1840,  studied  law  at  the  Harvard  law-
school,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1842,  and  then
theology  at  the  Union  theological  seminary  in  New
York,  and  at  Andover  seminary,  being  graduated
at  the  latter  institution  in  1845.  He  pursued  the
study  two  years  longer  at  the  University  of  Berlin,
under  Neander,  travelled  for  a  year  in  Germany,
Greece,  and  Palestine,  and  from  1850  till  1859  was
pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Salem,  Mass.
In  1861  he  accepted  the  chair  of  homiletics  and  the
pastoral  charge  in  Yale.  During  the  first  two
years  of  his  professorship  he  acted  as  pastor  of  the
college  church,  and  in  1872-'5  lectured  on  forensic
eloquence  in  the  law-school.  In  1879  he  resigned
the  chair  of  pastoral  theology  in  order  to  assume
that  of  the  history  of  art.  In  1880  he  taught  homi-
letics in  the  Union  theological  seminary,  New  York
city.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Knox
college,  Galesburg,  111.,  in  1870.  Prof.  Hoppin  is
the  author  of  "  Notes  of  a  Theological  Student "
(New  York,  1854) ;  "  Old  England,  its  Art,  Scenery,
and  People  "  (Boston,  1867) ;  "  Office  and  Work  of
the  Christian  Ministry  "  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  Life
of  Rear- Admiral  Andrew  Hull  Foote"  (1874);
"Memoir  of  Henry  Armitt  Brown"  (Philadelphia,
1880) ;  "  Homiletics  "  (New  York,  1881) ;  and  "  Pas-
toral Theology  "  (1884).  The  last  two  are  the  di-
visions of  his  work  entitled  "  The  Office  of  the


Ministry,"  revised  and  re-written.  He  has  also
contributed  numerous  articles  to  the  "  Bibliotheca
Sacra  "  and  to  the  "  New  Englander."

HOPPING,  Enos  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city  about  1805 ;  d.  in  Mier,  Mexico,  1  Sept.,  1847.
He  joined  the  United  States  army  during  the
Mexican  war,  and  was  appointed  a  brigadier-gen-
eral on  3  March,  1847,  but  died  six  months  later,
while  stationed  on  the  Rio  Grande.

HOPSON,  Winthrop  Hartly,  clergyman,  b.
in  Christian  county,  Ky.,  26  April,  1823.  He  re-
moved with  his  parents  to  Missouri  in  childhood,
was  graduated  at  the  state  university  in  1841,  and
entered  the  ministry  of  the  Christian  church.  He
received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  McDowell  col-
lege, St.  Louis,  in  1843,  and  practised  his  profes-
sion for  six  years,  not  ceasing  in  the  mean  time
from  his  ministerial  work.  His  ministrations  were
usually  protracted  for  weeks  at  an  appointment,
preaching  twice  daily.  Great  success  attended
these  labors,  and  he  made  thousands  of  converts.
He  gave  much  attention  to  the  founding  and  nur-
turing of  schools  and  colleges,  and  was  mainly
instrumental  in  building  up  a  flourishing  female
academy  at  Palmyra.  In  1860  he  accepted  a  call
to  the  pastoral  charge  of  the  Main  street  church,
Lexington,  Ky.,  where  he  preached  for'  over  two
years.  During  the  civil  war  Dr.  Hopson's  sympa-
thies were  with  the  south.  After  the  Bragg  and
Buell  campaign  and  the  Morgan  raids  in  Ken-
tucky in  1862,  he  was  seized  by  the  military  au-
thorities, cast  into  prison  at  Lexington,  and  soon
afterward  removed  to  Johnson's  island.  By  the
ruse  of  some  friends,  but  unknown  to  Dr.  Hopson,
his  name  was  placed  on  a  list  of  prisoners  for  ex-
change, as  chaplain  of  a  command  in  the  Confed-
erate army.  He  was  sent  through  the  lines,  and
in  June,  1863,  made  his  way  to  Richmond,  Va.,
and  shortly  afterward  settled  at  Bowling  Green,
where  he  preached  for  a  year.  After  the  war  he
was  called  to  the  church  in  Richmond,  Va.,  where
he  continued  for  over  three  years,  and  then  ac-
cepted a  call  to  the  1st  Christian  church,  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  with  which  he  spent  the  next  six  years.
He  returned  to  Missouri  in  1874,  and  remained  a
year  in  charge  of  the  church  there ;  after  which
he  became  president  of  Christian  university,  Can-
ton, Mo.,  serving  successfully  in  this  office  until
1877,  when  he  was  prostrated  by  disease,  which
compelled  his  retirement.

HORAN,  Eduard  John,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  in  1817;  d.  in  Canada.  fl
Feb.,  1875.  He  began  his  studies  in  the  Seminary
of  Quebec  at  an  early  age,  was  ordained  priest  in
1842,  and  subsequently  appointed  one  of  the  di-
rectors of  the  seminary.  On  the  foundation  of  the
normal-school  at  Quebec  he  was  made  its  principal,
and  held  also  a  high  office  in  the  Laval  university.
He  was  promoted  to  the  bishopric  of  Kingston  in
1858,  and  under  his  care  the  diocese  was  enriched
with  many  valuable  charitable  and  educational  in-
stitutions. He  was  an  assistant  of  the  pontifical
throne,  and  took  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the
Vatican  council,  where  he  was  a  strenuous  advocate
of  the  definition  of  papal  infallibility.  Bishop
Horan  was  compelled  by  sickness  and  growing  in-
firmities to  resign  his  see  some  time  before  his  deal  1).

HORAN,  Mary  Austin,  superior  of  the  Sisters
of  Mercy,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1820 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  June,  1874.  She  entered  the  Convent  of
mercy,  Dublin,  Ireland,  under  the  auspices  of
Catharine  McCauley,  founder  of  the  order,  and
came  to  New  York  in  1846,  at  the  request  of  Arch-
bishop Hughes,  with  Mother  Agnes  O'Connor,
whom  she  assisted  in  founding  the  Institution


HORDEN


HORNADAY


263


mercy  in  that  city.  She  was  the  first  mistress  of
novices  in  St.  Catharine's  convent,  New  York,  and
trained  all  its  earlv  members.  She  was  active  in
establishing  the  different  works  of  the  institution
and  in  the  visitation  of  the  poor,  and  also  built  St.
Joseph's  industrial  institute  for  children.

HORDEN,  John,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,  b.
in  Exeter,  England,  20  Jan.,  1828.  He  was  ordained
a  priest  in  1852,  a  missionary  at  Moose  Factory  and
the  adjacent  territory,  and  became  the  first  bishop
of  Moosonee,  Northwest  territory,  in  1873.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1873.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  sermons  and  of  several  religious  works  and
manuals  of  worship  in  the  Ojibbeway  language.

HORN,  Charles  Edward,  musician,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  in  1776;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  10
June,  1848.  He  was  educated  by  his  father,  a  Ger-
man musician  of  reputation,  and  in  1809  made  his
debut  as  a  vocalist  at  the  English  opera-house,  Lon-
don. Thereafter,  applying  himself  to  vocal  study
under  noted  instructors,  he  came  again  before  the
London  public  as  an  opera-singer  in  1814,  with
success.  He  now  appeared  in  most  of  the  large
play-houses  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  both  as
a  vocalist  and  as  a  conductor  of  music,  and  during
that  time  wrote  many  songs,  some  of  which  became
widely  popular.  Among  them  are  "The  Deep,
Deep  Sea,"  "Even  as  the  Sun,"  "Cherry  Ripe,"
and  "  I've  been  Roaming."  One  of  his  best  com-
positions, the  duet  "  I  Know  a  Bank  whereon  the
Wild  Thyme  Blows,"  is  still  sung  in  Shakespeare's
"  Midsummer  Night's  Dream."  In  1827  Horn  came
to  this  country,  where  he  first  sang  at  the  New
York  Park  theatre  in  Bishop's  musical  arrange-
ment of  "  Guy  Mannering,"  followed  by  "  The  Bar-
ber of  Seville,"  "  Der  Freyschiitz,"  and  "  Love  in  a
Village."  He  then  visited  the  other  large  cities  of
the  Union,  and  repeated  his  rounds  for  several
years.  In  1831  he  returned  to  London,  where,  for
a  time,  he  directed  the  music  at  the  Olympic
theatre.  In  1832  he  returned  to  this  country,  and.
after  losing  his  voice,  opened  a  music-store  in  New
York,  with  a  partner,  under  the  firm-name  of  Davis
and  Horn.  He  closed  his  career  in  Boston  as  a
teacher  of  music  and  conductor  of  the  Handel
and  Haydn  society.  Horn's  voice  was  a  baritone
of  indifferent  quality,  under  good  control.  As  an
opera-artist  he  ventured  to  sing  tenor,  baritone,
and  bass  parts,  transposing  and  altering  composi-
tions of  eminent  masters  to  suit  his  purposes.

HORN,  Edward  Traill,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eas-
ton,  Pa.,  10  June,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Penn-
sylvania college,  Gettysburg,  in  1869,  and  at  the
Philadelphia  theological  seminary  in  1872 ;  became
pastor  of  Christ  (Lutheran)  church  at  Chestnut  hill,
Philadelphia,  in  1872,  and  in  1876  of  St.  John's
(Lutheran)  church,  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he  still
(1887)  remains.  Mr.  Horn  took  an  active  part  in
the  work  of  effecting  a  union  of  the  Lutheran  syn-
ods in  the  south.  He  is  known  on  account  of  his
labors  in  the  interest  of  liturgies,  a  subject  on  which
]  he  is  an  authority.  He  is  now  (1887)  an  active
member  of  the  committee  on  a  common  service  for
all  English-speaking  Lutherans.  The  degree  of
D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Roanoke  in  1887
and  bv  Newberry.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Chris-
tian Year  "  (1876) ;  "  Historv  of  St.  John's,  Charles-
ton, from  1734  till  1886"  (1886);  and  "The  Evan-
gelical Pastor"  (1887);  besides  articles  in  "The
Lutheran  Church  Review  "  and  other  periodicals.

HORN, Van  de  or  Van,  buccaneer,  b.  in  Holland
about  1635;  d.  near  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico,  in  1683.
He  was  engaged  in  the  Dutch  merchant  service
from  about  1655  till  1659.  and  then  bought  a  vessel
with  his  savings,  and  with  a  band  of  reckless  men,


whom  he  had  enlisted,  became  a  terror  to  the  com-
merce of  the  Netherlands.  He  afterward  had
several  ships  in  his  employment,  and  obtained  such
notoriety  that  some  civilized  governments  were
willing  to  employ  him  against  their  enemies.  In
1666  a  French  minister  sent  him  a  commission
empowering  him  to  pursue  and  capture  Spanish
vessels,  and,  as  he  was  uniformly  successful,  he
amassed  enormous  sums.  After  the  treaty  of  Aix
la  Chapelle,  it  was  expected  that  he  would  cease
ravaging  the  American  coast,  but  the  French
government,  while  openly  disowning  their  cham-
pion, secretly  connived  at  his  misdeeds.  He  made
the  mistake  of  pillaging  a  French  ship,  but,  after  an
unsuccessful  attempt  to  take  him  had  been  made
in  1663,  he  no  longer  attacked  the  French  flag.
Learning  that  several  Spanish  galleons  were  wait-
ing in  the  harbor  of  Porto  Rico  for  a  convoy,  he
entered  the  harbor  and  offered  his  services  to  the
governor.  He  put  forward  his  recent  quarrel  with
the  French,  and  declared  that  his  only  chance  of
safety  was  in  the  protection  of  the  king  of  Spain.
The  governor  allowed  the  galleons  to  leave  port  un-
der the  protection  of  Horn,  but,  as  soon  as  they  were
outside  of  the  Antilles,  they  were  attacked  by  the
flotilla  of  the  buccaneer,  who  gained  over  2,000,000
livres  by  the  adventure.  Horn  was  engaged  with
De  Graff  and  other  buccaneer  chiefs  in  the  capture
of  Vera  Cruz  in  1683.  The  division  of  the  spoil
caused  a  duel  between  Horn  and  De  Graff,  which
was  fought  on  the  shores  of  the  bay  of  San  Sacri-
ficid,  five  or  six  miles  from  Vera  Cruz.  Horn  was
dangerously  wounded  in  the  arm.  and,  after  he  had
returned  to  his  ship,  the  extreme  heat,  combined
with  the  absence  of  surgical  aid  and  his  passion
for  drink,  soon  ended  his  life.

HORNADAY,  William  Temple,  naturalist,  b.
near  Plainfield,  Ind..  1  Dec,  1854.  He  studied  at
Iowa  agricultural  college,  and  in  1874  entered  the
employ  of  Henry  A.  Ward  at  his  natural  science
establishment  in  Rochester.  During  his  connec-
tion with  this  gentleman  he  was  sent  on  expedi-
tions in  search  of  rare  specimens  in  natural  historv,
including  visits  to  Cuba  and  Florida  in  1874-'5,  to
the  West  Indies  and  South  America  in  1876,  and  a
trip  around  the  world  by  way  of  Europe  to  Egypt,
Arabia.  India.  Ceylon,  the  Malay  peninsula,  Bor-
neo, in  1876-'9.  He  was  appointed  chief  taxider-
mist to  the  U.  S.  national  museum  in  Washington
in  1882,  which  office  he  now  holds.  In  1886  he
was  sent  to  Montana  in  charge  of  the  expedition
of  the  Smithsonian  institution  for  buffalo,  and  was
successful  in  achieving  the  desired  results.  He
founded  the  National  society  of  American  taxider-
mists in  1880,  an  organization  which  has  accom-
plished a  great  work  in  developing  and  advancing
the  art  of  taxidermy,  and  he  has  introduced  many
new  and  important  methods.  Of  late  years  he  has
made  a  specialty  of  mammals,  on  account  of  the
difficulty  of  mounting  them  and  the  field  they
present  for  the  display  of  skill.  Noted  examples
of  Mr.  Hornaday's  work  are  shown  in  the  groups
of  orang-outangs  and  American  bison,  which  were
both  collected  and  mounted  by  him,  in  the  U.  S.
national  museum,  and  also  in  the  group  of  orang-
outangs in  the  American  museum  of  natural  his-
tory in  New  York.  He  is  president  of  the  Society
of  American  taxidermists,  and  at  each  of  its  exhibi-
tions has  received  the  highest  prize  for  the  best
specimen  of  mounting.  His  work  has  also  received
medals  elsewhere.  Mr.  Hornaday  has  written  ar-
ticles on  taxidermic  methods,  and  has  published
"  Canoe  and  Rifle  on  the  Orinoco,"  a  serial  in  the
"Youth's  Companion"  (1885);  "  Two  Years  in  the
Jungle" (New York, 1885); and "The  Buffalo


264


HORNBLOWER


HORNE


Hunt,"  a  series  of  descriptive  articles  in  a  syndi-
cate of  newspapers  and  in  book-form  (1887).

HORNBLOWER,  Josiah,  engineer,  b.  in  Staf-
fordshire, England,  23  Feb.,  1729 ;  d.  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  21  Jan.,  1809.  He  early  studied  mathematics
and  the  mechanical  sciences,  and  adopted  the  pro-
fession of  civil  engineering  while  associated  with  his
elder  brother,  then  eminent  as  an  engineer,  whom  he
accompanied  to  Cornwall  in  1745  to  assist  in  erect-
ing steam  pumping-engines.  Subsequently  he  be-
came proficient  in  all  that  pertained  to  mining  and
machinery,  and  especially  fire-engines.  In  1753  he
came  to  the  United  States  at  the  request  of  Col.
John  Schuyler,  settled  near  Belleville,  N.  J.,  and
built  a  steam-engine  for  the  neighboring  copper-
mines,  which  was  the  first  one  ever  constructed  in
this  country.  He  continued  in  the  successful  man-
agement of  these  mines  for  five  years.  During  the
French  and  Indian  war  he  received  the  commission
of  captain,  and  aided  in  the  local  defences  of  New
Jersey.  In  1760  he  opened  a  store,  and  acquired
considerable  property  by  trading.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  sided  with  the
Americans,  and  was  sent  to  the  lower  house  of  the
New  Jersey  legislature,  where  he  was  extremely
active  in  securing  the  adoption  of  measures  favor-
able to  the  colonial  forces,  also  serving  as  speaker
in  1780.  An  unsuccessful  attempt  was  made  to
abduct  him  by  the  British  troops  in  1781,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  he  was  elected  to  the  council  or
upper  branch  of  the  legislature.  He  continued  a
member  of  this  body  until  1784,  when  he  was  se-
lected to  represent  the  colony  in  the  Continental
congress.  After  two  years'  service  he  withdrew,
and  in  1793  was  again  called  to  the  supervision  of
the  New  Jersey  copper-mine  association,  but  a  year
later  retired  from  this  office.  In  1790  he  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  Essex  common  pleas,  and
he  continued  on  the  bench  by  reappointment  un-
til failing  health  compelled  his  retirement.  See
"  Josiah  Hornblower  and  the  First  Steam-Engine  in
America,"  by  William  Nelson  (Newark,  N.  J.,  1883).
— His  son,  Joseph  Coerten,  lawyer,  b.  in  Belle-
ville. N.  J.,  6  May,  1777;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  11

June,  1864.  He  was
well  instructed  at
home  in  the  classics
and  in  mathematics,
but  on  account  of
feeble  health  did  not
enjoy  the  advantages
of  a  collegiate  edu-
cation. He  studied
law  in  the  office  of
David  B.  Ogden  in
Newark,  and  on  ad-
mission to  the  bar  in
1803  became  associ-
ated with  his  pre-
ceptor in  business.
As  early  as  1820  he
was  one  of  the  presi-
dential electors,  and
cast  his  vote  for
James  Monroe.  He  was  elected  by  the  joint  meet-
ing of  the  legislature  of  New  Jersey  chief  justice
of  that  state  in  1832,  and  re-elected  in  1839,  mak-
ing his  full  term  on  the  bench  fourteen  years.  In
1844  he  was  a  member  of  the  convention  to  frame
a  constitution  for  the  state.  Soon  after  he  had  re-
tired from  the  bench,  he  was  appointed,  in  1847,
professor  of  law  in  Princeton.  He  was  a  member
and  vice-president  of  the  Philadelphia  Republican
convention  that  in  1856  nominated  John  C.  Fre-
mont for  the  presidency. In  1860  he  was  president


^*-^6><?76


TfeW^?^


of  the  electoral  college  of  New  Jersey,  which  cast
the  vote  of  that  state  for  Lincoln  and  Hamlin.  He
was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  American
Bible  society,  and  was  the  president  of  the  New
Jersey  historical  society  from  its  foundation  in
1845  until  his  death. — Joseph  Coerten's  son,  Will-
iam Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  1
March,  1820;  d.  in  Allegheny,  Pa.,  16  July,  1883,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1838,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  in  1843.  He  labored  for  five
months  as  a  missionary,  was  ordained  to  the  Pres-
byterian ministry  in  1844,  and  after  holding  a  pas-
torate in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  for  twenty-seven  years,
was  professor  of  sacred  rhetoric,  church  govern-
ment, and  pastoral  theology  in  Allegheny  theo-
logical seminary  from  1871  till  his  death.  Rutgers-
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1860.

HORNE,  Antoine,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Besancon,  Franche-Comte,  in  1608;  d.  in  Bahia,.
Brazil,  in  1697.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Jes-
uit order  in  1625,  and  was  sent  to  the  missions  of
South  America.  In  1629  he  was  attached  to  the
missions  of  Para,  and  resided  for  several  years  on  the-
borders  of  the  river  Tocantin,  where  he  acquired
a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  different  Indian  dia-
lects, and  conceived  a  strong  inclination  for  that
people,  who  had  been  kept  in  a  state  approaching
slavery  by  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  colonists.
He  resolved  to  liberate  the  Indians,  and  asked  the
assent  and  support  of  his  superiors.  Although  the-
Jesuits  had  greatly  benefited  in  South  America  by
the  existing  order  of  things,  they  resolved  to  give
Father  .Home  full  support.  The  latter  travelled
through  the  country  in  1643,  spoke  to  the  Indians  in
every  city,  village,  or  farm  he  met  on  the  way,  and
invited  them  to  make  their  home  in  the  vast
country  around  the  river  Tocantin,  where  they
would  find  freedom  and  abundance.  The  Indians
came  in  great  crowds,  and,  two  years  later,  villages
that  had  been  prosperous  were  deserted,  and  many
farms  abandoned  for  want  of  laborers.  The  Por-
tuguese colonists  became  incensed,  and  denounced
Father  Home  as  a  republican  agitator.  The  gov-
ernor of  Maranhao  thought  it  necessary  to  order
his  arrest  in  1646,  and  sent  him  to  Lisbon,  saying,
in  his  official  report,  that  florae's  preaching  con-
stituted a  danger  to  the  authority  of  the  crown,
inasmuch  as  its  result  had  already  been  the  ruin  of
a  formerly  prosperous  part  of  the  country.  John
IV.,  being  of  a  liberal  turn  of  mind,  sent  for  the
imprisoned  Jesuit,  and,  after  a  long  conversation
with  him,  expressed  his  willingness  to  let  him  re-
turn, but  the  council  of  state  opposed,  and,  in
spite  of  the  protests  of  the  patriarch  of  the  Indies
in  behalf  of  Father  Home,  the  latter  remained  in
close  confinement  till  1655,  when  he  was  released
and  returned  to  Maranhao.  This  place  was  then
governed  by  one  of  his  former  pupils,  who  allowed
him  to  resume  his  labors  among  the  Indians  in
1656.  In  1662  the  governor,  being  satisfied  that
Home's  ideas  would  improve  neither  the  Indians
nor  the  country,  ordered  him  to  desist,  and  on
his  refusal  arrested  and  sent  him  again  to  Lis-
bon as  a  prisoner.  After  three  yeai's  of  close  con-
finement, the  Jesuits  obtained  his  release,  in  1665,
from  the  regent  Luisa  de  Guzman  under  the  con-
dition that  he  would  never  return  to  America.
Home  sailed,  nevertheless,  for  Brazil,  but,  when  he-
landed  in  Bahia  in  1666,  he  was  arrested  and  con-
fined in  a  monastery,  where  he  died.  Home  left
several  manuscripts,  the  publication  of  which  was-
forbidden  by  the  Portuguese  government,  but,
through  a  fortunate  circumstance,  they  fell,  in  1844,.
at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  into  the  possession  of  Ferdinand
Denis,  who  deposited  them  in  the  National  librar;


HORXER


HORSFORD


265


I


of  Paris,  and  inserted  several  extracts  from  them
in  his  numerous  publications  about  South  America.

HORNER,  William  Edmonds,  physician,  b.  in
Warrenton,  Va.,  3  June,  1793 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa,,  13  March,  1853.  His  grandfather,  Robert,
emigrated  from  England  to  Maryland  before  the
Revolution.  William  was  educated  at  a  private
school,  studied  medicine,  and  received  his  degree
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1814.  He
had  been  commissioned  surgeon's  mate  in  the  army
in  1812,  and  served  through  the  war  with  England
on  the  Canadian  frontier.  After  his  resignation,  in
1815,  he  practised  at  Warrenton,  but  in  1816  re-
moved to  Philadelphia.  He  became,  in  1817,  dissect-
or to  Dr.  Casper  Wistar,  who  was  then  professor  of
anatomy  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in
1819  was  made  adjunct-professor  of  anatomy  under
Dr.  Philip  S.  Physick.  He  now  devoted  himself
with  zeal  to  anatomical  investigation,  and  in  1824
discovered  the  Musculus  Hornerii,  an  important
muscle  of  the  eye,  which  he  described  in  a  series  of
articles  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Medical
Sciences "  of  that  year.  When  Dr.  Physick  re-
signed the  chair  of  anatomy  in  1831,  Dr.  Horner
became  his  successor,  and  remained  in  this  office
till  his  death.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the
city  sanitary  board  during  the  cholera  epidemic  of
1832,  and  was  presented  by  the  citizens  with  a
silver  pitcher  for  his  exertions.  He  united  with
the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  1839.  and  in  1847
founded  St.  Joseph's  hospital.  In  1848  he  re-visited
Europe,  and  was  well  received  by  scientific  men.
His  health  began  to  fail  in  1841,  and  during  his
last  years  he  suffered  greatly,  but  he  continued  his
lectures  till  two  months  before  his  death.  He  left
his  fine  anatomical  collections,  valued  at  $10,000,
to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  his  large
library  to  St.  Joseph's  hospital.  Dr.  Horner  pub-
lished "  Special  Anatomv  and  Histology  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1826;  8th  ed.,  2  vols.,  1851);  "  United
States  Dissector"  (5th  ed.,  revised  by  Dr.  Henry  H.
Smith,  1856) ;  "Anatomical  Atlas " ;  and  numerous
contributions  to  medical  periodicals.  He  left
manuscripts  on  theological  and  literary  subjects.

HORR,  Asa,  physician,  b.  in  Worthington.
Ohio,  2  Sept.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Cleveland  medical  college  in  1846,  and  after  prac-
tising in  Baltimore,  Fairfield  co.,  Ohio,  removed  in
1847  to  Dubuque,  Iowa.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  examining  surgeon  in  the  recruiting  service,
and  since  1869  has  been  president  of  the  Iowa
institute  of  science  and  arts,  of  which  he  was  in
1868  one  of  the  founders.  In  1875  he  was  appointed
examining  surgeon  to  the  U.  S.  pension  bureau.  In
1864  he  established  a  private  astronomical  observ-
atory at  Dubuque,  Iowa,  and  was  the  first  to  de-
termine accurately  the  longitude  of  that  city.  Dr.
Horr  has  bestowed  much  attention  upon  botany
and  other  sciences,  and  to  perfecting  a  system  of
short-hand,  and  for  many  years  has  been  a  meteo-
rological observer  to  the  Smithsonian  institution.
He  has  written  many  professional  and  scientific
papers,  and  with  John  M.  Bigelow  published  a
"  Catalogue  of  the  Plants  of  Franklin  county,  Ohio."

HORRY,  Elias,  benefactor,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  21  June,  1743  ;  d.  there,  17  Sept.,  1834.  He
was  descended  from  a  family  of  Huguenots,  and
became  a  wealthy  citizen  of  Charleston.  He  was
distinguished  for  his  liberality,  and  gave  $10,000
to  found  a  chair  of  moral  and  political  philosophy
in  Charleston  college.  Mr.  Horry  was  mayor  of
Charleston  in  1815-18.  and  was  afterward  inter-
ested in  the  South  Carolina  railroad.

HORRY,  Peter,  Revolutionary  soldier,  b.  prob-
ably in  South  Carolina. He  distinguished  himself


in  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  was  a  brigadier-
general  under  Gen.  Francis  Marion.  In  conjunc-
tion with  Rev.  Mason  L.  Weems  (a.  v.),  he  published
a  "Life  of  Marion"  (Philadelphia,  1824),  which
has  passed  through  many  editions.  Horry  fur-
nished the  facts  for  the  work,  and  the  romantic
manner  in  which  they  were  treated  by  his  co-worker
caused  a  correspondence  between  the  two,  in  which
Horry  disclaimed  the  honor  of  joint  authorship.

HORSEY,  Outerbridge,  lawyer,  b.  in  Somerset
county,  Del.,  in  1777 ;  d.  in  Needwood,  Md.,  9
June,  1842.  He  received  an  academical  education,
studied  law  with  James  A.  Bayard,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  at  Wilmington,  Del.
He  was  attorney-general  of  Delaware  for  many
years,  and  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Delaware  to
succeed  Samuel  White,  deceased,  serving  from  29
Jan.,  1810.  till  3  March,  1821.

HORSFIELD,  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia in  1773  ;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1859.
He  was  eminent  as  a  naturalist  and  traveller,  and,
after  pursuing  for  many  years  investigations  in
natural  history  in  Java,  went  to  England  in  1820.
He  published  "  Lepidopterous  Insects  "  (London,
1857) :  and  "  Zoological  Researches  in  Java  "  (Lon-
don, 1821-'4).  The  plants  that  he  collected  were
described  in  "  Plantae  Javanicae  Rariores."

HORSFORD,  Jedediah,  soldier,  b.  in  Charlotte,
Vt.,  8  March,  1791 ;  d.  in  Livonia,  N.  Y.,  14  Jan.,
1874.  He  participated  in  the  defence  of  Burling-
ton during  the  war  of  1812,  and  in  1814  removed
to  the  Genesee  valley,  where  he  served  as  a  mis-
sionary among  the  Seneca  Indians.  After  two
years  of  this  work  he  settled  as  a  farmer,  first  at
Mount  Morris,  and  then  at  Moscow,  X.  Y.  He
became  a  leader  in  the  organization  of  the  militia
of  the  Genesee  valley  at  the  time  of  the  burning
of  Buffalo  and  the  battle  of  Lundy's  Lane,  and
acquired  the  title  of  colonel.  Subsequently  he  was
a  member  of  the  Xew  York  legislature,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  1  Dec,
1851,  till  3  March,  1853.— His  son,  Eben  Norton,
chemist,  b.  in  Moscow,  Livingston  co.,  X.  Y.,  27
July,  1818,  was  graduated  at  the  Rensselaer  poly-
technic institute  as  a  civil  engineer  in  1838,  was
engaged  on  the  geological  survey  of  the  state  of
Xew  York  under  James  Hall  in  1838-'9,  and  in
1840  appointed  to  the  professorship  of  mathematics
and  natural  sciences  in  the  Albany  female  academy,
where  he  remained  for  four  years,  also  delivering
an  annual  course  of  lectures  on  chemistry  at
Xewark  college,  Delaware,  during  this  time.  In
1844  he  went  to  Germany,  where  he  spent  two  years
studying  analytical  chemistry  and  making  experi-
mental researches  in  Liebig's  laboratory  at  Giessen.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States  early  in  1847,
he  was  elected  to  the  Rumford  professorship  of
science  applied  to  the  arts,  in  Harvard.  Soon
afterward  he  submitted  to  Abbott  Lawrence  a  plan
for  a  department  of  analytical  and  applied  chem-
istry, which  led  to  the  formation  of  the  Lawrence
scientific  school  in  Cambridge.  After  sixteen  years
of  service  in  the  earliest  organized  and  equipped
laboratorv  for  instruction  in  analytical  chemistry
in  the  United  States,  Prof.  Horsford  resigned  his
place  to  engage  in  chemical  manufactures,  and  is
now  (1887)  president  of  the  Rumford  chemical
works  in  Providence.  R.  I.  The  most  important
of  his  discoveries  relate  to  the  preparation  of  white
bread,  and  the  restoration  of  the  phosphates  that
are  lost  with  the  bran  in  milling,  and  the  "acid
phosphate,"  a  medicinal  agent.  In  recent  years,
Prof.  Horsford  has  specially  interested  himself  in
Wellesley  college,  providing  for  the  endowment  of
the  library,  continuous  supplies  of  apparatus  for


266


HORSLEY


NORTON


the  departments  of  physics,  chemistry,  botany,  and
biology,  and  for  a  system  of  pensions  to  the  presi-
dent and  heads  of  departments.  By  this,  these
officers  are  allowed  to  spend  one  year  in  seven
in  Europe,  are  given  a  progressive  augmentation
of  salary  after  twenty-one  years  of  service,  after
twenty-six  years  of  service  a  pension  of  five  hun-
dred dollars  a  year  for  life.  Prof.  Horsford  has  at-
tached the  condition  that  the  beneficiaries  must  be
women.  He  has  received  the  degrees  of  A.  M.  from
Harvard  in  1847  and  from  Union  in  1843.  and
that  of  M.  D.  from  the  medical  college  in  Castle-
ton.  Prof.  Horsford  is  one  of  the  very  few  surviv-
ing members  of  the  original  American  society  of
naturalists  and  geologists,  which  has  since  grown
into  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  and  he  is  also  a  member  of  various
scientific  and  historical  societies.  His  contribu-
tions to  scientific  literature  include  numerous
articles  which  have  appeared  since  1846  in  technical
journals.  More  than  thirty  years  ago  he  published
in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science"  the  result?  of
successful  practical  experiments  in  pouring  oil  on
rough  seas.  His  services  as  a  chemical  expert  in
courts  of  law  were  in  frequent  demand,  more
especially  during  the  period  of  the  vulcanized
rubber  litigation.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  one
of  the  government  commissioners  to  the  Vienna
exposition,  and  contributed  an  article  on  "  Hun-
garian Milling  and  the  Vienna  Bread  "  to  the  U.  S.
government  reports.  He  was  one  of  the  jurors  in
the  Centennial  exhibition  held  in  Philadelphia  in
1876.  Of  his  late  publications  there  are  several
which  show  the  results  of  his  acquaintance  with
the  Indian  language,  acquired  in  his  childhood
from  the  Indians  who  had  been  pupils  of  his  father,
notably  one  on  the  li  Indian  Names  of  Boston,"
and  one  "  On  the  Landfall  of  John  Cabot  in  1497,
and  the  Site  of  Norumbega."  These  places  had
been  lost  for  more  than  three  centuries  when  he
established  their  exact  location.  His  latest  service
has  been  the  absolute  reproduction  in  print  of  the
manuscript  Indian  dictionary  of  David  Zeisberger,
the  Moravian  missionary.  It  is  given  in  English
and  equivalent  German,  Iroquois  (Onandaga),  and
Algonquin  (Delaware).  A  large  number  of  copies
have  been  given  to  Wellesley  college  to  enable  it
by  exchange  to  provide  facilities  to  specialists  who
desire  to  study  comparative  Indian  philology. — His
wife,  Mary  L'Hoinmedieu  Gardiner,  poet,  b.  in
New  York  city,  27  Sept.,  1824;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1855,  was  the  daughter  of  Samuel
S.  Gardiner  of  Shelter  Island.  She  was  educated
at  the  Albany  female  academy,  and  in  1847  mar-
ried Prof.  Horsford.  Besides  contributing  to  the
"  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "  and  other  periodicals,
she  published  "  Indian  Legends  and  other  Poems  "
(New  York,  1855).  In  1857,  Prof.  Horsford  mar-
ried her  sister,  Phcebe  Dayton  Gardiner.

HORSLEY,  Charles  Edward,  musician,  b.  in
Kensington,  England,  16  Dec,  1821 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  28  Feb.,  1876.  He  received  the  rudi-
ments of  musical  education  from  his  father,  and
in  1839  went  to  Cassel,  Germany,  where  he  studied
under  Hauptman,  Spohr,  and  Mendelssohn.  In
1841  he  returned  to  London,  and  began  his  career
as  a  musical  composer,  writing  the  oratorios  of
"  David  "  (1849)  and  "  Joseph  "  (1852),  the  cantata
"  Comus "  (1854),  and  the  oratorio  of  "  Gideon  "
(1860).  Besides  these  he  wrote  many  anthems  and
orchestral  works.  From  London  he  went  to  Aus-
tralia, and  thence,  in  1872,  to  New  York,  where  he
became  choir-master  at  St.  John's  chapel,  which
post  he  held  until  his  death.


HORSMANDEN,  Daniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Gould-
hurst.  Kent,  England,  in  1691 ;  d.  in  Flatbush,  N.Y.,
28  Sept.,  1778.  He  was  called  to  the  city  council  of
New  York,  23  May,  1733,  and  was  afterward  re-
corder and  chief  justice  from  March,  1763,  and  also
president  of  the  council.  In  1773  he  was  appointed
a  commissioner  to  inquire  into  the  burning  of  the
king's  ship  "  Gaspe  "  by  a  party  of  Whigs  in  the
preceding  year.  In  1776,  with  Oliver  De  Lancey
and  about  one  thousand  other  residents  of  the  city
and  county  of  New  York,  he  signed  an  address  to
Lord  Howe.  He  is  buried  in  Trinity  church- vard.
Judge  Horsmanden  published  "  The  New  York
Conspiracy,  or  the  History  of  the  Negro  Plot"
(1741-'2;  re-published  in  1810),  he  having  been
one  of  the  judges  that  tried  the  supposed  conspira-
tors, and  "  Letters  to  Gov.  Clinton  *  (1747).

HORTIGOSA,  Peter  de,  R.  C.  clergyman,  b.
in  Spain  in  1546 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1626.  He  was
president  of  the  Jesuit  college  in  the  city  of  Mexi-
co, and  taught  theology  there.  He  wrote  "De
Selectis  Theologiae  Questionibus "  and  "Concilii
Mexicani  Decreta  et  Canones  "  (Mexico,  1627).

HORTON,  Azariah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Southold,
N.  Y.,  20  March,  1715 ;  d.  in  what  is  now  Chatham,
N.  J.,  27  March,  1777.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1735,  ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  New  York
in  1740,  and  went  as  a  missionary  among  the  In-
dians in  the  eastern  part  of  Long  Island.  As  the
result  of  his  labors  two  churches  are  still  in  exist-
ence, one  at  Pooseputrick,  in  the  south  of  Brook-
haven,  and  the  other  at  Shinnecock.  He  was  pas-
tor at  South  Hanover,  N.  J.,  from  1748  till  Novem-
ber, 1776.  He  left  a  bequest  of  $533  "  for  the  edu-
cation of  pious  young  men."

HORTON,  George  Firman,  phvsician.  b.  in
Terrytown,  Bradford  co.,  Pa.,  2  Jan.,  1806;  d.
there,  20  Dec,  1886.  He  was  educated  at  Rensse-
laer polytechnic  institute.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  in  the
medical  department  of  Rutgers  college,  and  began
practice  in  his  native  town  in  1829.  He  became
an  advocate  of  the  temperance  cause  in  1830,  and
was  a  member  of  the  American  anti-slavery  society
almost  from  the  time  of  its  foundation  till  the  ex-
tinction of  slavery.  He  was  for  twelve  years  treas-
urer and  town-clerk  of  his  township,  from  1830  till
1856  postmaster  at  Terrytown,  and  in  1872  was
elected  a  delegate  to  the  Constitutional  convention
of  Pennsylvania  for  revising  the  state  constitution.
He  was  a  skilful  botanist  and  entomologist.  He
published  reports  of  his  cases  in  the  "  Transac-
tions of  the  Pennsylvania  State  Medical  Society  " ;
"  Reports  on  the  Geology  of  Bradford  County "
(1858) ;  and  "  The  Horton  Genealogy  "  (1876).

HORTON,  Valentine  Baxter,  manufacturer,
b.  in  Windsor,  Vt.,  29  Jan.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Pomeroy,
Meigs  co..  Ohio,  14  Jan.,  1888.  He  was  educated
at  Partridge's  military  academy  at  Norwich,  Vt.,
and  on  its  removal  to  Middletown,  Conn.,  accom-
panied it  as  a  teacher.  He  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1830,  and  began  practice  at  Pitts-
burg, Pa.  In  1833  he  removed  to  Cincinnati,  and
in  1835  to  Pomeroy,  Ohio,  where  he  became  en-
gaged in  mining  and  manufacturing.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1850,  and  was  then  elected  a  representative  in  con-
gress as  a  Republican,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1855,
till  3  March,  1859,  and  declining  a  renomination.
He  was  a  member  of  the  peace  congress  of  1861,
and  was  again  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  4
July,  1861,  till  3  March,  1863.  He  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Ohio  university  for  the
last  forty  years  of  his  life,  and  was  five  times  a
member  of  the  general  convention  of  the  Protest-
ant Episcopal  church  of  the  United  States.


HORWITZ


HOSKIXS


267


HORWITZ,  Phineas  Jonathan,  snrgeon,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  3  March,  1822. He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  Maryland  and  at  Jefferson
medical  college. In  1847  he  entered  the U.  S.
navy  as  assistant  surgeon,  and  during  the  Mexican
war  was  in  charge  of  the  naval  hospital  at  Tobas-
Frora  1859  till  1865  he  was  assistant  to  the
aureau  of  medicine,  and  chief  of  that  bureau  in
1865-'9. He  was  promoted  surgeon  19  April,  1861,
ammissioned  medical  inspector  3  March, 1871,
ledical  director  30  June,  1873,  and  was  retired
nth  the  relative  rank  of  captain  in  1885. His  office
assistant  to  the  bureau  of  medicine  and  surgery
luring  the  war  involved  the  adjustment  of  all  the
ensions  that  accrued  to  the  wounded  and  to  the
widows  and  orphans  of  the  killed  in  the  navy ;  the
ibulation  of  medical  and  surgical  statistics ;  and
ie  general  management  of  all  financial  matters
ertaining  to  the  office. Dr.  Horwitz  projected  and
instructed  the  Naval  hospital  in  Philadelphia.
HOSACK, David, scientist,  b.  in  New York
eity,  31  Aug.,  1769 ;  d.  there,  22  Dec,  1835. His
"ither  was  a  Scotch  artillery  officer,  who  served  at
le  capture of  Louisburg in 1758. David was
■uluated  at  Princeton  in  1789,  and  received  his
medical  degree  in
the  College  of  Phil-
adelphia in 1791.
He then  removed
to  Alexandria.  Va.,
practised there a
year,  and  in  1792
went to England
and Scotland for
study. In  1794  he
returned to New
York  with  the  first
collection  of  min-
erals that  had  been
introduced into
this country, and
the  duplicate col-
/^Z^^^r^e  s9^^^c lection of plants
V, -  \  from the  herbari-

um of  Linnaeus,
which  now  constitutes  a  part  of  the  museum  of
the  Lyceum  of  natural  history  of  New  York.  He
was  appointed  professor  of  natural  history  in  Co-
lumbia college  in  1795.  and  became  the" partner
of  its  first  president,  Dr.  Samuel  Bard,  succeed-
ing Dr.  William  Pitt  Smith  in  the  chair  of  ma-
teria medica  in  1797,  and  combining  its  duties
with  that  of  botany.  In  1807  he  became  professor
of  midwifery  and  surgery  in  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons,  afterward  occupying  the  chairs
of  the  theory  ami  practice  of  medicine  and  obstet-
rics and  the  diseases  of  women  and  children  until
1826,  when,  with  Dr.  Valentine  Mott,  Dr.  John
W.  Francis,  and  others,  he  organized  the  medi-
cal department  of  Rutgers  college,  which  was
closed  in  1830.  At  different  periods  he  was  phy-
sician to  the  New  York  hospital  and  the  Bloom-
ingdale  asylum.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  and
the  first  president  of  the  New  York  historical  so-
ciety in  1820-8.  president  of  the  Horticultural,  the
Literary,  and  the  Philosophical  societies,  and  estab-
lished the  Elgin  botanic  garden.  He  edited,  with
his  friend  and  pupil,  Dr.  John  W.  Francis,  the
P  American  Medical  and  Philosophical  Monthly "
in  1810-'14.  Dr.  Hosack  made  a  special  study  of
yellow  fever,  having  himself  suffered  from  the  dis-
ease, and  his  report  on  its  character  is  one  of  the
best  that  has  ever  been  published.  His  paper  on
"Contagious  Disorders"  and  his  treatise  on
"  Vision  "  were  republished  by  the  Royal  society  of


London  (1794).  His  "  Hortus  Elginensis,"  a  scien-
tific catalogue  of  his  own  collection  of  plants,  is  a
valuable  contribution  to  botany.  He  was  the  first
surgeon  in  this  country  to  tie  the  femoral  artery  at
the  upper  third  of  the  thigh,  and  introduced  as
early  as  1795  the  operation  for  hydrocele  by  injec-
tion. He  published,  besides  many  medical  and
scientific  papers,  "  Memoir  of  Hugh  Williamson,
M.  D."  (New  York,  1820) ;  "  Essays  on  Various  Sub-
jects of  Medical  Science  "  (1824-'30) :  "  System  of
Practical  Nosology  "  (1829) ;  "Memoirs  of  DeWitt
Clinton  "  (1829) ;  and  "  Lectures  on  the  Theory  and
Practice  of  Medicine,"  edited  by  Henry  W.  Du-
cachet  (New  York,  1838). — His  son,  Alexander
Eddy,  physician,  b.  in  New  York  city,  6  April,
1805;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  2  March,  1871,  was
prevented  by  delicate  health  from  receiving  a  col-
legiate education.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1824,  and
spent  the  years  1825-'7  in  study  in  Paris.  Return-
ing to  the  United  States  in  1828  he  settled  in  New
York,  devoting  himself  especially  to  the  practice
of  surgery,  and  was  the  first  practitioner  in  the
city  that  administered  ether  as  an  anaesthetic.  He
invented  in  1833  an  instrument  for  rendering  the
operation  for  staphylorraphy  more  complete  in  its
minutiae,  was  the  first  to  introduce  Symes's  opera-
tion of  exsection  of  the  elbow  into  this  country,
and  devoted  much  time  and  study  to  the  various
modes  of  inflicting  capital  punishment,  for  the
purpose  of  discovering  the  most  humane  method.
For  many  years  he  was  attending  surgeon  of  the
marine  hospital,  and  was  a  principal  organizer  of
Ward's  island  hospital.  Among  his  original  pa-
pers are  "  Description  of  an  Instrument  for  tying
Deep-seated  Arteries"  and  "Seventy-three  Cases
of  Lithotomy  by  a  Peculiar  Operation  without
dividing  the  Prostate  Gland,  all  Successful."  His
widow,  recently  deceased,  left  $70,000  to  the  New
York  academy  of  medicine  as  a  memorial  of  her
husband,  by  the  advice  of  Dr.  Samuel  S.  Purple.
Dr.  Hosack  published  a  pamphlet  on  "  Anaesthesia,
with  Cases,  being  the  First  Instance  of  the  Use
of  Ether  in  New  York,"  and  also  a  "History  of
the  Case  of  the  Late  John  Kearnev  Rodgers,  M.  D."
(New  York.  1851).

HOSFORD,  Oramel,  educator,  b.  in  Thetford,
Vt,  7  May,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Oberlin
college,  Ohio,  in  1843,  became  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  philosophy  in  Olivet  college,  Mich.,  in
1846,  and  at  the  same  time  was  pastor  of  the  Con-
gregational church  there.  In  1864  he  was  elected
superintendent  of  public  instruction  of  the  state  of
Michigan.  He  published  "  School  Laws  of  Michi-
gan, with  Notes  and  Forms  "  (Ann  Arbor,  1869).

HOSKIN,  Robert,  wood-engraver,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  10  Feb.,  1842.  He  was  educated  in  the
public  schools,  and  studied  drawing  at  the  Brook-
lyn institute,  where  he  received  the  Graham  medal
in  1858.  He  received  the  gold  medal  for  engraving
at  the  Paris  salon  in  1883.  and  the  same  year,  at
the  French  government  exhibition,  his  exhibit  was
placed  in  the  niche  of  honor.  At  the  international
exhibition  of  the  graphic  arts,  held  at  Vienna  in
1887,  he  received  the  gold  medal  of  honor  for  his
engraving  of  "Cromwell  visiting  Milton."  Mr.
Hoskin's  work  shows  great  delicacy  and  truth-
fulness, with  a  feeling  for  line  and  tone.  He  is  at
present  (1887)  an  engraver  for  magazines.

HOSKINS,  George  Gilbert,  congressman,  b.
in  Bennington.  N.  Y.,  24  Dec,  1824.  He  engaged
in  business  in  Bennington  in  early  life,  was  town-
clerk  for  many  years,  and  justice  of  the  peace  from
1851  till  1865!  He  was  postmaster  of  Bennington
through  the  administration  of  Taylor  and  Fillmore.


268


HOSKINS


HOSMER


and  again  under  Lincoln.  In  1860,  1865,  and
1866  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  was
speaker  of  the  house  in  1865.  He  was  commis-
sioner of  public  accounts  in  1868-'71,  and  in  May,
1871,  was  appointed  by  President  Grant  collector
of  internal  revenue  for  the  29th  district  of  New
York,  resigning  in  1873  to  become  a  member  of
congress,  having  been  elected  as  a  Republican.  He
served  till  1877,  and  was  a  defeated  candidate  for
re-election  in  1878,  became  lieutenant-governor  of
New  York  in  1879,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Re-
publican convention  held  in  Chicago  in  1880.

HOSKINS,  Nathan,  author,  b.  in  Wethersfleld,
Vt.,  27  April,  1795 ;  d.  in  Williamstown,  Mass.,  21
April,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1820,  taught  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  in  1821-2,  and  the
next  ten  years  practised  law  in  Vergennes,  Vt.,  and
edited  " The  Vermont  Aurora."  In  1831-9  he  re-
sided in  Bennington,  and  in  1840  removed  to  Will-
iamstown, Mass.  He  published  "  History  of  Ver-
mont" (1831);  "Notes  on  the  West "  (18*33) ;  and
"  The  Bennington  Court  Controversy  and  Strictures
on  Civil  Libertv  in  the  United  States"  (1847-8).

HOSMER,  George  Washington,  educator,  b.
in  Canton,  Mass..  in  1804 ;  d.  there,  5  July,  1881.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1826,  and  at  the
divinity-school  there  in  1830.  He  was  pastor  of
the  Unitarian  church  in  Northfield,  Mass.,  the
next  two  years  and  a  half,  and  from  1835  was  pas-
tor in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  till  his  election  to  the  presi-
dency of  Antioch  college,  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio,  in
1862.  While  discharging  these  duties  he  was  also
non-resident  professor  of  divinity  in  the  Unitarian
theological  school  at  Meadville,  Pa.  Resigning
the  presidency  of  Antioch  in  1872,  he  continued
the  next  year  to  occupy  the  chair  of  history  and
ethics  there.  Prom  1873  till  1879  he  was  pastor
of  the  Channing  religious  society  of  Boston,  Mass.
Dr.  Hosmer  was  one  of  the  most  noted  preachers
in  the  Unitarian  church  of  his  day. — His  son,
James  Kendall,  author,  b.  in  Northfield,  Mass.,
29  Jan.,  1834,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1855.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  52d  regiment
of  Massachusetts  volunteers.  He  was  professor  in
Antioch  college  in  1866-'72,  in  1872-4  occupied
the  chair  of  English  and  German  literature  in  the
University  of  Missouri,  and  in  1874  was  elected  to
a  similar  professorship  in  Washington  university,
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  now  (1887)  resides.  He
has  published  "  The  Color-Guard  "  (Boston,  1864) ;
"The  Thinking  Bayonet"  (1865):  "A  Short  His-
tory of  German  Literature "  (St.  Louis,  1879) ;
"  Life  of  Samuel  Adams  "  ("  American  Statesmen  "
series,  Boston,  1885) ;  and  "  Story  of  the  Jews "
("  Story  of  the  Nations  "  series,  New  York,  1886).

HOSMER,  Harriet,  sculptor,  b.  in  Watertown,
Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1830.  She  was  a  delicate  child,  and
was  encouraged  by  her  father,  a  physician,  to  pur-
sue a  course  of  physical  training  by  which  she  be-
came expert  in  rowing,  skating,  and  riding.  She
travelled  alone  in  the  western  wilderness,  and  vis-
ited the  Dakota  Indians.  She  began  to  model  in
clay  at  an  early  age,  and,  after  completing  her
school  education  in  Lenox,  Mass.,  followed  the
course  of  anatomical  instruction  in  the  St.  Louis
medical  college,  and  practised  modelling  at  home,
after  receiving  a  few  lessons  in  Boston.  Her  first
work  was  a  reduced  copy  of  Canova's  Napoleon,
which  was  soon  followed  by  an  ideal  head  called
"  Hesper,"  exhibited  in  Boston  in  1852.  Going  to
Rome  with  her  father  and  Charlotte  Cushman  in
November  of  the  same  year,  she  entered  the  studio
of  John  Gibson,  the  English  sculptor.  She  copied
from  the  antique,  and  executed  ideal  busts  of
"  Daphne  "  and  "  Medusa,"  which  attracted  much


/£Zv/'a£~gu~-~^*


attention.  "  CEnone,"  her  first  figure  of  full  size,
was  completed  in  1855.  In  the  summer  of  the
same  year  she  modelled  a  statue  of  "  Puck  "  in  a
style  so  spirited
and  original  that
nearly  thirty  copies
were  ordered,  and
her  reputation  was
established  in  her
own  country.  It
was  followed  by  a
companion  figure
of  similar  concep-
tion, called  "  Will-
o'-the-Wisp."  In
1857  the  reclining
statue  of  "  Beatrice
Cenci"  was  com-
pleted for  the  St.
Louis  public  li-
brary, and  in  the
following  winter
she executed a

monument  that  found  a  place  in  the  church  of  San
Andrea  del  Frate  in  Rome.  The  colossal  statue  of
"  Zenobia,"  on  which  she  worked  for  two  years  as-
siduously, and  to  the  detriment  of  her  health,  was
completed  in  1859 ;  followed  by  a  statue  of  Thomas
H.  Benton,  that  was  cast  in  bronze,  and  erected  in
Lafayette  park,  St.  Louis.  Among  her  other  works
are  a  "  Sleeping  Fawn,"  which  was  exhibited  at  the
Dublin  exhibition  of  1865  and  the  Paris  exhibition
of  1867 ;  a  fountain  representing  a  siren  and  cupids ;
a  statue  of  the  queen  of  Naples  as  the  "  Heroine  of
Gaeta  " ;  a  fountain  representing  the  myth  of  Hy-
las  and  the  water-nymphs ;  a  monument  to  Abra-
ham Lincoln ;  and  a  gateway  for  an  art-gallery  in
England.  The  "  Sleeping  Fawn,"  which  was  twice
repeated,  was  followed  by  a  companion-piece  called
the  "Waking  Fawn."  Miss  Hosmer  resides  in
Rome.  Besides  her  skill  in  sculpture,  which  is
executive  and  technical  rather  than  creative,  she
has  exhibited  talents  for  designing  and  construct-
ing machinery,  and  devising  new  processes,  espe-
cially in  connection  with  her  own  art,  such  as  a
method  of  converting  the  ordinaiy  limestone  of
Italy  into  marble,  and  a  peculiar  process  of  mod-
elling, in  which  the  rough  shape  of  a  statue  is  first
made  in  plaster,  on  which  a  coating  of  wax  is  laid
for  working  out  the  finer  forms.

HOSMER,  Jean,  actress,  b.  near  Boston,  Mass.,
29  Jan.,  1842.  She  first  appeared  on  the  stage  in
a  ballet  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  rose  to  be  a  star  ac-
tress, performing  the  part  of  Juliet  at  the  Chestnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  in  December,  1858.
Soon  afterward  she  retired  from  the  stage,  but  re-
turned in  May,  1866,  when  she  played  the  part  of
Camille  at  the  Winter  Garden  theatre,  New  York,
and  subsequently  performed  with  success  in  the
principal  cities  of  the  United  States.

HOSMER,  Margaret,  novelist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1830.  She  was  educated  m  the  public
schools  of  that  city,  went  to  California  in  1852,  and
settled  in  San  Francisco,  where  she  became  prin-
cipal of  a  public  school.  Returning  to  Philadel-
phia  in  1860,  she  engaged  in  literary  work,  pub-
lished two  novels,  and  contributed  to  magazines.
In  1864  she  returned  to  San  Francisco,  but  since
1875  has  resided  in  Philadelphia.  She  has  pub-
lished two  novels,  "The  Morrisons"  (New  York,
1863),  and  "Blanche  Gilroy"  (1864),  and  about
twentv-five  volumes  for  juvenile  readers.

HOSMER,  Titus,  statesman,  b.  in  Watertown,
Conn.,  in  1736 ;  d.  there,  4  Aug.,  1780.  His  gran*
father,  Col.  Thomas  Titus,  of  Hawkhurst,  England,


HOSSET


HOTCHKISS


269


an  officer  in  Cromwell's  army,  came  to  Boston  on
the  accession  of  Charles  II.,  and  afterward  settled
in  Middletown,  Titus  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1757,  practised  law,  was  a  member  of  the  council
and  of  the  assembly  of  1773-'8,  speaker  in  1777,
served  in  the  Continental  congress  of  1778-'9,  and
in  1780  became  a  judge  of  the  maritime  court  of
appeals  of  the  United  States.  He  was  the  patron
of  Joel  Barlow,  who  wrote  a  much-admired  elegy
on  his  death. — His  son,  Stephen  Titus,  jurist,  b.
in  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  17G3 ;  d.  there,  5  Aug.,
1834,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1782,  and  settled  in
the  practice  of  law  at  Middletown  in  1785.  For
two  years  and  a  half  he  was  a  member  of  the  coun-
cil of  state,  and  after  the  adoption  of  the  state
constitution  was  chief  justice  of  Connecticut  from
1815  till  1833.— Titus's  brother,  Timothy,  surgeon,
b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1740;  d.  in  Canan-
daigua,  N.  Y.,  in  1820,  was  an  officer  in  the  Con-
tinental army,  served  throughout  the  war,  and  for
two  years  and  a  half  was  surgeon  on  Washington's
staff.  He  removed  to  Ontario  county,  N.  Y.,  where
his  was  one  of  the  first  two  settlements  in  the  wil-
derness. In  1798  he  was  appointed  first  judge  of
the  county. — Timothy's  son,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in
Farmington,  Conn.,  30  Aug.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Chicago,
111.,  6  March,  1861,  received  a  classical  education,
studied  law,  and,  after  practising  a  year  in  Can-
andaigua,  removed  to  Avon.  N.  Y.  During  the
war  of  1812  he  served  on  the  western  frontier.  He
was  elected  district  attorney  of  Livingston  county
in  1820,  and  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1823-'5.
declined  a  renomination,  and  resumed  practice.
— George's  son,  William  Henry  Cuyler,  poet,  b.
in  Avon,  N.  Y.,  25  May,  1814;  'd.  there,  23  May,
1877,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont
in  1841,  studied  law,  and  became  a  master  in  chan-
cery at  Avon,  and  in  1854  was  appointed  clerk  in
the  New  York  city  custom-house.  He  was  a  stu-
dent of  Indian  character  and  lore,  and  travelled  ex-
tensively among  the  tribes  of  Florida  and  Wiscon-
sin. His  mother  was  an  accomplished  woman,  and
spoke  several  Indian  dialects.  His  publications  are
*  The  Fall  of  Tecumseh,"  a  drama  (Avon.  1830) ;
"'The  Themes  of  Song"  (Rochester,  1834);  "The
Pioneers  of  Western  New  York "  (Boston,  1838) ;
f  The  Months  "  (1847) ;  "  Yonnondio.  or  the  War-
riors of  Genesee  "  (New  York,  1844) ;  "  Bird-Notes  "
<1850);  "Indian  Traditions  and  Songs"  (1850);
*'  Legend  of  the  Senecas "  (1850) ;  and  "  Poetical
Works,"  a  collection  of  the  preceding  (2  vols.,  1854).
HOSSET,  or  OSSET,  Gillis,  colonist,  b.  in
Holland;  d.  on  Delaware  bay  in  December,  1631.
He  came  to  this  country  in  command  of  a  Dutch
colony,  known  as  the  De  Vries  expedition,  which
was  sent  out  bv  a  companv  of  patroons,  and  sailed
from  the  Texel,  12  Dec,  1630,  in  the  ship  "  Wal-
rus." They  arrived  probably  in  March,  1631,  and
landed  on  the  South  (or  Delaware)  bay  at  the  Hoerkil
^or  Lewis  creek),  where  they  settled,  being  the  first
colony  on  Delaware  bay  (or  river).  They  built  a
house  "  well  beset  with  palisades  in  place  of  breast-
works," and  named  it  Fort  Optlandt.  This  served
the  colony,  which  consisted  of  thirty-two  men,  as
a  place  of  defence,  a  dwelling,  and  a  storehouse.
Conformably  to  the  custom  of  the  Dutch,  Commis-
sary Hosset  erected  a  pillar,  bearing  a  piece  of  tin,
on  which  were  traced  the  arms  of  the  United  Neth-
erlands. This  was  innocently  removed  by  an  In-
dian, which  act  was  viewed  by  Hosset  as  a  national
insult,  and,  according  to  De  Vries,  "  those  in  com-
mand at  the  house  made  such  ado  about  it  that  the
Indians,  not  knowing  how  it  was  done,  went  away
and  slew  the  chief  who  had  done  it."  whereat  the
friends  of  the  murdered  chief  attacked  the  colo-


nists, and  Commander  Hosset  and  his  entire  com-
pany were  treacherously  and  brutally  murdered.
Hosset  had  previously  been  in  this  country,  when
he  was  selected  by  Minuet  to  make  purchases  of
lands  from  the  Indians  on  the  North  river,  and  in
1631,  shortly  after  his  arrival  on  the  Delaware,  he,
with  Capt.  Heges  of  the  "  Walrus,"  made  a  pur-
chase of  lands  for  Godyn  and  Bloemaert  in  what
is  now  Cape  Mav,  N.  J.

HOSTLOT,  "Lonis,  clergvman.  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1848 ;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  1
Feb..  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
St.  Francis  Xavier.  New  York  city,  in  1868,  and
went  to  Rome,  where  he  pursued  a  course  of  the-
ology. He  was  ordained  priest  in  1873,  was  ap-
pointed vice-rector  of  the  American  college  of
Rome,  and  afterward  became  its  rector.  The  col-
lege was  in  debt,  and  he  not  only  succeeded  in  pay-
ing it,  but  acquired  sufficient  funds  to  enable  him
to  purchase  a  country  house  in  Palestrina  for  the
use  of  the  students  during  the  summer  months.
The  American  college  as  an  educational  institu-
tion soon  began  to  rank  first  among  the  colleges  of
the  Propaganda  under  his  guidance.  Dr.  Hostlot
was  made  a  monsignor  of  the  second  class  by  the
pope,  and  was  afterward  raised  to  the  rank  of  do-
mestic prelate  of  the  first  grade.  Mgr.  Hostlot
used  his  great  influence  in  Rome  for  the  benefit  of
such  of  his  countrymen  as  visited  that  city.  He
left  some  manuscripts  which  he  was  about  to  pub-
lish at  the  time  of  his  death.

HOTCHKISS,  Benjamin  Berkely,  inventor,
b.  in  Wateitown,  Conn.,  1  Oct.,  1826 ;  *d.  in  Paris,
14  Feb.,  1885.  He  was  brought  up  as  a  machinist,
and  as  early  as  1856  designed  a  rifle  field-gun,
which  was  purchased  by  the  Mexican  government.
In  1860  he  submitted  to  the  U.  S.  government  an
improved  system  of  rifling-belt  and  percussion
fuse  for  projectiles,  and  after  their  adoption  he
engaged  in  their  manufacture  in  New  York.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war,  more  Hotchkiss  shells  were  used
than  any  other  variety  except  the  Parrott  shell.
Mr.  Hotchkiss  visited  Paris  in  1867,  and  invented
an  improved  metallic  cartridge-case  as  a  substitute
for  the  paper-case  then  used  in  the  French  army.
This  form  was  purchased  by  the  French  authori-
ties, and  its  manufacture  begun  at  St.  Etienne.
He  remained  in  Paris,  where  he  made  important
improvements  in  the  guns  used  by  different  na-
tions, including  his  revolving  cannon,  which  was
adopted  in  Germany,  Holland,  Denmark,  Russia,
Italy,  Austria,  Chili,  China,  Norway,  and  the
United  States.  His  next  invention  of  importance
was  that  of  a  magazine-rifle,  devised  in  1875,
and  followed  in  1882  by  a  quick-firing  gun  that
has  since  been  adopted  in  France,  England,  and
the  United  States.  During  1882  the  firm  of  Hotch-
kiss and  Company  was  formed,  and  the  policy  was
introduced  of  manufacturing  the  guns  in  the  dif-
ferent countries  using  them.  In  this  manner  con-
nections were  established  in  Germany.  Austria,
Italy,  England,  and  Russia.  At  the  time  of  his
death,  Mr  Hotchkiss  had  the  reputation  of  being
the  first  artillerv  engineer  in  the  world,  and  up  to
July,  1886,  his  factories  had  delivered  5.037  guns,
of  which  but  two  had  ever  failed.  The  Hotchkiss
ordnance  company,  in  which  the  three  original
partners  are  managing  directors,  was  formed  in
1887,  and  arrangements  were  made  by  the  U.  S.
government  for  the  establishment  of  one  of  the
companv's  factories  in  this  country.

HOTCHKISS,  James  Harrey,  clergyman,  b.
in  Cornwall,  Conn.,  23  Feb.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Pratts-
burgh,  N.  Y.,  21  Sept.,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at
Williams  in  1800,  and  stationed  at  Prattsburg  from


270


HOTCHKISS


HOUGH


1809  till  1830.  He  published  "History  of  the
Churches  of  Western  New  York  "  (New  York,  1851).

HOTCHKISS,  Velona  Roundy,  clergyman,
b.  in  Spafford,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y..  3  June,  1815;
d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  4  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Madison  university  in  1835,  and.  entering
the  Baptist  theological  seminary  at  Hamilton,
studied  there  three  years,  and  was  ordained  in  1838
as  pastor  of  a  church  in  Poultney,  Vt.  He  was
successively  in  charge  of  churches,  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  Fall  River,  Mass.,  and  Buffalo,  N.  Y,  till
1854,  when  he  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of  eccle-
siastical history  in  the  Baptist  theological  seminary
at  Rochester,  and  afterward  to  that  of  the  Hebrew
language  and  literature.  In  1864  he  was  recalled
to  his  former  charge  in  Buffalo,  continuing  at  the
same  time  his  connection  with  the  theological
seminary.  In  1869  he  resigned  his  professorship
and  devoted  himself  to  pastoral  work  till  1879,
when  increasing  age  and  infirmities  induced  his
resignation.  In  1880  he  delivered  a  course  of  lec-
tures on  "  Expository  Preaching  "  before  the  Bap-
tist theological  seminaries  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
Chicago,  111.,  Woodstock,  Canada,  and  the  State
ministerial  association  of  Michigan.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  U.  from  Madison  university.

HOUDAN,  Luc  du,  French  hydrographer,  b.  in
Rennes  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1846.  He  entered
the  navy,  and  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  French  fleet
that  blockaded  Buenos  Ay  res  in  1840-'3.  He  was
sent  several  times  to  make  hydrographic  observa-
tions through  the  country,  was  in  Buenos  Ayres  at
the  outbreak  of  the  riots  that  desolated  that  city
in  April,  1843,  and  barely  escaped  death.  Return-
ing to  France  in  December  of  the  same  year,  he
Eublished  "  Histoire  et  vue  pittoresques  des  sites  de
iuenos  Ayres  "  (Paris,  1844) ;  "  Le  systeme  pluvial
dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud"  (1844);  "Le  cours  du
Parana  jusqu'a  sa  junction  avec  le  Paraguay"
(2  vols.,  1845,  with  charts) ;  and  "  Releve  hydro-
graphique  de  l'Uruguay "  (2  vols.,  1845,  with
charts).  After  his  death  appeared  "  La  situation
politique  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud,  et  de  l'avenir  de
ces  pays  "  (Paris,  1846) ;  "  Releve  hydrographique
du  cours  du  Paraguay  "  (1846) ;  and  "  Hydrographie
et  geodesie  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud"  (1847).

HOUDE,  Frederick,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Riviere  du  Loup,  Canada,  23  Sept.,  1847.  He  was
educated  at  Nicolet  college,  edited  Canadian  pa-
pers in  the  United  States  for  six  years,  and  in  1874
became  editor  of  the  "  Nouveau  Monde  "  of  Mon-
treal. While  in  the  United  States  he  initiated  the
movement  for  the  return  of  Canadians  in  that
country  to  Canada,  which  was  afterward  partially
adopted  by  the  Dominion  and  Quebec  governments.
Mr.  Houde  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment in  1879  as  a  Conservative.  He  advocates  the
commercial  independence  of  Canada.

HOUDETOT,  Francois  Lauriot  de  (hoo-deh-
to'),  French  adventurer,  b.  in  Avranches  in  1617;
d.  in  Martinique  in  1659.  He  entered  the  service
of  the  West  Indian  company,  and  went  in  1635  to
St.  Christopher,  and  afterward  to  Martinique.
When  the  newly  appointed  governor-general  of  St.
Christopher,  Patrocle  de  Thoisy,  sought  help  of
Diel  Duparquet,  governor  of  Martinique,  against
the  rebel  commander,  Louvilliers  de  Poincy,  Du-
parquet left  Houdetot  in  command.  The  expedi-
tion proved  unsuccessful,  and  Poincy,  sailing  for
Martinique,  summoned  Houdetot  to  submit  to  his
authority,  promising  him  the  government  of  the
colony.  Houdetot  sternly  refused,  and,  having
called  to  arms  every  able-bodied  man  in  the  colo-
ny, obliged  Poincy  to  retire,  securing  also  the  re-
lease of  Duparquet  in  1648. Meanwhile  he  had


successfully  terminated  a  rebellion  that  had  been
incited  by  Capt.  Boutain,  an  agent  of  Poincy,  in
1646.  The  colony  being  again  pacified,  Houdetot
was  sent  with  a  force  of  100  men  to  Santa-Alousia,
or  Santa  Lucia,  conquered  it  from  the  Caribs  in
1648,  and,  importing  some  laborers  from  Marti-
nique, established  a  colony.  Two  years  later  Du-
parquet added  the  government  of  Granada  to  that
of  Santa  Lucia,  and  Houdetot  conquered  and  colo-
nized that  island.  In  1654  the  Caribs,  incited  by  a
half-breed  Englishman  named  Warner,  began  a
bloody  war,  lasting  three  years,  in  which  the
French  were  several  times  on  the  verge  of  ruin.
Houdetot,  with  a  handful  of  soldiers,  contrived  to
pacify  his  own  governments,  and  landing  in  Mar-
tinique rescued  Duparquet,  who  had  been  sur-
rounded in  his  house,  wounded,  and  his  forces  re-
duced to  twelve  men,  and,  chasing  the  Caribs,
inflicted  on  them  a  decisive  defeat.  Duparquet
died  in  the  following  year,  leaving  the  government
of  Martinique  to  his  wife,  with  a  recommendation
to  seek  the  advice  of  Houdetot ;  but  the  violent
temper  of  Mme.  Duparquet  brought  about  troubles,
during  which  Houdetot  found  a  premature  death.

HOUDON,  Jean  Antoine  (oo-don'),  French
sculptor,  b.  in  Versailles,  France,  20  March,  1740;
d.  in  Paris,  15  July,  1828.  He  studied  his  art  un-
der Michel  Ange  Slodtz,  and  later  under  Pigale,
and  while  in  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts,  when  only
nineteen  years  of  age,  took  the  first  prize  for  sculp-
ture, which  involved  a  residence  in  Italy.  He  spent
ten  years  in  Rome  at  a  period  when  the  exca-
vation of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii,  and  the
writings  of  Winckelmann,  had  given  new  impulse
to  art.  Among  other  works  he  there  finished  a
colossal  statue  of  St.  Bruno,  of  which  Clement
XIV.  said:  "He  would  speak,  if  the  rule  of  his
order  did  not  prescribe  silence."  Returning  to
Paris,  he  executed  during  the  next  fifteen  years
many  masterpieces,  which  placed  him  in  the  front
rank  of  French  sculptors  and  procured  his  admis-
sion to  the  academy.  In  1785. he  accompanied
Franklin  to  the  United  States  to  prepare  a  model
for  the  statue  of  Washington  which  had  been  or-
dered by  the  state  of  Virginia,  and  passed  two
weeks  at  Mount  Vernon  for  that  purpose.  The
statue,  bearing  the  sculptor's  legend,  "Fait  par
Houdon,  citoyen  francais,  1788,"  and  which  now
stands  in  the  hall  of  the  capitol  at  Richmond,  is
clad  in  the  uniform  of  an  American  Revolutionary
officer,  and,  according  to  the  testimony  of  personal
friends  of  Washington,  is  in  many  respects  the
best  representation  of  him  that  ever  has  been  made.
Among  Houdon's  later  works  were  busts  of  Napo-
leon and  Josephine,  and  other  celebrities  of  the
first  empire,  and  the  noted  statue  of  Cicero  in  the
palace  of  theLuxembourg.  After  the  execution  of
the  latter  work  he  lost  his  memory,  and  was  com-
pelled to  give  up  his  profession.  He  had  none  of
the  other  common  infirmities  of  age,  and  so  vener-
able was  his  appearance  that  the  artist  Gerard
introduced  him  in  his  picture,  "Entry  of  Henri
IV.  into  Paris,"  as  one  of  the  magistrates  who  pre-
sented the  king  with  the  keys  of  the  city.

HOUGH,  Franklin  Benjamin  (huff),  author,
b.  in  Martinsburg,  N.  Y.,  20  July,  1820 ;  d.  in  Low-
ville,  N.  Y.,  6  June,  1885.  His  father,  Dr.  Horatio  G.
Hough,  emigrated  from  Southwick,  Mass.,  ami  was
the  first  physician  in  Lewis  county,  N.  Y.  Frank-
lin was  graduated  at  Union  in  1843,  and  at  Cleve-
land medical  college  in  1848,  and,  after  teaching
for  several  years,  practised  medicine  in  Somer-
ville,  N.  Y.,  in  1848-52,  and  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in
1854-'60.  In  1862  he  entered  the  U.  S.  volunteer
service  as  regimental surgeon,  and  served nine


HOUGH


HOUGHTON


271


months  in  the  Maryland  and  Virginia  campaigns.
He  then  settled  in  Lowville,  N.  Y.,  and  devoted
himself  to  scientific  and  historical  studies.  He
was  superintendent  of  the  state  census  in  1865,
preparing  the  pamphlet  of  instruction  by  order  of
the  legislature,  and  for  several  years  was  chief  of
the  forestry  division  of  the  U.  S.  department  of
agriculture.  He  published,  besides  many  pam-
phlets, reviews,  and  essays,  "  A  Catalogue  of  Plants
m  Lewis  and  Franklin  Counties,  N.  Y."  (Albany,
1847) :  "  History  of  St.  Lawrence  and  Franklin
Counties,  N.  Y."  (1853);  "Plan  for  seizing  and
carrying  to  New  York  William  Goffe,  the  Regicide  "
(1855)  ;  "  Papers  relating  to  Cromwell  County,
N.  Y."  (1856) ;  "  Proceedings  of  the  Commission-
ers of  Indian  Affairs  "  (1861) :  an  annotated  transla-
tion of  Badan's  "Guerre  de  Crimee,"  under  the
title  of  "Military  and  Hospital  Camps"  (New
York,  1862) ;  "  History  of  Duryea's  Campaign "
(1864) ;  "  Washingtoniana,  or  Memorials  of  the
Death  of  George  Washington "  (Roxbury,  Mass.,
1865):  "The  Siege  of  Charleston,  May  12,  1780"
(Albany,  1867) ;  "  The  Duty  of  Government  in  the
Preservation  of  Forests "  (Salem,  1873);  "Ameri-
can Biographical  Notes  "  (Albany,  1875) ;  and  "  Re-
port on  Forestry "  (Washington,  1878-80).

HOUGH,  George  Washington,  astronomer,  b.
in  Tribes  Hill,  Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Oct.,
1836.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1856,  and
then  directed  his  attention  to  astronomy.  In  1860
he  was  appointed  astronomer  and  director  of  the
Dudley  observatory,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained until  1874,  devoting  his  time  to  meridian
observations  of  zone  stars  and  meteorology.  In
1879  he  was  called  to  the  directorship  of  Dearborn
observatory,  Chicago,  where  he  has  since  remained.
His  work  in  this  place  has  included  mierometrical
measurements  and  discovery  of  double  stars,  and
physical  observations  on  the  planet  Jupiter.  Of
the  double  stars,  300  different  ones  have  been  dis-
covered by  him,  and  a  catalogue  of  209  prepared
for  publication.  He  has  made  many  improvements
in  the  apparatus  used  in  astronomy,  and  his  inven-
tions include  a  star-charting  machine  (1862) ;  an  au-
tomatic registering  and  printing  barometer  (1865) ;
the  same  applied  to  the  thermometer  and  other  me-
teorological apparatus  now  tised  by  the  U.  S.  signal
service  and  others  (1866) ;  a  barograph  and  thermo-

fraph  for  recording  meteorological  phenomena  at
efinite  intervals,  also  used  by  the  U.  S.  signal
service  (1869) ;  a  printing  chronograph  (1871),  re-
modelled and  improved  (1885)  (this  is  the  only  print-
ing chronograph  in  the  world);  a  recording  chro-
nograph (1879) ;  and  an  observing-seat  for  equato-
rial telescope  (1880),  now  used  by  the  principal  ob-
servatories in  the  United  States.  More  recently  he
has  invented  a  sensitometer  and  an  exposing  base
and  plate-holder  (1884).  He  is  a  member  of  several
scientific  societies,  and,  besides  numerous  miscel-
laneous contributions  on  astronomical  and  other
scientific  subjects  to  American  and  foreign  jour-
nals, he  has  published  "  Annals  of  Dudley  Observa-
tory" (2  vols.,  Albany,  1866-'71)  and  "Annual  Re-
ports of  Dearborn  Observatory  "  (Chicago,  1880-6).
HOUGH,  Jacob  B.,  physician,  b.  in  Camar-
go,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  23  June,  1829.  He  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Michigan  in  1863,  and  for  two  years
taught  analytical  and  medical  chemistry  there,  but
resigned  a  few  months  before  the  termination  of
the  civil  war,  to  enter  the  army.  He  practised  in
Ohio  in  1866-'72,  and  in  1875  became  professor  of
chemistry  and  toxicology  in  Miami  medical  college,
Cincinnati,  where  he  has  resided  since  1873,  work-
ing as  an  analytical  and  consulting  chemist. He


has  published  various  papers  on  chemical,  physical,
and  medical  subjects,  and  has  invented  numerous
mechanical  and  technological  devices.  Among  his
papers  are  "Chlorinated  Anaesthetics,"  "Report
on  Medical  Chemistry,"  "  First  Phases  of  Living
Forms,"  "  Melanoidin,  a  New  Compound,"  "  Origin
of  Animal  Heat,"  and  "  Report  of  the  Analysis  of
School-room  Atmospheres,  in  the  tenth  annual
report  of  the  Cincinnati  health  department  (1876.)

HOUGH,  John  Stockton,  physician,  b.  in
Yardley,  Bucks  co.,  Pa..  5  Dec,  1845.  His  ances-
tor, Richard  Hough,  of  Cheshire,  England,  was  a
follower  of  William  Penn,  came  to  this  country  in
1683,  and  bought  a  large  tract  of  land,  now  Yard-
ley,  Pa.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Supreme  execu-
tive council  of  Pennsylvania,  and  a  representative
in  the  provincial  assembly,  till  he  was  drowned  in
1704.  John  Stockton  finished  his  preparatory  edu-
cation at  the  Polytechnic  college.  Philadelphia,
1867,  where  he  became  master  of  chemistry  in  1870,
and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1868,  and  in  that  year  became  adjunct
professor  of  experimental  chemistry  at  the  Phila-
delphia high-school.  He  was  a  resident  physician
to  the  Philadelphia  hospital,  1868-'9,  after  which
he  was  a  physician  in  Philadelphia  till  1874.  He
has  invented  a  process  of  constructing  fire-proof
buildings,  and  various  surgical  instruments,  and  is
the  author  of  numerous  papers  on  biology,  specula-
tive physiology,  social  science,  vital  statistics,  etc.,
a  complete  list  of  which  is  contained  in  the  "  Index
Catalogue  of  the  Library  of  the  Surgeon-General's
Office,"  Washington,  D.  C.  At  present  (1887)  he  is
compiling  a  bibliography  of  medical  literature.

HOUGHTON,  Douglas,  naturalist,  b.  in  Trov,
N.  Y.,  21  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.  on  Lake  Superior,  13  Oct.,
1845.  At  an  early  age  he  removed  to  Fredonia,  N.  Y.
He  erected  a  hermitage  in  his  father's  orchard,
where  he  engaged  in  various  researches.  Among  his
experiments  was  the  manufacture  of  percussion-
powder,  which  had  been  recently  invented.  An
explosion  occurred  in  which  he  was  blown  up  with
his  manufactory.  Although  receiving  no  serious
injury,  he  bore  evidence  of  this  accident  through-
out his  life.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Rensselaer
polytechnic  institute  in  1829,  remained  there  as
assistant,  and  in  the  following  year  was  appointed
adjunct  to  the  junior  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  history.  He  delivered  a  course  of  scientific
lectures  in  Detroit  in  1830,  which  attracted  large
audiences.  In  1831  he  was  licensed  to  practise
medicine  by  the  medical  society  of  Chautauqua
county,  and  at  this  time  served  as  physician  and
botanist  on  the  government  expedition  organized
by  Henry  R.  Schoolcraft  to  explore  the  sources  of
Mississippi  river.  His  report  on  the  botany  of  this
region  proved  his  extensive  knowledge  of  the  flora
of  the  northwest,  and  extended  his  reputation.  He
settled  in  Detroit,  where  he  practised  as  a  physician
and  surgeon  from  1832  till  1837,  when  he  projected
the  geological  survey  of  Michigan,  and  received  the
appointment  of  state  geologist.  In  1838  he  was
appointed  professor  of  geology,  mineralogy,  and
chemistry  in  the  University  of  Michigan.  In  1840
he  explored  the  southern  coast  of  Lake  Superior,
the  results  of  which  research  he  reported  to  the
legislature.  In  1842  he  was  elected  mayor  of  De-
troit. He  was  a  member  of  the  National  institute
of  Washington,  D.  C,  of  the  Boston  society  of
natural  history,  an  honorary  member  of  the  Royal
antiquarian  society  of  Copenhagen,  and  of  other
scientific  and  literary  associations.  He  lost  his  life
while  engaged  in  a  new  government  survey  on  Lake
Superior.  Anxious  to  arrive  at  his  destination,  he
did  not  heed  the  warnings  of  the  threatened  snow-


272


HOUGHTON


storm,  his  frail  boat  encountered  the  violent  sea,
and  he  was  drowned.

HOUGHTON,  George  Frederick,  jurist,  b.  in
Guilford,  Vt.,  31  May,  1820;  d.  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,
22  Feb.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Vermont  in  1839,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1841.  In  1848-'9  he  was  state  secre-
tary of  civil  and  military  affairs,  and  in  1852-'3
state's  attorney  for  Franklin  county.  The  next
year  he  established  the  "  Vermont  Transcript,"  and
was  subsequently  connected  with  the  "Church
Journal,"  New  York.  Mr.  Houghton  was  a  founder,
and  at  the  time  of  his  death  president,  of  the  Ver-
mont historical  society,  and  had  contributed  largely
to  historical  and  biographical  literature.

HOUGHTON,  George  Washington  Wright,
author,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  12  Aug.,  1850 ;  d.*
in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  1  April,  1891.  During  1868  he
became  editor  of  the  "  Hub,"  a  trade-paper,  pub-
lished in  New  York  city.  He  was  one  of  the  incor-
porators of  the  society  of  Sons  of  the  Revolution,
and  was  its  second  secretary.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Legend  of  St.  Olafs  Kirk  "  (Boston,  1881)  and
"  Niagara,  and  other  Poems  "  (1883).

HOUGHTON,  Henry  Clark,  physician,  b.  in
Roxbury,  Mass.,  22  Jan.,  1837.  He  was  graduated
at  Bridge  water  normal  school  in  1859,  where  he
was  made  instructor.  He  received  his  medical
degree  from  the  New  York  university  in  1867,  and
in  that  year  was  appointed  resident  physician  to
the  Five  Points  house  of  industry,  which  place  he
held  till  1869.  From  1868  till  1870  he  was  pro-
fessor of  physiology  in  the  New  York  homoeopathic
college,  and  from  1869  till  1872  professor  of  physi-
ology in  the  New  York  college  for  women.  In  1868
he  was  appointed  surgeon  to  the  New  York  oph-
thalmic hospital,  which  post  he  now  holds  (1887).
For  two  years  he  was  individual  relief  agent  in  the
Christian  commission.  He  is  now  dean  and  pro-
fessor in  the  College  of  New  York  ophthalmic  hos-
Eital,  professor  of  clinical  otology  in  New  York
omceopathic  medical  college,  president  of  the
American  homoeopathic  ophthalmological  and  oto-
logical  society  since  1881,  and  president  of  the
Homoeopathic  medical  societies  of  New  York  coun-
ty and  New  York  state.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Lec-
tures on  Clinical  Otology  "  (Boston,  1885)..

HOUGHTON,  Henry  Oscar  (ho'-ton),  publish-
er, b.  in  Sutton,  Vt.,  30  April,  1823.  He  attended
the  academy  in  Bradford,  Vt.,  learned  the  printer's
trade  in  Burlington,  and  worked  at  it  in  Nunda,
N.  Y.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Ver-
mont in  1846,  and
failing  to  obtain  a
place  as  teacher
went  to  Boston  and
engaged  as  reporter
for  the  "  Traveller."
In  1849  he  became  a
member  of  the  firm
of  Bolles  &  Hough-
ton, printers,  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,
and  in  1852  estab-
lished in  that  city
the  Riverside  Press,
under  the  firm-name
of  H.  O.  Houghton
S&  d  A^—r<C^^r- and  Co..  of which

head.  In  1864  he  became  a  member  of  the  pub-
lishing-firm of  Hurd  and  Houghton,  which  in  1878
was  succeeded  by  that  of  Houghton,  Osgood  and  Co.,
and  in  1880  by  that  of  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Co.
By  the  change  of  1878  it  acquired  the  large  list  of


HOUSE

the  old  Ticknor  and  Fields  house,  which  included
many  famous  American  authors  of  the  general  ion
of  Emerson,  Longfellow,  Whittier,  and  Holmes.
When  Mr.  Houghton  was  an  apprentice  in  Burling-
ton, an  unknown  man  one  day  walked  into  the  of-
fice, handed  him  a  printed  slip,  and  said :  "  My
lad,  when  you  use  these  words,  spell  them  as  here,
theater,  center,"  etc.  It  was  Noah  Webster,  whose
great  dictionary  is  now  printed  at  the  Riverside
Press,  where  several  presses  are  constantly  at  work
upon  it.  Among  the  notable  books  that  have  been
produced  there  are  fac-simile  reprints  of  the  "  Bay
Psalme  Book,"  and  Cromwell's  "Souldier's  Bible,"
"Notes  on  Columbus,"  edited  by  Harrisse,  Win-
sor's  "History  of  America,"  and  the  illustrated
edition  of  Longfellow's  works.  In  1872  Mr.  Hough-
ton was  elected  mavor  of  Cambridge.

HOUGHTON,  Sherman  0.,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York,  10  April,  1828.  His  grandfather  served  in
the  Revolution,  and  his  father  was  a  captain  of
artillery  during  the  war  of  1812.  The  son  was
educated  at  a  commercial  institute  in  New  York,
and  entered  the  army  as  a  private  in  1846,  serving
throughout  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  being  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  lieutenant.  In  1846  he  went
to  California  by  Cape  Horn.  He  became  interested
in  gold-mining,  and  was  mayor  of  San  Jose  in
1855-6.  In  1857  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and,
owing  to  his  knowledge  of  French  and  Spanish,
and  Spanish  and  Mexican  land-grants,  he  soon  ac-
quired a  large  practice.  During  the  civil  war  he
served  as  inspector  of  militia.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  1871  till
1875  on  the  committees  on  post-offices  and  post-
roads,  the  Pacific  railroad,  and  weights  and  meas-
ures. In  1881  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner
to  investigate  the  affairs  of  the  U.  S.  mint  in
San  Francisco.  He  now  (1887)  resides  in  Los
Angeles,  Cal.,  and  practises  law.

HOUSE,  Edward  Howard,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1836.  His'  father,  Timothy
House,  b.  in  1814.  was  an  engraver  of  distinction,
engaged  in  bank-note  engraving  from  1834  till  his
death  in  1864.  The  son  educated  himself,  and
from  1850  till  1853  studied  music,  and  during  this
period  his  light  orchestral  compositions  were  per-
formed in  Boston.  He  was  also  an  engraver  on
steel  in  the  New  England  and  American  bank-
note companies.  He  was  part  proprietor,  associate
editor,  and  musical  and  dramatic  critic  of  the  Bos-
ton "  Courier  "  from  1854  till  1858 ;  special  corre-
spondent, associate  editor,  and  dramatic  and  mu-
sical critic  of  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  from  1859
till  1873 ;  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  New  York
"  Times  "  in  1870 :  and  from  1874  till  1876  was  cor-
respondent from  Japan  and  Formosa  of  the  New
York  "  Herald."  From  1871  till  1873  he  was  pro-
fessor of  the  English  language  and  literature  in
the  University  of  Tokio,  Japan.  He  has  trav-
elled through  North  and  South  America,  in  Eu-
rope, Africa,  eastern  Asia,  Japan,  China,  and  un-
explored parts  of  Formosa.  He  has  labored  with
energy  for  fifteen  years  to  defend  Japan  from  for-
eign powers,  and  especially  devoted  himself  to  se-
curing the  return  of  the  "  Simonoseki  Indemnity"
from  the  United  States  government,  which  was
effected  in  1882.  His  publications  are  "  The  Si-
monoseki Affair"  (Tokio,  1874) ;  "The  Kaposi  ma
Affair  "  (1874) ;  "  The  Japanese  Expedition  to  For-
mosa "  (1875) ;  "  Japanese  Episodes  (Boston.  1882) ;
and  "  The  Tokio  Times,"  a  weekly  periodical,  his
exclusive  work  (Tokio,  1877-'80).

HOUSE,  James,  soldier,  b.  about  1775:  d.  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  17  Nov.,  1834.  lie  was  ap-
pointed to  the  army  from  Pennsylvania,  and  be-


:


HOUSE


HOUSTON


273


came  lieutenant  in  the  1st  artillerists  and  engineers,
22  Feb.,  1799,  and  district  paymaster,  16  March,
1802.  He  was  made  captain,  1  Nov.,  1805,  and  on  3
March,  1813,  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d
artillery.  He  was  made  colonel  of  the  1st  artillery,  8
May,  1822,  and  brevetted  brigadier-general,  8  May,
1832.  for  ten  years'  faithful  service  in  one  grade.

HOUSE,  James  Alford,  inventor,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  April,  1838.  He  was  educated  as  an
architect,  but  his  taste  was  for  invention,  and  in
1864  he  became  the  mechanical  engineer  of  the
Wheeler  and  Wilson  manufacturing  company.
The  button-hole  machine  made  by  this  corporation
was  invented  by  him  in  1862,  and  the  button-hole
attachment  for  their  family  sewing-machine  was

{atented  by  him  in  1866.  He  has  also  invented  an
ndia-rubber  trunk  shield  and  several  sewing-
machine  improvements,  including  an  ingenious
adaptation  of  the  variable  motion  by  means  of  a
steel  pin  moving  over  unequal  distances  in  equal
times  in  a  slotted  disk.

HOUSE,  Royal  Earl,  inventor,  b.  in  Rocking-
ham, Vt.,  9  Sept..  1814.  He  early  became  inter-
ested in  mechanics,  chemistry,  and  magnetism,
and  devoted  much  time  to  their  study.  The  prac-
ticability of  the  printing-telegraph  became  manifest
to  him,  and  he  invented  a  keyboard,  a  single  line
of  insulated  electric  conductors,  magnets,  type-
w*heels,  automatic  platens,  and  paper-carriers,  for
several  stations,  adapted  for  transmitting  and
■  printing  messages  in  Roman  characters.  This  in-
"  vention  was  first  put  in  operation  and  exhibited
at  the  Mechanics'  institute.  New  York,  in  1844.
Although  the  first  of  its  kind,  it  attained  a  speed
of  transmission  of  over  fifty  words  a  minute.  Sub-
sequently efforts  were  made  by  the  representatives
of  the  Morse  patents  to  enjoin  the  use  of  the  print-
ing-telegraph ;  but  after  much  litigation  Mr.  House
was  sustained.  He  has  since  made  other  impor-
tant inventions  in  the  art  of  telegraphy.

HOUSTON,  David  Crawford,  engineer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  5  Dec,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856.  and  was  retained
at  the  academy  as  assistant  professor  of  natural
and  experimental  philosophy  until  September,  1857,
when  he  was  placed  on  construction  of  fortifica-
tions at  Hampton  Roads,  Va.  From  1856  till  1860
he  commanded  a  detachment  of  engineer  troops  in
Oregon,  after  which  he  was  assistant  engineer  in
the  construction  of  a  fort  on  Sandy  Hook,  N.  J.
During  the  civil  war,  as  1st  lieutenant  of  the  engi-
neer corps,  he  aided  in  constructing  the  defences  of
Washington.  D.  C.  He  was  at  Blackburn's  Ford
and  Bull  Run  as  engineer  of  Gen.  Tyler's  division,
and  as  chief  engineer  1st  army  corps,  department
of  the  Rappahannock.  He  was  with  the  3d  army
corps  in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run  and  of  Cedar
Mountain,  after  which  he  was  brevetted  captain.
He  became  chief  engineer  of  the  1st  corps,  Army
of  the  Potomac,  in  the  Maryland  campaign,  and
was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  South  Mountain  and
I Antietam,  where  he  was  brevetted  major,  17  Sept.,

1862.  He  was  in  charge  of  the  defences  of  Har-

Ser's  Ferry,  Va.,  and  of  the  Department  of  the  Gidf
uring  the  siege  of  Port  Hudson,  La.,  in  March,

1863,  for  which  service  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel,  17  June,  1863.  He  took  part  in  the  expe-
dition to  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Grande,  1863,  and
in  the  Red  River  campaign  in  April,  1864.  He  was
a  member  of  the  special  board  of  engineers  for  the
defences  of  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  in  1864-'5.  On  13
March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  colonel  for  "  gallant
and  meritorious  services  during  the  rebellion."
He  served  on  the  board  for  defences  of  Willet's
Point,  N.  Y.,  in 1865,  and  from  1865  till  1867  on

vol.  m. — 18


the  board  to  carry  out  in  detail  the  modifications
of  the  defences  near  Boston,  as  proposed  by  the
board  of  27  Jan.,  1864.  He  was  also  superintend-
ing engineer  of  the  construction  of  the  defences  of
Narragansett  bay.  R.  I.,  in  1865 ;  of  the  river  and
harbor  improvements  in  Rhode  Island  and  Con-
necticut from  1866  till  1870 :  and  of  surveys  and
improvements  of  various  rivers  in  Wisconsin  since
July,  1870.  In  1868  he  was  a  member  of  the  board
of  engineers  on  Block  Island  breakwater,  on  the
wreck  of  the  steamer  "  Scotland,''  and  on  the  im-

frovement  of  Ogdensburg  and  Oswego  harbors,
n  1869  he  served  on  the  Wallabout  channel  and
in  the  New  York  navy  yard.  In  1871  he  was
charged  with  the  plans  for  docks  in  Chicago  break-
water, and  from  1872  till  December,  1875,  was  en-
gaged in  constructing  harbors  in  the  northwest.
He  was  also  superintending  engineer  on  modifica-
tions proposed  for  Michigan  city  harbor,  Ind..  in
July,  and  on  the  improvement  of  Fox  and  Wis-
consin rivers  in  August,  1878.  He  became  major
of  the  corps  of  engineers  on  7  March,  1867,  lieu-
tenant-colonel, 30  June,  1882,  and  since  1886  has
been  a  member  of  the  board  of  engineers  for  forti-
fications and  river  and  harbor  improvements.

HOUSTON,  George  Smith,  governor  of  Ala-
bama, b.  in  Williamson  county,  Tenn.,  17  Jan.,
1811 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Limestone  co.,  Ala.,  17  Jan.,
1879.  At  an  early  age  he  removed  to  Limestone
county,  Ala.,  where  he  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1831.  He  practised  with  suc-
cess, and  served  in  the  state  legislature  for  two
sessions.  In  1836  he  became  state's  attorney  for
the  Florence  judicial  district,  after  which  he  served
a  second  time  in  the  legislature.  He  was  elected
as  a  Democrat  to  congress  in  1841.  and  was  so  con-
tinued by  successive  elections  till  1849,  when  he
resumed  his  law  practice.  In  1851  he  was  again
elected  to  congress,  serving  on  several  important
committees,  and  officiating  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  judiciary  and  on  that  of  ways  and
means.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  special  com-
mittee of  thirty-three.  He  retired  in  1861,  when
Alabama  seceded.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Phila-
delphia national  union  convention  of  1866.  In
1874  he  was  governor  of  Alabama.

HOUSTON,  John,  governor  of  Georgia,  b.  in
Waynesboro,  Ga.,  31  Aug.,  1744 ;  d.  at  White
Bluff,  near  Savannah,  Ga.,  20  July,  1796.  He  was
a  son  of  Sir  Patrick  Houston,  and  early  distin-
guished in  the  revolutionary  movement.  In  1774
he  was  one  of  four  citizens  who  called  the  first
meeting  of  the  Sons  of  Liberty  in  Savannah.
This  meeting,  of  which  he  was  chairman,  was  held
at  the  watch-house,  where  letters  from  the  north-
ern committees  were  read,  and  a  committee  to  draft
resolutions  was  appointed.  On  15  June,  1775,  he
was  sent  as  a  representative  to  congress,  where  he
was  a  member  of  the  first  naval  committee.  He
was  again  a  delegate  to  congress  in  1776,  and
would  have  signed  the  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence had  he  not  been  called  to  Georgia  in  order  to
counteract  the  influence  of  Dr.  Zubly,  a  delegate
from  that  state,  who  had  left  his  seat  in  congress
to  oppose  the  movement.  On  8  May,  1777,  he  was
made  a  member  of  the  state  executive  council.
While  holding  this  office  he  co-operated  with  Gen.
Robert  Howe  in  an  invasion  of  eastern  Florida.
When  they  arrived  at  the  St.  Mary's  river,  farther
progress  was  prevented,  and,  as  he  was  unwilling
to  relinquish  the  command  of  the  Georgia  militia
to  Gen.  Howe,  a  misunderstanding  arose,  which
was  one  of  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  expe-
dition. On  8  Jan.,  1778,  he  was  elected  governor
of  Georgia,  which  office  he  held  again  in  1784. In


274


HOUSTON


HOUSTON


1787  he  was  appointed  by  the  general  assembly  a
commissioner  for  settling  disputes  respecting  the
boundary-line  between  Georgia  and  South  Caro-
lina ;  but  he  differed  with  the  other  commission-
ers, and  protested  against  their  proceedings.  This
protest  is  contained  in  Marbury  and  Crawford's
"  Digest."  He  was  an  able  lawyer,  and  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1792.

HOUSTON,  Samuel,  president  of  Texas,  b.  in
Rockbridge  county,  Va.,  2  March.  1793 ;  d.  in
Huntsville,  Walker  co.,  Texas,  25  July,  1863.  He
was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent.  On  the  death  of  his
father,  the  family  removed  to  a  place  in  Tennessee
near  the  Cherokee  ter-
ritory. He  received
but  little  education,
and  spent  much  of
his  time  with  the  In-
dians, by  one  of  whom
he  was  adopted.  In
1813  he  enlisted  in
the  7th  U.S.  infantry,
and  soon  became  a
sergeant.  He  was
present  at  the  bat-
tle of  the  Horseshoe
Bend  (Tohopeka),
where  he  attracted
the  attention  of  Gen.
Jackson  by  his  des-
perate bravery,  and
was  several  times
wounded.  He  was
made  ensign  in  the
39th  infantry,  29  July,  1813,  and  in  the  following
May  became  2d  lieutenant.  For  a  time  he  acted
as  sub-agent  for  the  Cherokees,  at  Jackson's  re-
quest. He  became  1st  lieutenant  in  March,  1818,
but  resigned  in  the  following  May  on  account  of
criticism  emanating  from  the  war  department,  of
which  John  C.  Calhoun  was  secretary,  touching  the
smuggling  of  negroes  from  Florida  into  the  United
States.  This  he  had  tried  to  prevent,  and,  being
accused  of  complicity,  he  demanded  an  investiga-
tion and  was  fully  exonerated.  He  began  the  study
of  law  at  Nashville,  in  June,  1818,  obtained  his
license  in  a  few  months,  and  commenced  practice
at  Lebanon.  In  1819  he  was  elected  district  at-
torney of  the  Davidson  district,  whereupon  he  re-
moved to  Nashville.  He  was  also  appointed  ad-
jutant-general of  the  state.  In  1821  he  was  elect-
ed major-general,  and  within  a  year  resigned  the
district  attorneyship.  In  1823  he  was  elected  to
congress,  and  in  1825  was  re-elected.  In  the  last
year  of  his  term,  he  fought  a  duel  with  Gen.
White,  whom  he  wounded.  In  1827  he  was  a
candidate  for  governor,  and  was  elected  by  an
overwhelming  majority.  In  January,  1829,  he
married  a  Miss  Allen,  of  Sumner  county,  Tenn.,
but  a  few  weeks  after  the  marriage  Houston  sud-
denly separated  from  his  wife  without  a  word  of
explanation.  He  always  protested  that  the  cause
of  separation  in  no  manner  affected  his  wife's  char-
acter. He  left  the  state  amid  a  storm  of  vitupera-
tion, and  made  his  way  up  the  Arkansas  to  the
mouth  of  the  Illinois,  where  lived  his  former
Cherokee  father- by-adoption.  Here  he  remained
about  tjjree  years.  In  1832  he  made  a  trip  to
Washington  in  the  interest  of  the  Indians.  He
wore  the  Indian  garb,  and  was  warmly  received  by
President  Jackson.  While  in  Washington  he  was
accused  by  William  Stansberry,  of  Ohio,  a  member
of  congress,  of  attempting  to  obtain  a  fraudulent
contract  for  furnishing  the  Indians  supplies.  In
retaliation,  he  attacked  Stansberry,  and  beat  him


severely.  He  received  a  mild  reprimand  at  the  bar
of  the  house,  and  was  fined  $500,  but  Jackson  re-
mitted the  fine.  This  year  he  made  a  trip  to  Texas.
He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention  called
to  •  meet  at  San  Felipe  de  Austin,  1  April,  1833,
where  a  constitution  was  adopted,  in  which  Hous-
ton had  inserted  a  clause,  forbidding  the  legisla-
ture to  establish  banks.  Shortly  afterward,  Hous-
ton was  elected  general  of  Texas,  east  of  Trinity
river.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  so-called
"  General  Consultation  "  that  met  in  October,  1835,
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  provisional  gov-
ernment. He  successfully  opposed  a  declaration
of  absolute  independence  as  premature.  He  was
here  elected  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of
Texas,  and  at  once  proceeded  to  perfect  the  mili-
tary organization  of  the  scattered  population,
though  constantly  hampered  by  the  bickerings  ;md
jealousies  of  those  in  control  of  the  law-making
power,  who  soon  deprived  him  of  his  office.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention  that  met
at  New  Washington,  and  adopted  a  declaration  of
absolute  independence,  2  March,  1836,  which  also
re-elected  him  commander-in-chief.  The  Mexi-
cans, under  Santa-Anna,  began  the  invasion  of
Texas,  about  5,000  strong,  in  three  columns.  On  6
March  the  Alamo  fell,  and  185  men  were  put  to
death,  Bowie,  David  Crockett,  and  Travis  among
the  number.  A  few  days  later,  Goliad  was  cap-
tured by  the  Mexicans,  and  500  men  were  put  to
death.  After  some  manoeuvring,  Houston,  on  21
April,  1836,  with  750  men,  met  the  main  division
of  the  Mexicans,  1,800  strong,  under  Santa-Anna,
on  the  banks  of  the  San  Jacinto,  near  the  mouth
of  Buffalo  bayou.  The  American  battle-cry  was
"Remember  the  Alamo!"  The  fight  lasted  less
than  an  hour,  and  the  Mexicans  were  totally
routed,  losing  630  killed  and  730  prisoners,
among  them  Santa- Anna.  Houston,  wounded  in
the  ankle,  was  treated  with  great  indignity  by
the  civil  authorities  immediately  after  the  battle,
and  retired  to  New  Orleans.  In  the  autumn  of
1836,  when  he  returned  to  Nacogdoches,  Mirabeau
B.  Lamar  had  been  made  commander-in-chief.  An
election  for  president  of  the  republic  had  been  or-
dered by  the  March  convention,  and  Houston  an-
nounced himself  a  candidate  twelve  days  before  the
day  of  election.  In  a  total  vote  of  5,104,  he  re-
ceived 4,374,  and  on  22  Oct.,  1836,  he  became  first
president  of  the  republic  of  Texas.  His  term
expired  12  Dec,  1838.  He  left  the  country  in  a
healthy  condition,  its  treasury  notes  at  par,  at
peace  with  the  Indians,  and  on  a  friendly  footing
with  Mexico,  although  a  permanent  peace  had  not
yet  been  negotiated.  Houston  had  been  in  the
Texan  congress  for  the  two  terms  1839-'41.  In
April,  1840,  he  married  Margaret  Moffette,  having
been  divorced  from  his  first  wife.  His  second  wife,
who  exercised  an  ennobling  and  restraining  influ-
ence over  him,  was  from  Alabama.  In  1841  he
was  re-elected  to  the  presidency.  From  12  Dec.,
1841,  till  9  Dec,  1844,  Houston's  work  was  to  undo
the  mischief  of  his  predecessor,  Lamar.  He  prob-
ably saved  the  government  from  disbanding.  Con-
gress, in  June,  1842,  passed  a  bill  making  him  dig
tator,  and  10,000,000  acres  of  land  were  voted  to
resist  the  threatened  Mexican  invasion.  Houstol
vetoed  these  measures,  and  the  danger  of  invasion
soon  passed  away.  In  1838  he  had  taken  the  first
step  toward  securing  the  annexation  of  Texas  to
the  United  States.  Van  Buren  hesitated,  when
Houston  began  to  coquette,  as  he  afterward  said,
with  Spain,  France,  and  England,  knowing  that
the  United  States  dreaded  the  intrusion  of  a  Bog
ropean  power  upon  American  soil. On  29  Dec,


HOUSTON


HOVEY


275


1845,  Texas  entered  the  Union,  and  in  March,

1846,  Houston  entered  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served
till  1859.  He  was  a  pronounced  Unionist,  voted
against  and  strenuously  opposed  the  repeal  of  the
Missouri  compromise,  and  voted  for  all  compro-
mise measures  during  the  slavery  agitation.  He
opposed  the  Kansas  and  Nebraska  bill,  and  in
1858  voted  against  the  Lecompton  constitution  of
Kansas.  He  refused  to  sign  the  Southern  address.
Constantly,  during  his  term  of  service,  he  earnestly
advocated  the  cause  of  the  Indians.  A  favorite
and  oft-quoted  maxim  of  his  was  that  no  treaty,
made  and  carried  out  in  good  faith,  had  ever  been
violated  by  the  Indians.  His  availability  as  a
presidential  candidate  became  patent,  and  at  one
time  his  nomination  was  regarded  as  a  foregone
conclusion.  In  1852  he  received  eight  votes  on
the  first  ballot  in  the  convention  that  nominated
Franklin  Pierce.  His  popularity  was  somewhat
impaired  in  the  Democratic  party  by  his  sympa-
thetic course  toward  the  Know-Nothings.  On  11
Oct.,  1854,  a  meeting  of  Democrats  at  Concord,
N.  H.,  had  put  Houston  forward  as  the  people's
candidate,  in  opposition  to  caucus  or  convention
nomination.  In  the  American  convention  that
met,  22  Feb.,  1856,  and  nominated  Millard  Fill-
more, Houston  received  three  votes.  The  conven-
tion of  the  Constitutional  Union  party  met  at
Baltimore,  9  May,  1860,  and  on  the  first  ballot  John
Bell,  of  Tennessee,  received  68|,  and  Houston  5?
votes.  On  the  next  ballot  Bell  was  nominated.  In
November,  1857,  Houston  had  been  defeated  for
governor  of  Texas  by  Harrison  R.  Runnels,  the
regular  nominee  of  the  Democratic  party.  In
1859,  as  an  independent  candidate,  he  defeated
Runnels.  In  the  presidential  election  of  1860  his
preference  was  for  any  Union  man  that  could  de-
feat Lincoln,  and  in  his  message  to  the  legislature
he  deeply  deplored  Lincoln's  election,  but  saw  in
this  no  grounds  for  secession.  At  the  election,  23
Feb.,  1861,  the  state  was  carried  for  secession,  and
all  state  officers  were  required  to  take  the  oath  of
allegiance  to  the  Confederate  states.  This  Hous-
ton refused  to  do,  and  on  18  March  he  was  de-
posed. U.  S.  troops  were  offered  him,  but  he  re-
fused their  aid.  On  10  May,  1861,  he  made  a  speech
at  Independence,  Texas,  in  which  he  defined  the
position  of  southern  Unionists.  He  said :  "  The
voice  of  hope  was  weak,  since  drowned  by  the
guns  of  Fort  Sumter.  .  .  .  The  time  has  come
when  a  man's  section  is  his  country.  I  stand  by
mine.  .  .  .  Whether  we  have  opposed  this  seces-
sion movement  or  favored  it,  we  must  alike  meet
the  consequences.  ...  It  is  no  time  to  turn  back
'now."  He  took  no  part  in  public  life  after  this.
See  his  life,  anonymous  (New  York,  1855).

HOUSTON,  William  Churchill,  lawyer,  b.  in
Cabarrus  county,  N.  C,  in  1740;  d.  in  Frankfort,
Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1788.  His  father,  a  native  of  Ireland,
settled  in  the  central  part  of  North  Carolina  with
Lord  Cabarrus.  In  early  manhood  the  son  went
to  Princeton,  taught  in  the  college  grammar-school,
and  was  graduated  in  1768,  and  appointed  a  tutor.
In  1771  he  was  elected  professor  of  mathematics
and  natural  philosophy,  which  post  he  held  until
he  resigned  in  1783.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  he  and  Dr.  Witherspoon  were  the
only  professors  in  the  college,  and  when  Princeton
was  invaded  in  1776,  and  the  students  scattered,
he  commanded  a  scouting-party,  organized  in
Flemington,  N.  J.,  and  rendered  important  service
in  the  counties  of  Hunterdon  and  Somerset.  He
was  commissioned  captain  in  the  2d  battalion,
Somerset,  28  Feb.,  1776.  Quiet  having  been  re-
stored in  Princeton,  he  resigned  his  captaincy,  17


Aug.  of  the  same  year,  and  resumed  the  duties  of
his  professorship.  In  1777,  while  still  connected
with  the  college,  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
general  assembly  from  Somerset  county,  and  in
1778  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  council  of  safety.
In  1779  he  was  sent  to  congress  as  a  representative
of  the  county  of  Middlesex,  and  served  during
that  year  and  in  1780-'l.  In  1783  he  resigned  his
professorship  in  the  college,  having,  in  the  midst
of  his  multifarious  occupations,  acquired  sufficient
knowledge  of  the  law  to  be  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  now  removed  to  Trenton,  N.  J.,  where  he  en-
tered upon  an  extensive  practice.  In  1784  he  was
again  sent  to  congress,  and  was  appointed  a  dele-
gate from  New  Jersey  to  the  convention  of  com-
missioners at  Annapolis,  11  Sept.,  1786,  which  sug-
gested the  convention  that  framed  the  Federal
constitution.  But,  broken  down  by  severe  study
and  arduous  labor,  he  was  unable  to  take  part  in
the  proceedings  of  this  convention,  which  met  in
Philadelphia  the  following  year,  and  soon  after-
ward he  abandoned  all  active  employment.

HOUSTOUN,  William,  congressman. He  was
an  agent  of  Georgia  in  the  settlement  of  boundary-
disputes  with  South  Carolina  in  1785.  and  a  trus-
tee for  the  state  college. He  was  a  delegate  from
Georgia  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1784  and
1787.  and  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed
the  Federal  constitution,  but  refused  to  sign  that
document. The  convention,  in  committee,  fixed
the  period  of  the  president's  official  term  at  seven
years,  prohibiting  re-election ;  but  on  the  motion
j  of  Mr. Houstoun,  supported  by  Roger  Sherman
and  Gouverneur  Morris,  this  provision for  com-
,  pulsory  rotation was struck out by six  states,
against  Delaware,  Virginia,  and  the  two  Carolina*.
I  He  also  directed  the  attention  of  the  convention
"  to the expense and extreme inconvenience  of
]  drawing  together  men  from  all  the  states  for  the
J  single purpose  of  electing  the  chief  magistrate."
I  He  was in  favor  of  revising  and amending  the
constitutions  of  the  several  states.

HOVENDEN,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Dunroan-
way,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  28  Dec,  1840.  He  re-
ceived his  early  art  education  in  the  Cork  school
of  design,  came  to  New  York  in  1863,  and  studied
in  the  National  academy.  In  1874  he  went  to
Paris,  where  he  studied  in  the  Eeole  des  beaux
arts  under  Cabanel,  and  returned  to  the  United.
States  in  1880.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  thf
National  academy  in  1881,  a  national  academician
in  1882,  a  member  of  the  Society  of  American  art-
ists, and  a  member  of  the  American  water-color
society  in  1882,  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  so-
ciety of  artists  in  1883,  and  a  member  of  the  New
York  etching  club  in  1885.  His  works  include
"The  Two  Lilies"  (1874;;  "A  Brittany  Woman
Spinning"  and  "Pleasant  News"  (1876);  "The
Image-Seller  "  (Paris  salon,  1876) ;  "  Thinking  ol
Somebody "  and  "  News  from  the  Conscript "
(1877) :  ""Pride  of  the  Old  Folks  "  and  "  Loyalist
Peasant  Soldier  of  La  Vendee,  1793"  (1878);  "A
Breton  Interior,  1793 "  (1878) ;  "  In  Hoc  Signo
Vinces  "  (1880,  published  bv  Goupil  and  Co.,  Paris)  ;
"  Dat  Possum  "  (1880) ;  "  Elaine  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Last
Moments  of  John  Brown,"  leaving  the  jail  on  the
morning  of  his  execution  (1884).

HOVEY,  Alvah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Greene,  Che-
nango co.,  N.  Y.,  5  March,  1820.  He  spent  his
early  life  in  Thetford,  Vt,  was  prepared  for  col-
lege at  Brandon,  and  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1844  and  at  Newton  theological  institution  in
1848,  after  which  he  was  pastor  of  the  Baptist
church  in  New  Gloucester,  Me.,  for  a  year.  He
was  assistant  teacher  of  Hebrew  in  Newton  theo-


276


HOVEY


HOWARD


logical  institution  from  1849  till  1855,  and  professor
of  church  history  from  1853  till  1855.  Since  1855
he  has  been  professor  of  theology  and  Christian
ethics,  and  since  1868  has  been  president.  From
1868  till  1883  he  was  a  member  of  the  executive
committee  of  the  American  Baptist  missionary
union.  He  is  a  trustee  of  Wellesley,  and  a  fellow  of
Brown.  He  received  the  degrees  of  D.  D.  from
Brown  in  1856  and  LL.  D.  from  Denison  and  Rich-
mond in  1876.  He  has  published,  besides  review
articles,  a  translation  of  Priedrich  M.  Perthe's
"  Life  of  Chrysostom,"  with  Rev.  D.  B.  Ford  (Bos-
ton, 1854);  "The  State  of  the  Impenitent  Dead"
(1859) ;  "  The  Miracles  of  Christ  as  attested  by  the
Evangelists  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Scriptural  Law  of  Di-
vorce "  (1866) ;  "  God  with  Us,  or  the  Person  and
Work  of  Christ"  (1872);  "Normal-class  Manual,
Part  I.,  What  to  Teach "  (1873) ;  "  Religion  and
the  State "  (1874) ;  "The  Doctrine  of  the  Higher
Christian  Life,  compared  with  the  Teachings  of  the
Holy  Scriptures  "  (1876) ;  "  Manual  of  Systematic
Theology  and  Christian  Ethics"  (1877;  new  ed.,
Philadelphia,  1880).  He  is  general  editor  of  "  An
American  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament,"
to  which  he  contributed  the  commentary  on  the
gospel  of  John  (Philadelphia,  1885). — His  brother,
Charles  Edward,  lawyer,  b.  in  Thetford,  Orange
co.,  Vt.,  26  April,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1852,  after  which  he  became  principal  of
the  high-school  in  Framingham,  Mass.,  and  of  the
boy's  high-school  in  Peoria,  111.  He  assisted  in
organizing  the  Illinois  normal  university  in  Nor-
mal, of  which  he  was  president  from  1857  till  the
civil  war,  and  on  the  organization  of  a  system  of
public  schools  in  that  city,  in  1856,  he  was  ap-
pointed superintendent,  and  assisted  in  forming
the  state  teachers'  association,  of  which  he  was
president  in  1856.  On  15  Aug.,  1861,  he  entered
the  national  service  as  colonel  of  the  33d  Illinois
volunteer  infantry,  a  regiment  composed  chiefly  of
young  men  from  the  state  colleges.  In  1862  he
was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  and
on  5  Sept.,  1862,  to  that  of  major-general  by  brevet,
for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  in  battle,
particularly  at  Arkansas  Post,  11  Jan.,  1863.  He
left  the  military  service  in  May,  1863,  and  has
since  practised  law.  He  delivered  a  number  of
addresses  in  Illinois,  was  a  member  of  the  state
board  of  education  there,  was  the  editor  of  the
"Illinois  Teacher,"  and  contributed  also  to  other
educational  periodicals  from  1852  till  1861.

HOVEY,  Alvin  Peterson,  soldier,  b.  in  Posey
county,  lnd.,  6  Sept.,  1821.  He  was  educated  in
the  Mount  Vernon  common  schools,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Mount  Vernon  in  1843,
and  practised  with  success.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  Constitutional  convention  of  Indiana  in  1850.
In  1851  he  became  circuit  judge  of  the  3d  judicial
circuit  of  Indiana,  which  office  he  held  until  1854,
when  he  was  made  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
Indiana.  From  1856  till  1858  he  served  as  U.  S.
district  attorney  for  Indiana.  During  the  civil  war
he  entered  the  national  service  as  colonel  of  the
24th  Indiana  volunteers,  in  July,  1861.  He  was
promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  28
April,  1862,  and  brevetted  major-general  for  meri-
torious and  distinguished  services  in  July,  1864.  He
was  in  command  of  the  eastern  district  of  Arkansas
in  1863,  and  of  the  district  of  Indiana  in  1864-'5.
Gen.  Grant,  in  his  official  report,  awards  to  Gen.
Hovey  the  honor  of  the  key-battle  of  the  Vicksburg
campaign,  that  of  Champion's  Hill.  Gen.  Hovey
resigned  in  October,  1865,  and  was  appointed  min-
ister to  Peru,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1870.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  in  1886.


HOVEY,  Charles  Mason,  horticulturist,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  26  Oct.,  1810 ;  d.  there,  2  Sept.,
1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Cambridge  acad-
emy in  1824.  He  was  early  interested  in  culti-
vation of  fruits  and  flowers,  exhibiting  varieties
that  gained  him  the  first  premiums  from  the  Mas-
sachusetts horticultural  society,  with  which  he  has
been  identified  since  1831.  He  was  its  president
from  1863  till  1867,  and  during  his  service  in  this
capacity  their  new  hall  was  built  under  his  super-
vision. He  laid  the  corner-stone,  18  Aug.,  1864
and  delivered  the  dedicatory  address,  6  Sept.,  1865.
His  grounds  in  Cambridge  contain  the  largest  col-
lection of  trees  in  the  United  States,  168  specimens
and  varieties,  all  from  30  to  40  years  old ;  and  he
has  produced  many  fine  specimens  of  fruits  and
flowers  from  seed  and  hybridization.  He  is  a
member  of  the  principal  horticultural  societies  of
America,  and  corresponding  and  honorary  member
of  the  Royal  horticultural  societies  of  London  and
Edinburgh.  He  edited  the  American  "Gardiner's
Magazine  "  in  1835,  and  the  "  Magazine  of  Horti-
culture" (34  vols.,  1835-69).  He  has  published
"  Fruits  of  America,"  with  colored  plates,  for  which
he  made  drawings  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1854).  and  a
reprint  of  Rev.  T.  C.  Brehaut's  "  Cordon  Training
of  Fruit-Trees,"  with  a  supplement  (Boston,  1865).
He  has  also  contributed  largely  to  magazines.

HOW,  Samuel  Blanchard,  clergyman,  b.  in
Burlington,  N.  J.,  14  Oct.,  1790 ;  d.  in  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  29  Feb.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1810,  at  Prince-
ton theological  seminary  in  1813,  was  ordained  in
1815,  and  settled  successively  over  Presbyterian
churches  in  Salisbury,  Pa.,  Trenton,  and  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  until  1823,  when  he  became  pas-
tor of  the  Independent  church  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
whence  he  was  called  in  1830  to  the  presidency  of
Dickinson  college,  Pa.  In  1832  he  became  pastor
of  the  1st  Reformed  Dutch  church  of  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  continuing  in  this  charge  until  failing
health  induced  his  resignation  in  1861. .  Union
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1830.  Dr.
How  was  an  old-school  Presbyterian,  was  fear-
less in  the  espousal  of  unpopular  subjects,  took  ex-
treme views  in  defence  of  slavery,  and,  in  connec-
tion with  the  request  of  the  classis  of  North  Caro-
lina of  the  German  Reformed  church  to  be  admitted
into  the  body  of  the  Dutch  Reformed,  he  published  a
volume  urging  its  admission,  under  the  title
"  Slaveholding  not  Sinful "  (New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,
1855).  Among  many  sermons  and  addresses  he
published  "The  Gospel  Ministry"  (New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  1838) ;  "  Tribute  of  Filial  Affection  on
the  Death  of  Mrs.  Jane  Kirkpatrick  "  (1851) ;  "  Ser-
mons "  (1851) ;  "  Sermon  on  the  Death  of  Rev.  Dr.
Jacob  J.  Janewav  "  (1858) ;  and  "  Funeral  Sermon
on  the  Death  of  Littleton  Kirkpatrick  "  (1859).

HOWARD,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
about  1760 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  18  Sept.,  1814.
He  removed  to  Kentucky  in  early  manhood,  and
was  a  member  of  congress  from  1807  till  1810,
when  he  resigned  to  become  governor  of  upper
Louisiana.  In  March,  1813,  he  was  appointed
brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  8th  military  depart-
ment, including  the  territory  west  of  the  Mississippi.

HOWARD,  Benjamin  Chew,  statesman,  b.  in
Baltimore  county,  Md.,  5  Nov.,  1791 :  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  6  March,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1809,  studied  law,  and  practised  in
Baltimore.  In  1814  he  assisted  in  organizing
troops  for  the  defence  of  Baltimore,  and  enin-
manded  the  "mechanical  volunteers"  at  the  battle
of  North  Point  on  12  Sept.  of  that  year. He  served


HOWAKD


HOWARD


277


in  congress  in  1829-'33,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Democrat,  and  again  in  1835-'9,  when  he  was  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  foreign  relations,  and
drew  up  its  report  on  the  boundary  question.
From  1843  till  1862  he  was  reporter  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  United  States,  and  in  1861  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  peace  congress.  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1869.  He  published  "  Re-
ports of  Cases  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States  from  1843  till  1855  "  (Baltimore,  1855).

HOWARD,  Blanche  Willis,  author,  b.  in
Bangor,  Me.,  21  July,  1847.  After  publishing
several  successful  novels,  she  removed  to  Stuttgart,
Germany,  and  is  now  (1887)  editing  a  magazine
published  there  in  English.  Her  books  are  "One
Summer "  (Boston,  1875) ;  "  One  Year  Abroad  "
(1877);  "Aunt  Serena"  (1880);  "Guenn"  (1882);
and  "  Aulnay  Tower"  (1886).

HOWARD,  Bron son.  dramatist,  b.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  7  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  educated  at  the  New
Haven  collegiate  and  commercial  institute,  adopted
the  profession  of  journalism,  and  since  1875  has  re-
sided in  New  York  city  and  London.  His  dramas
are  "Saratoga"  (New  York,  1870;  produced  in
London  in  1874);  "Diamonds"  (1872);  "  Hurri-
canes "(1878:  produced  in  London  as  "Truth,"
1879) ;  "  The  Banker's  Daughter  "  (1878 ;  produced
in  London  as  "  The  Old  Love  and  the  New,"  1879) ;

1  Wives  "  (1879) ;  "  Young  Mrs.  Winthrop  "  (1882 ;
produced  in  London  in  1884) ;  "  One  of  Our  Girls  "
(1885) ;  and  "  Met  by  Chance  "  (1887).

HOWARD,  Francis,  Baron  of  Effingham,  b.  in
England  about  1630 :  d.  there.  30  March,  1694.  He
was  the  son  of  Sir  Charles  Howard,  and  the  bar-
ony of  Howard  of  Effingham  reverted  to  him
in  1681.  In  1684-'9  he  was  governor  of  Virginia,
and  during  the  early  part  of  his  administration,
which  was  exceedingly  rapacious  and  cruel,  the
colony  suffered  greatly  from  Indian  depredations.
He  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  tribes  at  Albany,
N.  Y.,  which  was  ratified  in  1685.  He  forbade  the
use  of  printing-presses  in  the  colony.

HOWARD,  Henry,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in
the  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  1  Dec,  1815.  He
was  graduated  in  medicine  in  1838,  and  was  ap-

fwinted  medical  superintendent  of  the  provincial
unatic  asylum  at  St.  Johns,  province  of  Quebec,
in  1861,  and  Aisiting  physician  to  Longue  Pointe
asylum  in  1875.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Anat-
omy, Physiology,  and  Pathology  of  the  Eye"
(1850) ;  and  "  The  Philosophy  of  Insanity,  Crime,
and  Responsibility  "  (1882).

HOWARD,  Jacob  Merritt,  senator,  b.  in
Shaftsbury,  Vt.,  10  July,  1805 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,

2  April,  1871.  By  teaching  he  gained  the  means
of  obtaining  an  education  at  Williams  college,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1830.  Removing  to
Detroit,  Mich.,  in  1832,  he  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  the  next  year,  and  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1838.  In  1840  he  was  elected
to  congress,  serving  from  1841  till  1843,  and  in
1854-'8  was  attorney-general  of  Michigan.  In  1854
Mr.  Howard  drew  up  the  platform  of  the  first  con-
vention ever  held  by  the  Republican  party,  and  is
accredited  with  giving  the  party  its  name.  He
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1862,  as  a  Repub-
lican, to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Kinsley  S.  Bing-
ham, deceased,  was  re-elected  in  1865,  and  served
until  3  March,  1871.  During  his  term  as  senator
he  was  chairman  of  the  ordnance  committee.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  loyalist  conven-
tion of  1866,  and  in  that  year  Williams  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He"  published  a  "  Transla-
tion from  the  French  of  the  Secret  Memoirs  of  the
Empress  Josephine  "  (New  York,  1847).


HOWARD,  John  Eager,  soldier,  b.  in  Balti-
more county,  Md.,  4  June,  1752;  d.  there,  12  Oct.,
1827.  His  grandfather,  Joshua,  an  officer  in  the
Duke  of  York's  army  during  the  Monmouth  rebel-
lion, was  the  first  of  the  name  of  Howard  that  set-
tled in  this  country.  John's  father,  a  wealthy
planter,  bred  him  to"  no  profession,  but  gave  him
an  excellent  education  under  the  care  of  tutors.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  joined
the  American  army,  commanded  a  company  of  the
flying  camp  under  Gen.  Hugh  Mercer  at  the  battle
of  White  Plains,  28  Oct.,  1776.  Upon  the  disband-
ing of  his  corps  in  December  of  this  year,  he  was
commissioned  major  in  the  4th  Maryland  regiment
of  the  line,  and  was  engaged  at  Germantown  and
Monmouth.  In  1780,  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
5th  Maryland  regiment,  he  fought  at  Camden
under  Gen.  Horatio  Gates,  and  in  the  latter  part
of  the  year  joined  the  army  under  Gen.  Nathanael


Greene.  He  displayed  great  gallantry  at  the  battle
of  Cowpens.  17  Jan.,  1781,  and  the  bayonet-charge
under  his  command  secured  the  American  victory.
At  one  time  of  this  day  he  held  the  swords  of  seven
British  officers,  who  had  surrendered  to  him.  In
honor  of  his  services  at  this  battle  he  received  a
medal  from  congress.  He  materially  aided  Gen.
Greene  in  effecting  his  retreat  at  Guilford  Court-
House.  15  March,  1781.  and  at  the  battle  of  Hob-
kirk's  Hill,  on  15  April,  succeeded  to  the  command
of  the  2d  Maryland  regiment.  At  Eutaw  Springs,
where  his  command  was  reduced  to  thirty  men.  and
he  was  its  only  surviving  officer,  he  made  a  final
charge,  and  was  severely  wounded.  From  1789  till
1792  he  was  governor  of  Marvland,  and  he  was  U.  S.
senator  in  1796-1803.  He  declined,  in  1796,  a  seat
in  Washington's  cabinet.  In  anticipation  of  war
with' France.  Washington  selected  him  in  1798  as
one  of  his  major-generals.  During  the  panic  in
Baltimore  in  1814,  subsequent  to  the  capture  of
Washington  by  the  British  troops,  he  prepared  to
take  the  field,  and  was  an  earnest  opponent  of
capitulation.  In  1816  he  was  a  candidate  for  vice-
president.  His  wife.  Margaret,  was  a  daughter
of  Chief-Justice  Benjamin  Chew.  The  illustration
represents  his  residence  of  "  Belvedere,"  which  was
in  an  extensive  park,  and  remained  standing  until
recently.  Lafayette  was  entertained  there  in  1824.
HOWARD,  John  George,  Canadian  architect,
b.  in  Bengeo,  Hertfordshire,  England.  27  July,
1803.  He  attended  school  at  Hertford  until  his
fourteenth  year,  and  at  fifteen  years  of  age  was
sent  to  sea  before  the  mast.  After  passing  two
years  at  sea  he  studied  engineering,  land-surveying,
and  architecture  in  London,  and  in  1827  became
engineer  on  Chromford  canal,  near  Matlock,  Der-
byshire. In  September.  1832.  Mr.  Howard  removed
to  York,  now  Toronto,  Canada,  where  he  has  resided
ever  since.  He  has  been  engaged  in  important
city  surveys,  and  has  designed  many  of  the  princi-


278


HOWARD


HOWARD


pal  buildings  in  Toronto.  From  1833  till  1856  he
was  drawing-master  of  Upper  Canada  college.  In
1834  the  first  artists'  society  was  formed  in  To-
ronto, and  Mr.  Howard  was  its  vice-president  and
treasurer  in  1847-'8.  In  1883  the  Marquis  of  Lome
conferred  upon  him  the  title  of  royal  Canadian
academician.  In  1873  Mr.  Howard  conveyed  120
acres  of  land  at  High  Park  to  the  corporation  of
Toronto  as  a  public  park,  and  at  his  death  Col-
borne  Lodge,  where  he  resides,  and  forty-five  acres
more,  are  to  become  part  of  the  new  park.  He
also  conveyed  to  the  city  of  Toronto,  in  May,  1881,
127  paintings  and  sketches,  by  himself  and  his
wife,  in  the  gallery  at  Colborne  Lodge,  and  after-
ward added  his  library  to  the  gift.

HOWARD,  John  Purple,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Burlington,  Vt.,  3  June,  1814 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 10  Oct.,  1885.  After  passing  his  early  life  in
Burlington,  he  removed  to  New  York  city,  where
he  engaged  in  business,  and  established  several
hotels,  among  which  were  the  old  Exchange,  the
Howard  house,  and  the  Irving  hotel.  Retiring
with  a  large  fortune,  he  devoted  his  later  years  to
the  care  of  his  property  and  to  foreign  travel.  His
gifts  to  Burlington,  Vt.,  exceeded  $275,000.

HOWARD,  Oliver  Otis,  soldier,  b.  in  Leeds,
Me.,  8  Nov.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1850,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1854,
became  1st  lieutenant  and  instructor  in  mathemat-
ics in  1854,
and  resigned
in  1861  to
take  com-
mand of  the
3d  Maine  reg-
iment. He
commanded  a
brigade  at  the
first  battle  of
BullRun,and
for  gallantry
in  that  en-
gagement was
made  briga-
dier -  general
of  volunteers,
3  Sept.,  1861.
He  was  twice
wounded  at
the  battle  of
Pair  Oaks,  losing  his  right  arm  on  1  June,  1862,
was  on  sick-leave  for  six  months,  and  engaged  in
recruiting  service  till  September  of  this  year,  when
he  participated  in  the  battle  of  Antietam,  and  after-
ward took  Gen.  John  Sedgwick's  division  in  the  2d
corps.  In  November,  1862,  he  became  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers.  He  commanded  the  11th  corps
during  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker's  operations  in  the
vicinity  of  Fredericksburg,  2  May,  1863,  served  at
Gettysburg,  Lookout  Valley,  and  Missionary  Ridge,
and  was  on  the  expedition  for  the  relief  of  Knox-
ville  in  December,  1863.  He  was  in  occupation
of  Chattanooga  from  this  time  till  July,  1864,  when
he  was  assigned  to  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  in
the  invasion  of  Georgia,  was  engaged  at  Dalton,
Resaca,  Adairsville,  and  Pickett's  Mill,  where  he
was  again  wounded,  was  at  the  surrender  of  At-
lanta, and  joined  in  pursuit  of  the  Confederates  in
Alabama,  under  Gen.  John  B.  Hood,  from  4  Oct.
till  13  Dec,  1864.  In  the  march  to  the  sea  and
the  invasion  of  the  Carolinas  he  commanded  the
right  wing  of  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  army.
He  became  brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army,  21
Dec,  1864.  He  was  in  command  of  the  Army  of
the  Tennessee,  and  engaged  in  all  the  important


(S.ty.\*o-u>-cStS— "


battles  from  4  Jan.  till  26  April,  1865,  occupying
Goldsborough,  N.  C,  24  March,  1865,  and  partici-
pating in  numerous  skirmishes,  terminating  with
the  surrender  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  at  Dur-
ham, N.  C,  26  April,  1865.  In  March  of  this  year
he  was  brevetted  major-general  for  gallantry  at
the  battle  of  Ezra  Church  and  the  campaigns
against  Atlanta,  Ga.  He  was  commissioner  of  the
Freedmen's  bureau  at  Washington  from  March,
1865,  till  July,  1874,  and  in  that  year  was  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Colum-
bia. In  1877  he  led  the  expedition  against  the
Nez  Perces  Indians,  and  in  1878  led  the  campaign
against  the  Bannocks  and  Piutes.  In  1881-2  he
was  superintendent  of  the  IT.  S.  military  academy.
In  1886  Gen.  Howard  was  commissioned  major-
general,  and  given  command  of  the  division  of  the
Pacific.  Bowdoin  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
A.  M.  in  1853,  Waterville  college  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1865,  Shurtleff  college  the  same  in  1865,  and
Gettysburg  theological  seminary  in  1866.  He  was
also  made  a  chevalier  of  the  Legion  of  honor  by
the  French  government  in  1884.  Gen.  Howard  has
contributed  various  articles  to  magazines,  his  latest
being  an  account  of  the  Atlanta  campaign  in  the
"  Century "  for  July,  1887,  and  has  published
"  Donald's  School  Days  "  (1879) ;  "  Chief  Joseph,  or
the  Nez  Perces  in  Peace  and  War  "  (1881) ;  and  is
the  author  and  translator  of  a  "Life  of  Count
Agenor  de  Gasparin."

HOWARD,  Simeon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bridge-
water,  Me.,  10  May,  1733;  dt  in  Boston,  13  Aug.,
1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1758,  anc
after  teaching  and  at  the  same  time  studying  the
ology,  became  pastor  of  a  church  in  Cumberland,
Nova  Scotia.  In  1765  he  returned  to  Harvard  as
a  resident  graduate-student,  and  was  appointed  a
tutor  the  following  year.  In  1767  he  became  pas-
tor of  the  West  church,  Boston,  where  he  minis-
tered till  his  death,  with  the  exception  of  a  sojourn
of  a  year  and  a  half  in  Nova  Scotia,  where  he  and
many  of  his  congregation  had  gone  to  avoid  the
dangers  of  the  Revolution.  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Edinburgh  university.
He  was  an  overseer  and  a  fellow  of  Harvard,  a
member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sci-
ences, and  of  the  Society  for  propagating  the  gos-
pel, and  was  vice-president  of  the  Humane  society.
He  published  various  sermons.

HOWARD,  Volney  E.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Norridge-
wock,  Me.,  about  1808 ;  d.  in  Santa  Monica,  Cal.,  14
May,  1889.  He  studied  law,  and,  having  been  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  began  to  practise  in  1830  in  Vicks-
burg,  Miss.  In  1837  he  was  appointed  reporter  of
the  court  of  errors  and  appeal,  and  was  during  sev-
eral years  the  editor  of  the  "  Mississippian,"  a  Demo-
cratic newspaper  published  at  Vicksburg.  While
in  Mississippi  Mr.  Howard  fought  a  duel  with  Ser-
geant S.  Prentiss,  and  another  with  Alexander  G.
McNutt.  He  removed  to  San  Antonio,  Tex.,  in
1847,  and  was  elected  a  representative  from  that
state  in  two  successive  congresses,  serving  from
3  Dec,  1849,  till  3  March,  1853.  He  took  an  acl  ill
part  in  favor  of  the  Missouri  compromise  meas-
ures, and  was  sent  by  the  president  of  the  United
States  to  California  on  a  mission  regarding  the  or-
ganization of  that  state.  He  subsequently  resided
in  California.  Mr.  Howard  published  "  Mississippi
Law  Reports,  1834-'44"  (7  vols.,  Philadelphia
1839-44);  and,  in  conjunction  with  A.  Hutchin-
son. "  Statute  Laws  of  Mississippi "  (1840).

HOWARD,  William  A.,  revenue  officer.  1>.  in
Maine  in  1807;  d.  18  Nov.,  1871.  When  a  boy  he
distinguished  himself  by  leading  an  expedition  to
rescue  a  United  States  vessel  that  had  been  seized


HOWARD


HOWE


279


by  the  British  for  infringing  the  fishery  laws.  In
1824  he  entered  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  in  1828  re-
signed his  commission  to  receive  a  captaincy  in  the
revenue  marine.  So  successful  was  he  in  assisting
vessels  in  distress  on  the  coast  of  New  England
that  the  merchants  of  Boston  presented  him  with
a  valuable  service  of  silver.  In  1848  the  German
confederation  appointed  him  second  in  command
of  the  fleet  on  the  Weser,  and  he  there  constructed
a  navy-yard  and  dock,  and  remained  in  charge  until
the  breaking  up  of  the  fleet.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  Capt.  Howard  raised  a  regiment  of
marine  artillery,  which  was  attached  to  the  Burn-
side  expedition.  On  returning  north  he  began  or-
ganizing in  New  York  a  regiment  of  heavy  artil-
lery, and  raised  2,500  men,  who  were  detailed  for
active  service  with  the  Army  of  the  James.  As
colonel  he  commanded  the  defences  around  Ports-
mouth and  Norfolk,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  re-
sumed his  commission  as  captain  in  the  revenue
marine.  He  hoisted  the  flag  of  the  United  States
in  Alaska  soon  after  its  transference  by  Russia.
His  last  service  was  superintending  the  building
of  steam-launches  for  the  revenue  marine.

HOWARD,  William  Alanson,  lawyer,  b.  in
Hinesburg,  Chittenden  co.,  Vt.,  8  April.  1813;  d.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  10  April,  1880.  When  four-
teen years  of  age  he  was  apprenticed  to  the  cabinet-
maker's trade  at  Albion,  N.  Y.  He  remained  there
four  years,  and  in  1832  entered  an  academy  at
Wyoming,  where  he  studied  three  years,  and  in
1839  was  graduated  from  Middlebury.  In  1840
he  became  tutor  of  mathematics  in  the  Michigan
university.  He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Detroit  in  1842.  He  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative in  congress  from  Michigan  for  three
successive  terms,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1855.  till  3
March,  1861.  While  in  the  house  of  representa-
tives he  took  a  decided  stand  in  opposition  to  sla-
very. In  1861  he  was  appointed  postmaster  at
Detroit,  and  in  1869  declined  an  appointment  as
minister  to  China.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Na-
tional Republican  conventions  of  1868,  1872,  and
1876.  In  1869  he  was  appointed  land-commis-
sioner of  the  Grand  Rapids  and  Indiana  railway,
and  in  1872  of  the  Northern  Pacific.  He  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  Dakota  territory  in  1878,  and
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  at  Yankton.

HOWARD,  William  Washington,  educator,
b.  in  London,  England,  19  Sept.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Aurora,
Cayuga  co.,  N.Y.,  1  July,  1871.  He  was  graduated
at  Oxford,  and  subsequently  was  a  teacher  in  Lon-
don. In  1849  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and,
after  passing  some  time  in  Indiana,  became  a  pro-
fessor in  the  military  institute  at  Drennon  Springs,
Ky.  On  returning  east,  he  was  for  some  years  a
professor  in  the  academy  at  Sing  Sing,  N.  Y.,  in
the  high-school  at  Jersey  Shore,  Pa.,  and  then  be-
came principal  of  Erasmus  Hall  at  Flatbush,  N.  Y.
He  was  licensed  as  a  preacher,  became  in  1863  pas-
tor of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Aurora,  N.  Y.,
and  was  chosen  the  first  president  of  Wells  female
college  in  that  place.  He  published  "Aids  to
French  Composition  "  (New  York,  1854).

HOWE,  Albion  Paris,  soldier,  b.  in  Standish,
Me.,  13  March,  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1841,  entered  the  4th  ar-
tillery, and  from  1843  till  1846  was  a  teacher  of
mat  hematics  at  West  Point.  He  served  with  credit
in  the  Mexican  war,  was  brevetted  captain  for  his
conduct  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  became
captain,  2  March,  1855.  He  was  Gen.  McClellan's
chief  of  artillery  in  western  Virginia  in  1861,  and
commanded  a  brigade  of  light  artillery  in  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  during  the  campaign  on  the  pen-


insula in  1862.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  11  July,  1862,  and  was  assigned
to  a  brigade  in  Couch's  division,  4th  army  corps.
He  was  in  the  battles  of  Manassas,  South  Moun-
tain, Antietam,  Fredericksburg,  and  Gettysburg.
He  was  in  command  of  the  artillery  depot,  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  in  1864-'6,  and  was  brevetted  ma-
jor-general, U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865.  for  meri-
torious service  during  the  rebellion.  He  was  re-
tired from  the  army,  30  June,  1882,  after  serving  for
several  years  on  the  Pacific  coast  with  the  4th  artil-
lery, of  which  he  became  colonel,  19  March,  1882.

HOWE,  Edgar  Watson,  author,  b.  in  Wabash
county,  Ind.,  3  May,  1854.  He  did  not  attend
school  after  his  ninth  year,  and  till  his  eighteenth
year  worked  as  a  printer  in  the  western  states  and
territories.  Since  1878  he  has  been  publisher,  pro-
prietor, and  editor  of  the  "  Daily  Globe "  at  At-
chison, Kan.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Story  of  a
Country  Town  "  (Boston,  1884) ;  "  The  Mystery  of
the  Locks"  (1885);  "A  Moonlight  Boy"  (1886);
and  "  A  Man  Story  "  (1888).

HOWE,  Elias/inventor.  b.  in  Spencer,  Mass.,  9
July,  1819 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  3  Oct.,  1867.
He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer  and  miller,  and  assisted
his  father  in  these  pursuits,  also  attending  school
during  the  winter  months.  In  1835  he  went  to
Lowell,  and  served  for  a  time  with  a  manufacturer
of  cotton  machinery,  earning  but  fifty  cents  a  day.
The  financial  panic  of  1837  threw  him  out  of  em-
ployment, and  he  then  went  to  Cambridge,  Mass.,
where  he  was  given  work  in  the  shop  of  Ari  Davis,
a  Boston  machinist.  It  was  at  this  time  that  he  con-
ceived the  idea  of  making  a  sewing-machine,  and
he  diligently  labored  upon  it  in  spare  hours  after
his  day's  work.  After  five  years  of  continuous  ex-
perimenting he  succeeded  in  completing  his  inven-
tion in  May.  1845,  but  not  until  he  had  received
pecuniary  aid  from  an  old  school-fellow,  George
Fisher,  with  whom  he  formed  a  partnership.  He
obtained,  on  10  Sept.,  1846,  a  patent  for  the  first
practical  sewing-machine,  but  in  consequence  of
the  opposition  to  any  labor-saving  machines,  the
artisans  of  Boston  were  unwilling  to  use  it,  and  for
a  brief  time  Mr.  Howe  obtained  employment  on  a
railroad  as  an  engineer  until  his  health  failed.  In
1847  he  visited  England,  hoping  for  success  in  that
country,  but  after  two  years  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  utterly  destitute,  after  working  his
way  home  as  a  common  sailor.  While  in  England
he  disposed  of  his  rights  in  that  country  to  Will-
iam Thomas,  and  adapted  the  machine  to  the  busi-
ness of  corset,  umbrella,  and  valise  making.  Dur-
ing his  absence  the  machine  had  been  imitated  and
introduced  through  the  country  regardless  of  his
patents.  Friends  were  now  easily  found  who  were
willing  to  help  him  to  establish  his  patent,  and  in
1854,  after  much  litigation,  he  was  successful  in  es-
tablishing his  prior  right  to  the  invention.  His
prosperity  was  thenceforth  assured,  and  a  year  later
he  had  repurchased  all  of  the  patents  that  he  had
sold  during  his  season  of  adversity.  Mr.  Howe
then  received  a  royalty  on  every  sewing-machine
that  was  manufactured  in  the  United  States,  and
his  income  grew  from  $300  a  year  until  it  reached
$200,000.  It  was  estimated  that  up  to  September,
1867,  the  date  of  the  expiration  of  the  patent,  he
had  realized  about  $2,000,000.  In  1863  he  organ-
ized a  company  of  which  he  was  made  president,
and  erected  a"  large  sewing-machine  factory  at
Bridgeport,  Conn.  During  the  civil  war  he  con-
tributed largely  to  the  support  of  the  government,
enlisting  as  a  private  soldier  in  the  17th  Connecti-
cut regiment,  with  which  he  served  until  failing
health  compelled  his  resignation,  and  later,  when


280


HOWE


HOWE


the  government  was  pressed  for  funds,  he  advanced
money  to  pay  the  regiment.  Mr.  Howe  received
numerous  medals,  including  the  gold  medal  of  the
World's  fair  held  in  Paris  in  1867,  where  he  also
was  given  the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  honor.

HOWE,  Fisher,  author,  b.  in  Rochester,  Vt„  in
1798 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y,  7  Oct.,  1871.  He  was
engaged  in  business  in  Brooklyn  for  many  years,
and,  having  accumulated  a  fortune,  gave  liberally
of  his  time  and  means  to  philanthropic  enter-
prises. In  1852  he  made  an  extended  tour  of  the
east,  and  after  many  years  of  biblical  research
published  a  work  entitled  "Oriental  and  Sacred
Scenes  "  (New  York,  1856),  and  a  treatise  on  "  The
True  Site  of  the  Cross  "  (1869).

HOWE,  George  Augustus,  viscount,  British
soldier,  b.  in  England  in  1724;  d.  near  FortTicon-
deroga,  N.  Y.,  5  July,  1758.  His  father,  Emanuel
Scrope,  was  second  Viscount  Howe  of  the  Irish
peerage.  The  son  entered  the  army  at  an  early
age,  soon  rose  to  distinction,  and  in  1757  was  sent
to  this  country  in  command  of  the  60th  regiment,
arriving  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in  July  of  this  year.  He
was  transferred  to  the  command  of  the  55th  in-
fantry in  September,  promoted  brigadier-general
in  December,  and  on  6  July,  1758,  under  Com-
mander-in-Chief James  Abercrombie,  landed  at  the
outlet  of  Lake  George.  Coming  suddenly  upon
the  French  force  two  days  afterward  at  Fort  Ti-
conderoga,  he  fell  at  the  head  of  his  corps  in  the
ensuing  skirmish.  Howe  was  idolized  by  his  men,
and  exercised  much  influence  with  his  officers,
whom  he  induced  by  his  example  to  dress  and  fare
like  the  common  soldiers,  and  to  abandon  the  lux-
urious habits  that  were  then  in  vogue.  A  contem-
poraneous historian  says  in  allusion  to  his  death,
"  With  him  the  soul  of  the  army  seemed  to  expire."
The  general  court  of  Massachusetts  appropriated
£250  for  his  monument,  which  was  erected  in
Westminster  Abbey. — His  brother,  Richard,  Brit-
ish naval  officer,  b.  in  England  in  1725 ;  d.  there,
5  Aug..  1799,  entered  the  navy  at  fourteen  years  of
age,  and  served  with  distinction  against  the  French
from  1745  till  1759. On  the  death  of  his  brother

George  in  1758,
he  succeeded  to
the  family  title
and  estates.  At
the  conclusion
of  peace  between
France  and  Eng-
land, he  served
on  the  admiralty
board,  was  ap-
pointed treasurer
of  the  navy  in
1765,  entered  par-
liament for  Dart-
mouth, and  in
1770  was  made
rear-admiral  of
the  blue,  and
commanded  a
fleet  in  the  Medi-
terranean. In
1776,  with  the
rank  of  rear-admiral,  he  sailed  for  North  America
as  joint  commissioner  with  his  brother  William  for
restoring  peace  with  the  colonies.  Howe  was  sin-
cere in  his  attempts  to  reconcile  the  countries,  and,
as  unsuspicious  as  he  was  brave,  thought  that  by
riding  about  the  country  and  conversing  with  the
principal  inhabitants,  he  could,  by  moderation  and
concession,  restore  the  king's  authority.  When,
after  negotiations  with  Franklin,  he  discovered  the


true  attitude  of  the  colonists,  he  declared  that  he
had  been  deceived  in  accepting  a  commission  that
left  him  no  power  but  to  assist  in  the  subjugation
of  the  colonies  by  arms.  In  a  second  attempt  to
bring  about  a  reconciliation,  after  the  retreat  from
Long  Island,  he  used  John  Sullivan  as  a  go-between
to  congress,  but  was  forced  by  the  American  com-
missioners that  had  been  appointed  to  treat  with
him  to  acknowledge  that  his  commission,  in  respect
to  acts  of  parliament,  was  confined  to  powers'  of
consultation  with  private  individuals.  Howe  was
then  variously  employed  against  the  American
forces  for  two  years,  and  in  August,  1778,  had  an
indecisive  encounter  with  a  superior  French  fleet
under  Count  d'Estaing,  off  the  coast  of  Rhode
Island,  in  which  both  fleets  were  severely  shattered
by  a  storm.  Howe  then  resigned  his  command  to
Admiral  Byron  and  returned  to  England.  In  1782
he  was  made  a  peer  of  Great  Britain  under  the
title  of  Viscount  Howe.  In  the  latter  part  of  this
year  he  succeeded  in  bringing  into  the  harbor  at
Gibraltar  the  fleet  sent  to  the  relief  of  Gen.  Elliot ;
and  for  these  and  previous  services  was  created
Earl  and  Baron  Howe  of  Langar.  In  1793  he  was
put  in  command  of  the  channel  fleet,  in  the  next
year  he  gained  a  victory  over  the  French  on  the
western  coast  of  France  off  Ushant,  and  received
the  thanks  of  the  English  parliament.  In  1795  he
was  made  admiral  of  the  fleet,  and  in  1797  a  knight
of  the  garter.  His  last  important  service  was  the
suppression  of  a  mutiny  in  the  fleet  at  Spithead  in
1797.  Lord  Howe's  swarthy  complexion  gave  him,
among  the  sailors,  the  sobriquet  of  "  Black  Dick."
Horace  Walpole  describes  him  in  parliament,  as
"  silent  as  a  rock  except  when  naval  matters  were
discussed,  when  he  spoke  briefly  but  to  the  point."
A  severe  criticism  of  his  conduct  during  the  Ameri-
can war  was  written  probably  by  Lord  George
Germaine  (London,  1779),  and  he  replied  to  it  in  a
"Narrative  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Fleet"
(1780).  His  "  Life,"  with  letters  and  notes  from
his  journal,  was  published  and  edited  by  Sir  John
Barrow  (London,  1838).— Another  brother,  Will-
iam, soldier,  b.  in  England,  10  Aug..  1729 ;  d.  in
Plymouth,  England,  12  July,  1814,  commanded  the
light  infantry  under  Wolfe  at  the  heights  of  Abra-
ham, near  Quebec,  in  1759,  and  in  1775  succeeded
Gen.  Thomas  Gage  as  commander-in-chief  of  the
British  forces  in  America.  He  commanded  at  the
battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  after  the  evacuation  of  Bos-
ton retired  to  Halifax,  and  in  August,  1776,  de-
feated the  colonial  forces  on  Long  Island.  He  took
possession  of  New  York  on  15  Sept.,  defeated
Washington  at  White  Plains,  and  captured  Fort
Washington  with  its  garrison  of  2,000  men.  In
July,  1777,  he  sailed  to  Chesapeake  bay,  defeated
Washington  at  Brandywine,  11  Sept.,  and  on  the
26th  of  this  month  entered  Philadelphia.  He  re-
pulsed the  attack  of  Washington  at  Germantown
on  4  Oct.,  but,  instead  of  breaking  up  the  American
camp  at  Valley  Forge,  spent  the  winter  of  1777-8
in  Philadelphia  with  his  army,  in  indolence  and
pleasure.  In  May,  1778,  he  was  recalled  and  su-
perseded by  Sir  Henry  Clinton.  His  officers,  with
whom  he  was  personally  popular,  were  indignant
at  what  they  termed  the  injustice  of  his  removal,
and  gave  him  on  his  departure  a  grand  entertain-
ment called  the  "  mischianza."  On  the  investiga-
tion of  his  military  conduct  by  parliament  in  1779,
he  was  acquitted  of  blame  by  Lord  Grey,  Lord
Cornwallis,  and  other  military  men,  who  affirmed
that  he  had  done  what  he  could  considering  the
insufficiency  of  his  force.  Gen.  Plowe  became
lieutenant  of  ordnance  in  1782,  colonel  of  the  19th
dragoons,  and  full  general  in  1786,  was  governor  of


HOWE


HOWE


281


Berwick  in  1795,  and  in  1799,  on  the  death  of  his
brother  Richard,  succeeded  to  the  Irish  viscounty.

At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  a  pri-
vy councillor,  and
governor  of  Plym-
outh. Although
brave  and  an  adept
in  military  science,
Howe  was  incapable
of  conducting  the
operations  of  a  great
army,  and  owed  his
advancement  to  his
name,  and  his  re-
lationship, by  ille-
gitimate descent,  to
George  III.  He  is
described  by  Gen.
Henry  Lee  as  being
"  the  most  indolent
of  mortals,  who
never  took  pains  to
examine  the  merits
or  demerits  of  a
cause  in  which  he  was  engaged."  Gen.  Howe  pub-
lished a  narrative  relative  to  his  command  in  North
America  (London,  1780).

HOWE,  Henry,  historian,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  11  Oct.,  1816.  He  was  the  son  of  Hezekiah
Howe,  a  publisher,  in  whose  book-store  he  often
listened  to  Noah  Webster,  Jeremiah  Day,  Roger
Minot  Sherman,  David  Daggett,  Benjamin  Silli-
man,  and  James  Gates  Percival.  He  adopted  his
father's  profession,  and  when  only  twenty-three
published  his  first  book,  "  Eminent  Mechanics "
(New  York,  1839),  which  was  sold  by  subscription.
The  following  year  he  canvassed  the  state  of  New
York  with  John  W.  Barber  (q.  v.),  collecting  mate-
rials and  making  drawings  for  "  Historical  Collec-
tions of  New  York"  (New  York,  1841).  The  two
afterward  issued  together  "  Historical  Collections
of  New  Jersey"  (New  York,  1841).  On  the  publi-
cation of  his  book  on  Ohio,  Mr.  Howe  removed  to
Cincinnati,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  compiling
similar  works.  His  most  important  publication  was
"Our  Whole  Country  "(2  vols.,  Cincinnati,  1861),
which  was  designed  to  give  a  complete  survey  of
the  United  States  at  the  time  when  it  was  written.
In  1856  he  had  made  arrangements  with  Mr.  Bar-
ber to  travel  throughout  the  Union,  take  views
and  collect  materials  for  the  proposed  work,  and
it  was  five  years  in  preparation.  The  time  of  its
publication  was  unfortunate,  as  the  people  then
cared  for  nothing  but  war  literature,  and  when  the

treat  struggle  had  ended  the  book  was  out  of  date,
ince  the  autumn  of  1885  Mr.  Howe  has  been  en-
gaged in  preparing  a  new  edition  of  his  work  on
the  state  of  Ohio,  which  he  expects  to  publish
toward  the  close  of  1887.  His  publications  include,
besides  those  already  mentioned,  "  Historical  Col-
lections of  Virginia "  (Charleston,  S.  C,  1845) ;
"Historical  Collections  of  Ohio"  (Cincinnati,
1847);  "The  Great  West"  (1851);  "Travels  and
Adventures  of  Celebrated  Travellers"  (1853);
I  Life  and  Death  on  the  Ocean  "  (1855) ;  "  Adven-
tures and  Achievements  of  Americans  "  (1858) ;
"  Times  of  the  Rebellion  in  the  West "  (1867) ;  and
"Over  the  World"  (Philadelphia,  1883).  Mr.
Howe  has  also  issued  in  pamphlet-form  "Outline
History  of  New  Haven  *  (1884),  and  "  New  Ha-
ven's Elms  and  Greens  "  (1885).

HOWE,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in
1753  :  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1835.  He  was
associated  with Mrs.  Margaret  Draper  (q.  v.)  in


the  publication  of  the  "  Boston  News  Letter "  in
1775-'6.  He  adhered  to  the  roval  cause,  and,  when
Boston  was  evacuated  by  the  British  troops,  he  re-
tired to  Newport,  whence  he  removed  to  Nova
Scotia.  He  established  a  newspaper  at  Halifax,  and
was  postmaster-general  and  king's  printer. — His
son,  William,  b.  in  1786 ;  d.  in  Halifax  in  Jan-
uary, 1843,  was  assistant  commissary-general. —
Another  son,  John,  d.  in  Halifax  in  1843,  was
postmaster-general  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Halifax
Gazette." — A  third  son,  Joseph,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  near  Halifax,  13  Dec,  1804 ;  d.  in  Halifax,
1  June,  1873,  began,  when  thirteen  years  old,  to
learn  printing  in  the  "  Gazette  "  office,  and  in  1827
purchased  part  of  the  "  Weekly  Chronicle,"  which
was  continued  under  the  title  of  the  "  Acadian."
Selling  his  interest  in  this  paper  in  January,  1828,
he  became  sole  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Nova
Scotian."  In  1830  Mr.  Howe's  "Legislative  Re-
view "  appeared  and  attracted  wide  notice.  In
1835  he  published  an  article  censuring  the  local
government,  and  was  indicted  for  libel,  but  ac-
quitted. In  1836  he  was  elected  to  parliament  for
the  county  of  Halifax,  and  in  1840  he  became  a
member  of  the  provincial  cabinet.  Soon  afterward
the  system  that  he  had  attacked  and  exposed  was
abolished,  and  Halifax  was  granted  a  municipal
charter.  In  1848  Mr.  Howe  became  provincial
secretary,  in  1854  relinquished  this  office  to  super-
intend the  construction  of  the  first  railway  in  >\ova
Scotia,  and  in  1863  became  premier  of  the  province.
He  at  first  opposed  the  absorption  of  Nova  Scotia
into  the  Dominion  of  Canada,  but,  after  obtaining
the  best  possible  terms  for  his  province,  he  entered
the  Dominion  cabinet  in  1869  as  president  of  the
council,  and  in  1870  became  secretary  of  state  and
superintendent-general  of  Indian  affairs.  In  1873
he  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Nova
Scotia,  but  survived  his  appointment  only  a  few
weeks.  Mr.  Howe  had  acted  upon  several  occasions
as  colonial  agent  in  Great  Britian,  and  had  once
been  compelled  to  fight  a  duel  for  some  statement
he  had  published  reflecting  upon  an  opponent.  He
was  one  of  the  best  public  orators  that  Canada  has
produced.  See  his  "  Speeches  and  Public  Letters,"
edited  by  William  Armand  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1858).

HOWE,  John  Badlam,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  3  March,  1813 :  d.  in  Lima.  Ind..  22  Jan.,
1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1832,  and,
removing  to  Indiana,  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture in  1840,  and  of  the  State  constitutional  conven-
tion in  1850.  He  published  " Political  Economy"
(Boston,  1878) ;  "  Monetary  and  Industrial  Falla-
cies "  (1879) ;  "  Common  Sense  of  Monev  "  (1881) ;
and  "Replv  to  Criticisms"  (1882).— His  brother,
William  Bell  White,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Clare-
mont,  N.  H.,  21  March,  1823.  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Vermont  in  1844,  ordained  deacon  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1847,  and
priest  in  June.  1849.  He  was  in  charge  successively
of  St.  John's  church,  Berkeley,  S.  C,  and  St.
Philip's,  Charleston,  and  in  October,  1871,  was  con-
secrated assistant  bishop  of  South  Carolina,  becom-
ing the  sixth  bishop  of  the  diocese  in  December  of
the  same  year.  The  University  of  the  South,  at
Sewanee,  Tenn.,  gave  him  the  degree  of D.  D.  in

1871,  and  he  received  the  same  from  Columbia  in

1872.  He  has  published  sermons  and  addresses.
HOWE,  John  Ireland,  inventor,  b.  in  Ridge-
field,  Conn.,  20  July,  1793;  d.  in  Birmingham,
Conn.,  10  Sept.,  1876.  He  began  the  study  of
medicine  in  1812.  and  for  several  years  was  one  of
the  resident  physicians  of  the  New  York  almshouse.
Later  he  followed  his  profession  in  New  York
city,  and  in  1829  settled  in  North  Salem,  N.  Y.


282


HOWE


HOWE


During  his  residence  in  New  York  he  experimented
on  India-rubber,  and  in  1828  obtained  a  patent  for
a  rubber  compound.  After  settling  in  North
Salem,  he  built  a  factory  for  the  manufacture  of
rubber,  which  was  abandoned  soon  after,  owing  to
lack  of  success.  Mr.  Howe  says:  "So  far  as  1
know,  I  was  the  first  person  who  attempted  to
utilize  rubber  by  combining  other  substances  with
it,  but  I  did  not  happen  to  stumble  upon  the  right
substance."  He  then  began  a  series  of  experiments
with  a  view  of  constructing  a  machine  for  the
manufacture  of  pins,  and,  after  laboring  during  the
winters  of  1830-'l,  made  a  machine  that  was  suc-
cessful as  a  working  model,  and  would  make  pins,
though  in  an  imperfect  manner.  He  patented  this
machine  in  1832,  and  during  the  same  year  was
awarded  a  large  silver  medal  by  the  American  in-
stitute. A  second  machine  was  completed  early  in
1833,  after  which  he  went  to  Europe  for  the  pur-

Eose  of  securing  patents  abroad.  In  January,  1834,
e  began  the  building  of  a  machine,  in  Manches-
ter, with  which  pins  to  the  weight  of  24,000  to
the  pound  were  made,  but  he  was  unsuccessful
in  disposing  of  his  European  patents,  and  re-
turned to  New  York  after  an  absence  of  about
two  years.  Soon  after  his  return  the  Howe  manu-
facturing company  was  organized  for  the  purpose
of  making  pins  with  the  machine  he  had  in-
vented. Dr.  Howe  was  appointed  general  agent
of  the  company,  and  continued  in  that  capaci-
ty until  1865,  having  the  management  of  the
manufacturing  department.  Shops  were  fitted  up
in  New  York  in  1836,  but  the  factory  was  removed
in  1838  to  Birmingham,  Conn.  Late  in  1838  a  new
"  rotary  machine "  was  invented  by  Dr.  Howe,
which  he  patented  in  1840.  For  upward  of  thirty
years  this  machine  was  used  without  any  material
improvement  or  alteration,  and  in  1842  Dr.  Howe
was  awarded  a  gold  medal  by  the  American  insti-
tute for  the  "  best  solid-headed  pins,"  which  were
made  on  this  machine.  Subsequently  he  invented
improvements  in  the  methods  used  for  "  sheeting  "
pins,  and  was  associated  in  the  invention  of  means
by  which  japanned  "  mourning-pins  "  were  made.

HOWE,  Mark  Antony  De  Wolfe,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  5  April,  1809.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1828,  ordained  deacon  in  1832,
and  priest  in  1833.  In  October  of  the  latter  year
he  became  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Roxbury,
Mass.,  where  he  remained  three  years,  and  then  re-
moving to  Cambridge  was  rector  of  Christ  church,
and  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Witness."  Returning
to  Roxbury  in  1836,  he  remained  there  ten  years,
and  then  became  rector  of  St.  Luke's  church,  Phila-
delphia, where  he  officiated  till  1865,  when  he  was
consecrated  bishop  of  central  Pennsylvania.  From
1850  till  1862  he  was  secretary  of  the  house  of
clerical  and  lay  deputies,  and  he  was  a  deputy  to
the  general  convention  from  that  date  till  1872.
In  1865  he  was  elected  missionary  bishop  of  Nevada,
but  declined.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Brown  in  1848,  and  from  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1876.  He  has  published,  besides
sermons,  essays,  and  addresses,  "  A  Review  of  the
Report  of  the  Boston  Public  Schools"  (Boston,
1845) ;  "  Oration  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  So-
ciety "  (Hartford,  1852) ;  "  Domestic  Slavery,  a  Re-
ply to  Bishop  Hopkins  "  (Philadelphia,  1864) ;  "  Life
of  Bishop  Alonzo  Potter  "  (1871) ;  "  Poem  read  at
the  Bi-Centenary  of  Bristol,  R.  I."  (Providence,
R.  I.,  1882) ;  and  "  Charge  to  the  Clergy  of  the  Dio-
cese of  Central  Pennsylvania  "  (Reading,  1886).

HOWE,  Nathanael,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ipswich,
Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1764;  d.  in  Hopkinton,  Mass.,  15
Feb.,  1837. He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786,


and,  after  teaching  one  year  in  Ipswich,  studied
theology  under  Dr.  Nathanael  Emmons  (q.  v.),  of
whose  Calvinistic  theology  he  was  a  zealous  ex-
pounder. He  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Hopkinton  from  1791  until  his  death.
Dr.  Howe  was  a  characteristic  divine  of  the  old
New  England  school,  and  his  pithy  sayings,  such
as  "Leisure  is  time  for  doing  something  use-
ful," and  "  A  dead  fish  can  swim  with  the  stream,
but  only  a  living  one  can  swim  against  it,"  have
passed  into  proverbs.  His  most  famous  discourse,
which  was  delivered  on  the  one  hundredth  anni-
versary of  the  settlement  of  Hopkinton,  is  a  valu-
able history  of  the  town,  and  was  described  in  the
"  North  American  Review  "  of  1815  as  "  a  unique
specimen,  beyond  all  praise."  It  passed  through
several  editions,  and  was  reprinted  with  a  memoir
of  Dr.  Howe  by  Rev.  Elias  Nason  (Boston,  1851).
His  other  publications  are  "  Design  of  John's  Bap-
tism "  (Hopkinton,  1819),  and  "  A.  Catechism  with
Questions  and  Proverbs  "  (1820).

HOWE,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Brunswick  county,
N.  C,  in  1732 ;  d.  there,  12  Nov.,  1785.  He  was  de-
scended from  an  English  family,  and,  having  lost
his  parents  at  an  early  age,  received  an  irregular
and  scanty  education.  Marrying  while  still  a  youth,
he  took  his  wife  to  England,  and  remained  there  two
years,  the  guest  of  his  kindred.  On  his  return  in  1766
he  was  appointed  captain  of  Fort  Johnson,  N.  C,
under  the  commission  of  Gov.  Tryon,  and  baron  of
the  exchequer.  He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly
in  1772-'3,  a  delegate  to  the  colonial  congress  that
met  at  New  Berne,  25  Aug.,  1774,  and  chairman  of
the  committee  to  which  the  speech  of  the  loyal
governor  Martin,  opposing  the  congress,  was  re-
ferred. Howe's  able  and  patriotic  reply  so  in-
censed Martin  that  on  8  Aug..  1775,  the  latter  is-
sued a  proclamation  on  board  the  British  ship
"  Cruiser,"  denouncing  Howe  for  having  taken  the
title  of  colonel,  and  for  summoning  and  training
the  militia.  On  21  Aug.  of  this  year  Howe  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  2d  North  Carolina  regi-
ment by  the  colonial  congress,  which  met  at  Hills-
borough, and  in  December,  1775,  with  his  regiment,
was  ordered  to  Virginia.  Joining  Gen.  William
Woodford  at  Norfolk,  he  drove  the  loyal  governor,
Lord  Dunmore,  out  of  that  part  of  the  state,  re-
ceived the  thanks  of  the  Virginia  convention  and
of  congress  for  the  successful  conduct  of  this  cam-
paign, and  was  promoted  brigadier-general.  In
March,  1776,  Howe,  with  his  regiment,  joined  Gen.
Henry  Lee  in  Virginia,  and  went  to  the  south,
being  received  with  public  honors  as  he  passed
through  North  Carolina.  The  next  month,  Sir
Henry  Clinton,  who  had  excepted  Howe  when  he
had  offered  the  royal  clemency  to  all  who  would
lay  down  their  arms,  sent  Lord  Cornwallis  with
900  men  to  ravage  Howe's  plantation  in  Brunswick
county.  Gen.  Howe  commanded  the  North  Caro-
lina troops  at  the  defence  of  Charleston,  and  a
short  time  afterward  succeeded  Gen.  James  Moore
as  chief  in  command  of  the  southern  department.
In  October,  1777,  he  was  commissioned  major-
general,  and  in  the  spring  of  the  next  year  he
made  an  expedition  against  Florida,  which  want
of  proper  supplies,  insubordination,  and  a  fever
epidemic  rendered  disastrous.  Howe  was  forced
to  retreat  to  Savannah  with  a  shattered  command,
with  which,  and  a  small  militia  force,  he  endeav-
ored to  defend  the  city  against  the  British  under
Gen.  Provost ;  but,  being  surprised  in  the  night
by  Lieut.-Col.  Campbell,  was  forced  to  evacuate
the  place.  Although  he  was  honorably  acquitted
by  a  court-martial,  Howe's  conduct  was  severely
criticised,  especially  in  a public  letter  by  Gen.


HOWE


HOWE


283


Christopher  Gadsden,  of  Charleston,  whom  Howe
at  once  challenged.  They  met  at  Cannonsburg,  13
Aug.,  1778.  Howe's  ball  grazed  Gadsden's  ear,  and
the  latter  fired  in  the  air,  after  which  the  combat-
ants became  reconciled.  Maj.  John  Andre  com-
memorated the  affair  in  a  humorous  poem  of
eighteen  stanzas.  In  compliance  with  the  solicita-
tions of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  Howe  was
then  superseded  by  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  in
command  of  the  southern  department,  and  was  or-
dered to  join  Washington  on  the  Hudson.  He  was
in  command  at  West  Point  in  1780,  and  in  1781
led  the  troops  that  were  sent  to  quell  the  mutiny
in  the  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey  regiments,
afterward  receiving  the  thanks  of  Washington  for
his  judicious  performance  of  this  duty.  In  June,
1783,  he  was  ordered  on  a  similar  expedition  to
Philadelphia.  In  May,  1785,  he  was  appointed  by
congress  to  treat  with*  the  western  Indians.  Re-
turning to  North  Carolina  a  few  months  later  he
was  received  with  public  honors  and  elected  to  the
legislature,  but  was  attacked  with  fever,  and  died
before  taking  his  seat.

HOWE,  Samuel  Gridley,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  10  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  there,  9  Jan.,  1876.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1821,  and  at  the
Harvard  medical  school  in  1824.  After  complet-
ing his  studies  he  went  to  Greece,  where  he  served
as  surgeon  in  the  war  for  the  independence  in
1824-'7,  and  then  as  the  head  of  the  regular  surgi-
cal service,  which  he  established  in  that  country.
In  1827  he  returned  to  the  United  States  in  order
to  obtain  help  for  the  Greeks  when  they  were
threatened  with  a  famine,  and  later  founded  a
colony  on  the  isthmus  of  Corinth,  but  in  conse-
quence of  prostration  by  swamp-fever  he  was
obliged  in  1830  to  leave  the  country.  In  1831,
his  attention  having  been  called  to  the  need  of
schools  for  the  blind,  for  whose  education  no  pro-
vision had  been  made  in  this  country,  he  again
visited  Europe  in  order  to  study  the  methods  of
instruction  then  in  use  for  the  purpose  of  acquir-
ing information  concerning  the  education  of  the
blind.  While  in  Paris  he  was  made  president  of
the  Polish  committee.  In  his  efforts  to  convey  and
distribute  funds  for  the  relief  of  a  detachment  of
the  Polish  army  that  had  crossed  into  Prussia,  he
was  arrested  by  the  Prussian  authorities,  but,  after
six  weeks'  imprisonment,  was  taken  to  the  French
frontier  by  night  and  liberated.  On  his  return  to
Boston  in  1832  he  gathered  several  blind  pupils  at
his  father's  house,  and  thus  gave  origin  to  the
school  which  was  afterward  known  as  the  Perkins
institution,  and  of  which  he  was  the  first  superin-
tendent, continuing  in  this  office  until  his  death.
His  greatest  achievement  in  this  direction  was  the
education  of  Laura  Bridgman  (q.  v.).  Dr.  Howe  also
took  an  active  part  in  founding  the  experimental
school  for  the  training  of  idiots,  which  resulted  in
the  organization  of  the  Massachusetts  school  for
idiotic  and  feeble-minded  youth  in  1851.  He  was
actively  engaged  in  the  anti-slavery  movement,  and
was  a  Free-soil  candidate  for  congress  from  Boston
in  1846.  During  1851-'3  he  edited  the  "  Common-
wealth." Dr.  Howe  took  an  active  part  in  the
sanitary  movement  in  behalf  of  the  soldiers  during
the  civil  war.  In  1867  he  again  went  to  Greece  as
bearer  of  supplies  for  the  Cretans  in  their  struggle
with  the  Turks,  and  subsequently  edited  in  Boston
I  The  Cretan."  He  was  appointed,  in  1871,  one  of
the  commissioners  to  visit  Santo  Domingo  and  re-
port upon  the  question  of  the  annexation  of  that
Hand  to  the  United  States,  of  which  he  became  an
earnest  advocate.  In  1868  he  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Brown. His  publications  include


letters  on  topics  of  the  time ;  various  reports,  es-
pecially those  of  the  Massachusetts  commissioners
of  idiots  (Boston,  1847-8) ;  "  Historical  Sketch  of
the  Greek  Revolution  "  (New  York,  1828) ;  and  a
"  Reader  for  the  Blind,"  printed  in  raised  charac-
ters (1839).  See  "  Memoir  of  Dr.  Samuel  G.  Howe,"
by  Mrs.  Julia  Ward  Howe  (Boston,  1876).— His
wife,  Julia  Ward,  b.  in  New  York  city,  27  May,
1819,  is  the  daughter  of  Samuel  Ward,  a  New  York
banker.  Her  mother,  Julia  Rush  Ward,  was  the  au-
thor of  various  occasional  poems.  Julia  was  care-
fully educated,  partly  at  home  and  partlv  in  private
schools  in  New  York.  Her  tutor  in  German  and
Latin  was  Dr.  Joseph  G.  Cogswell.  At  an  early
age  Miss  Ward  wrote  plays  and  poems.  After  her
father's  death  she  visited  Boston,  and  met  there  Dr.
Howe,  whom  she  married  in  1843.  She  afterward
continued  her  studies,  learned  to  speak  fluently  in
Italian,  French,  and  Greek,  and  became  a  student  of
Kant,  Hegel,  Spi-
noza, Comte,  and
Fichte.  She  also
wrote  philosophi-
cal essays,  which
she  read  at  her
house  before  her
literary  friends.
For  some  time  be-
fore the  civil  war
she  conducted  with
her  husband  the
Boston  "Common-
wealth," an  anti-
slavery  paper.  In
1861,  while  on  a
visit  to  the  camps  L  /'  1i  .**  "if
near  Washington,  h^U^-  *  taA'  *W-<  .
with  Gov.  John  A.

Andrew  and  other  friends,  Mrs.  Howe  wrote  the
"  Battle-Hymn  of  the  Republic,"  which  soon  be-
came popular.  She  espoused  the  woman-suffrage
movement  in  1869,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  New  England  women's  club,  of  which  she  has
been  president  since  1872.  She  has  also  presided
over  several  similar  associations,  including  the
American  woman-suffrage  association.  In  1872
she  was  a  delegate  to  the  World's  prison  reform
congress  in  London,  and  in  the  same  year  aided  in
founding  the  Woman's  peace  association  there.  In
1884-'5  she  presided  over  the  Woman's  branch  of
the  New  Orleans  exposition.  She  has  delivered  nu-
merous lectures,  and  has  often  addressed  the  Mas-
sachusetts legislature  in  aid  of  reforms.  She  has
preached  in  Rome,  Italy,  Santo  Domingo,  and  from
Unitarian  pulpits  in  this  country.  She  has  also
read  lectures  at  the  Concord  school  of  philosophy.
Mrs.  Howe  has  published  two  volumes  of  poems,
entitled  "Passion  Flowers"  (Boston,  1854),  and
"Words  for  the  Hour  "(1857) :  "  The  World's  Own,"
a  drama,  which  was  acted  at  Wallaek's  theatre,  New
York,  in  1855  (1857) ;  "  A  Trip  to  Cuba  "  (1860);  "  La-
ter Lyrics  "  (1866) ;  "  From  the  Oak  to  the  Olive  "
(1868) ;  "  Modern  Societv,"  two  lectures  (1881) ;  and
"  Life  of  Margaret  Fuller  "  (1883).  She  has  also
edited  "  Sex  and  Education,"  a  reply  to  Dr.  Edward
H.  Clarke's  "  Sex  in  Education  "  (1874) ;  and  wrote
for  Edwin  Booth,  in  1858, "  Hippolytus,"  a  tragedy,
which  has  been  neither  acted  nor  published. —
Their  daughter,  Julia  Rnmana.  educator,  b.  in
Rome,  Italy,  12  March,  1844 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
10  March,  1886,  became  proficient  in  history  and
languages,  and  was  an  instructor  in  the  Perkins
institution,  where  at  one  time  she  taught  German
to  a  blind  class  so  well  that  her  pupils  were  able  to
converse  fluently  in  that  language. She  was  the


284


HOWE


HOWELL


founder  and  for  some  time  president  of  the  Meta-
physical club  in  Boston,  and  published  a  sketch  of
the  Concord  school  of  philosophy,  also  "Stray
Chords"  (Boston,  1884),  a  volume  of  poems.  In
December,  1870,  she  married  Michael  Anagnos,
who  succeeded  her  father  as  superintendent  of  the
Perkins  institution. — Their  son,  Henry  Marion,
mining  engineer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  March,
1848,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1869,  and  at
the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology  in  1871.
His  attention  was  then  turned  to  mining  engineer-
ing and  metallurgy,  and  he  has  had  charge  of
various  works  in  the  United  States  and  Canada.
Mr.  Howe  is  an  active  member  of  the  American
institute  of  mining  engineers,  was  its  vice-president
in  1879-81,  and  has  been  a  manager  since  1886.
His  publications,  consisting  of  professional  papers,
have  been  contributed  to  the  transactions  of  the
mining  engineers,  and  treat  principally  of  the  me-
tallurgy of  iron,  steel,  copper,  and  nickel.  He  has
also  written  valuable  treatises  for  the  "  Bulletins
of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,"  such  as  "  Copper
Smelting "  (Washington,  1885),  and  "  Metallurgy
of  Steel"  (1887).— Another  daughter,  Maud,  au-
thor, b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  Nov.,  1855,  married  in
February,  1887,  John  Elliott,  an  English  artist.
She  has  published  "  San  Rasario  Ranch  "  (Boston,
1884) ;  "  A  Newport  Aquarelle  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Ata-
lanta  in  the  South  "  (1886).

HOWE,  Timothy  Otis,  senator,  b.  in  Liver-
more.  Me.,  24  Feb.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Kenosha,  Wis.,  25
March,  1883.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, working  on  a  farm  during  his  vacations.
In  1839  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  in  Readfield.  He  was  an  ardent  Whig  and
admirer  of  Henry  Clay,  and  in  1840  was  in  the
legislature,  where  he  was  active  in  debate.  Im-
paired health  occasioned  his  removal  to  Wisconsin
in  the  latter  part  of  this  year,  and  opening  a  law-
office  in  Green  Bay,  then  a  small  village,  he  con-
tinued his  residence  there  throughout  his  life.  He
was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  congress  in
1848,  and  two  years  afterward  was  elected  circuit
judge.  The  circuit  judges  were  also  judges  of  the
supreme  court,  and  during  part  of  his  term  he
served  as  chief  justice  of  the  state.  Resigning  his
judgeship  in  1855,  he  resumed  his  profession,  and
was  an  efficient  Republican  speaker  in  the  canvass
of  1856.  In  the  trial  that  was  held  to  ascertain
whether  William  Boynton  or  Coles  Bashford  was
lawful  governor  of  Wisconsin,  Mr.  Howe  appeared
as  Bashford's  counsel  and  gained  his  case,  and  his
success  largely  increased  his  reputation.  In  1861
he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Republican,  serv-
ing till  1879.  During  his  long  career  he  served  on
the  committees  of  finance,  commerce,  pensions,  and
claims,  was  one  of  the  earliest  advocates  of  univer-
sal emancipation,  and  in  a  speech  in  the  senate  on
29  May,  1861,  advocated  in  strong  terms  the  negro-
suffrage  bill  for  the  District  of  Columbia.  He  also
urged  the  right  of  the  National  government  to  es-
tablish territorial  governments  over  the  seceded
states.  He  made  able  speeches  in  1865-'6  against
the  policy  of  Andrew  Johnson,  and  voted  in  favor
of  his  impeachment.  He  supported  the  silver  bill
in  1878,  denounced  President  Hayes's  policy  re-
garding civil-service  reform  in  the  southern  states,
and  opposed  the  anti-Chinese  bill.  On  the  death
of  Salmon  P.  Chase,  President  Grant  offered  Judge
Howe  a  judgeship  in  the  supreme  court,  which  he
declined.  He  had  left  the  senate  when  the  third-
term  question  came  up,  but  favored  the  election
of  Grant,  and  in  1880  spoke  strongly  in  its  sup-
port. In  1881  he  was  a  U.  S.  delegate  to  the  In-
ternational monetary  conference  in  Paris. In  De-


cember, 1881,  he  was  appointed  postmaster-general
by  President  Arthur,  and,  although  his  term  of
service  was  little  more  than  a  year,  a  reduction  of
postage  was  effected,  postal-notes  were  issued,  and
reform  measures  urged  with  great  force.

HOWELL,  Arthur,  a  preacher  of  the  Society
of  Friends,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  20  Aug.,  1748 ;  d.
there,  26  Jan.,  1816.  In  1779  he  was  acknowledged
as  a  minister  by  the  monthly  meeting  of  the  Phila-
delphia Friends,  and  is  described  as  "  remarkable
for  spiritual  mindedness,  and  the  gift  of  prophecy."
When  in,  the  preaching-gallery  he  always  sat  with
his  hat  drawn  over  his  face,  and  the  upper  part  of
his  outside  coat  elevated  to  meet  it,  isolated  from
all  earthly  things.  Many  anecdotes  are  related  of
his  strict  integrity  in  business.  On  one  occasion
he  purchased  a  cargo  of  oil  on  a  rising  market,  and,
after  selling  it  at  a  higher  rate  than  he  anticipated,
he  paid  the  person  from  whom  he  had  bought  it
an  additional  dollar  on  each  barrel.  During  the
fever  epidemic  of  1793  in  Philadelphia  he  rendered
valuable  assistance  in  nursing  the  sick  and  bury-
ing the  dead.  Although  credited  with  supernatural
powers  of  divination,  he  was  simple  and  prudent.

HOWELL,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Jersev,  1
Jan.,  1747;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  29  July,  1S26.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1766,  and,  re-
moving to  Rhode  Island,  was  appointed  professor
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Brown
in  1769,  also  holding  the  chair  of  law  from  1790
till  1824.  In  the  interval  he  filled  the  several  of-
fices of  member  of  the  Continental  congress  in
1782-'5,  attorney-general  in  1789,  judge  of  the  su-
preme court,  commissioner  for  settling  the  bounda-
ries of  the  United  States,  and  district  attorney,  and
from  1812  until  his  death  was  a  district  judge  of
Rhode  Island.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1793.  Judge  Howell  was  distinguished
for  wit,  learning,  and  eloquence,  and  was  a  forcible
political  speaker. — His  son,  Jeremiah  Brown,
senator,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1772 ;  d.  there
in  November,  1822,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1789,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice.
In  1810  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a
Federalist,  and  served  from  1811  till  1817.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1791.

HOWELL,  George  Rogers,  b.  in  Southamp-
ton, N.  Y.,  15 .  June,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1854,  and,  after  spending  several  years  in
teaching  and  in  studying,  he  entered  the  Prince-
ton theological  seminary,  and  was  graduated  in
1864.  When  engaged  in  ministerial  work  in
western  New  York,  he  was  invited  to  deliver  the
address  at  the  celebration  of  the  225th  anniversary
of  his  native  place  in  1865.  At  the  close  of  this
celebration  he  was  requested  by  many  of  his  towns-
people to  prepare  a  history  of  this  town.  He  pub-
lished "The  Early  History  of  Southampton,  L.
I.,  with  Genealogies"  (New  York,  1866;  2d  ed„
Albany,  1887).  In  1872  he  was  invited  to  take  an
office  in  the  New  York  state  library,  to  become
familiar  with  its  wants  and  its  mode  of  adminis-
tration, preparatory  to  becoming  librarian  when
that  post  should  become  vacant.  He  has  pub-
lished historical  and  scientific  pamphlets,  and  has
written  much  for  the  newspapers.  He  published
several  papers  in  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Albany
Institute,"  including  "Linguistic  Discussions."
"  The  Open  Polar  Sea,"  and  "  Heraldry  in  America."

HOWELL,  James  B.,  senator,  b.  near  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  4  July,  1816;  d.  in  Keokuk,  Iowa,  17
June,  1880.  His  father,  Elias,  removed  with  his
family  to  Ohio  in  1819,  and,  settling  in  Licking
county,  was  state  senator,  and  in  1830  a  member
of  congress. James  was  graduated  at  Miami  uni-


HOWELL


HOWELLS


285


versity  in  1839,  and  settled  in  Newark,  Ohio.  In
1841  he  removed  to  Kosauque,  Iowa,  practised  law,
and  engaged  in  polities,  and  was  the  editor  of  the
"  Des  Moines  Valley  Whig."  In  1849  he  removed
with  his  paper  to  Keokuk,  and  abandoning  law
devoted  himself  to  politics  and  to  his  journal,
which  he  now  published  under  the  title  of  the
"Daily  Gate  City."  He  was  one  of  the  earliest
advocates  for  the  formation  of  the  Republican
party  in  the  state,  and  in  1856  was  a  delegate  from
Iowa  to  the  convention  that  nominated  John  C.
Fremont  for  president.  He  supported  Abraham
Lincoln  in  the  presidential  campaign  of  1861,  and
vehemently  opposed  slavery.  In  1870  he  was  elect-
ed to  the  IJ.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  to  fill  the
unexpired  term  of  James  W.  Grimes,  and  served
till  3  March,  1871.  Shortly  after  the  close  of  the
session  of  1871,  President  Grant  selected  him  as
one  of  the  three  commissioners  that  were  author-
ized by  the  act  of  3  March,  1871,  to  examine  and
report  on  claims  for  stores  and  supplies  that  had
been  taken  or  furnished  for  the  use  of  the  National
army  in  the  seceded  states.  He  was  engaged  in
this  work  until  10  March,  1880.

HOWELL,  John  Adams,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  York,  16  March,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1858 ;  became  a  lieu-
tenant in  April,  1861 ;  lieutenant-commander  in
March,  1865 ;  and  commander,  6  March,  1872.  He
served  as  executive  officer  of  the  steam-sloop  "  Os-
sipee"  at  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay,  5  Aug.,  1864,
and  was  honorably  mentioned  by  his  commanding
officer  in  his  despatches.  He  was  promoted  to  cap-
tain on  1  March,  1884,  and  in  1887  was  a  member  of
the  naval  advisory  board.  He  is  the  inventor  of  a
torpedo  (the  result  of  sixteen  years  of  study)  which
naval  officers  regard  as  probably  superior  to  any
other  in  use.

HOWELL,  Richard,  statesman,  b.  in  Newark,
Del.,  in  1753 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  28  April,  1802.
He  was  a  lawyer,  commanded  a  company  of  grena-
diers before  the  war,  and  was  one  of  the  young
men  who  were  prosecuted  for  being  concerned  in
the  burning  of  the  cargo  of  tea  at  Greenwick,  N.  J.,
22  Nov.,  1774.  In  1775  he  was  appointed  captain
in  the  2d  New  Jersey  regiment,  and  was  present
at  Quebec.  He  was  promoted  to  major  in  1776,
commanded  his  regiment  until  1779,  and  was  ap-

Sointed  judge-advocate  of  the  army  in  1782.  but
eclined.  Resuming  practice,  he  was  clerk  of  the
state  supreme  court  from  1778  till  3  June,  1793,
and  governor  of  New  Jersey  from  1794  till  October,
1801.  He  composed  an  ode  welcoming  Gen.  Wash-
ington to  Trenton,  N.  J.,  while  on  his  way  to  New
York  to  be  inaugurated  president. — His  brother,
Rednap,  poet,  taught  in  Deep  River,  N.  C,  and
composed  many  patriotic  songs.  He  was  the
author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  A  Fan  for  Fan-
ning, and  a  Touch  for  Tryon"  (Boston,  1771). —
Richard's  son,  Richard  Lewis,  b.  in  Stockton,
N.  J.,  was  a  captain  in  the  U.  S.  army ;  took  part
in  the  actions  at  Chrysler's  Farm  and  at  Fort
George,  where  he  reoeived  Gen.  Pike  into  his  arms,
when  he  was  mortally  wounded ;  and  was  in  many
minor  actions  on  the  Canada  border. — Richard
Lewis's  son,  John  dimming,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  24  Nov.,  1819,  was  educated  at
Crawford's  classical  school  in  that  city,  and  at
Washington  college,  Pa.,  entering  the  navy  as
an  acting  midshipman,  9  June,  1836.  He  became
beutenant  in  August.  1849 ;  commander,  16  July,
1862;  and  captain,  25  July,  1866.  He  served  in
the  "  Minnesota,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  in  1861,  and  was  her  executive  officer  at
the  battle  of  Hatteras  Inlet. He  commanded  the


steamer  "  Tahamo,"  Eastern  Gulf  blockading  squad-
ron, in  1862- '3,  and  the  "  Nereus,"  of  the  North
Atlantic  squadron,  in  1864-'5,  and  participated  in
the  two  actions  at  Fort  Fisher  in  1864-'5.  For
his  cool  performance  of  duty  he  was  recommended
for  promotion  bv  Rear- Admiral  Porter,  28  Jan.,
1865.  From  1868  till  1870  he  was  fleet-captain  of
the  European  squadron,  and  from  1870  till  1872
commandant  of  the  navy-yard  at  League  island,
Philadelphia.  He  was  commissioned  commodore,
29  Jan.,  1872,  had  command  of  the  navy-yard  at
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  till  1874,  and  from  that  year
till  1878  was  chief  of  the  bureau  of  yards  and
docks.  He  became  a  rear-admiral,  25  A'pril,  1877,
commanded  the  North  Atlantic  and  European
squadrons  in  1878-'8l,  and  was  acting  secretary  of
the  navv  at  various  times  from  1874  till  1878.

HOWELL,  Robert  Boyte  Crawford,  author,
b.  in  Wayne  county,  N.  C,  10  March,  1801 ;  d.  in
Nashville,  Tenn.,  5  April.  1868.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbian  college,  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1826.
Soon  afterward  he  was  licensed  to  preach,  and
labored  as  a  missionary  under  the  Baptist  general
association  of  Virginia.  On  27  Jan.,  1827,  he  was
ordained  pastor  of  the  Cumberland  street  Bap-
tist church,  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he  continued
eight  years,  and  in  1834  he  removed  to  Nashville,
Tenn.,  where  until  1850  he  was  pastor  of  the  1st
Baptist  church.  He  established  and  edited  for
some  time  a  religious  newspaper  in  Nashville,  was
moderator  or  president  of  all  the  religious  organi-
zations of  the  Baptists  in  the  state,  and  for  ten
consecutive  years  was  president  of  the  southern
Baptist  convention.  In  1850-'7  he  was  pastor  of
the  2d  Baptist  church  in  Richmond,  Va.,  but  after-
ward returned  to  his  former  charge  at  Nashville,
and  remaining  there  till  his  death.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  took  a  decided  stand  in
favor  of  the  south,  and,  when  the  city  came  into
the  possession  of  the  National  forces,  was  placed
under  military  surveillance  by  Andrew  Johnson,
then  governor  of  the  state.  Dr.  Howell  was  com-
manding in  his  presence,  eloquent  as  a  preacher,
and  graceful  and  vigorous  as  a  writer.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Terms  of  Sacramental  Communion  "
(Philadelphia,  1841) ;  "  Howell  on  the  Deaconship  "
(1846) ;  "  The  Wav  of  Salvation  "  (Charleston,  1849) ;
"The  Evils  of  "infant  Baptism"  (1851);  "The
Cross"  (1854);  "The  Covenant"  (1856);  "The
Early  Baptists  of  Virginia"  (Philadelphia,  1876);
and  several  smaller  books.  He  left  unpublished
"  A  Memorial  of  the  First  Baptist  Church  of
Nashville  from  1820  to  1863,"  "The  Christology
of  the  Pentateuch,"  an  enlargement  of  "  The  Cove-
nants," and  "  The  Family."  Some  of  his  works
were  republished  in  England.

HOWELLS,  William  Dean,  author,  b.  in  Mar-
tin's Ferry,  Ohio,  1  March,  1837.  His  ancestors
on  the  father's  side  were  Welsh  Quakers,  and  peo-
ple of  substance:  his  great-grandfather  introduced
the  manufacture  of  flannel  into  his  town  and  built
three  mills ;  his  grandfather,  impelled  by  his  demo-
cratic sympathies,  emigrated  to  this  country,  and
became  an  ardent  Methodist ;  while  his  father
adopted  the  beliefs  of  Swedenborg,  in  which  young
Howells  was  educated.  In  all  these  generations  the
family  was  a  cultivated  race,  living  in  an  atmos-
phere of  books  and  moral  and  literary  refinement.
His  father  had,  for  the  time  and  place,  a  good  col-
lection of  books,  but  it  was  mostlv  poetry,  and  fa-
miliarity with  this  doubtless  decided  the  nature  of
his  early  literary  efforts.  Almost  as  soon  as  he
could  read  he  began  to  make  verses  and  put  them
in  type  in  his  father's  printing-office.  In  his  in-
herited literary  tastes  and  refinement  and  liberal


286


HOWELLS


HO  WELLS


/v-^y^^.


and  undogmatic  religious  tendency,  in  the  plain
living  of  his  early  years  and  his  learning  a  trade,  in
his  contact  with  a  thoroughly  democratic  society,  in
the  early  habit  of  self-dependence  and  the  knowl-
edge of  the  realities
of  life,  it  is  evident
what  has  given  the
man  his  charm  as  a
writer,  his  courage
of  opinion,his  sturdy
Americanism,  and
his  profound  sym-
pathy with  common
life.  When  he  was
three  years  old  his
father  removed  to
Hamilton,  Ohio,  and
bought  the  Hamil-
ton "  Intelligencer,"
a  weekly  journal,  in
the  office  of  which
Howells  learned  to
set  type  before  he
was  twelve  years  old.  In  1849,  the  elder  Howells,
unable,  conscientiously,  to  support  a  slave-holding

E resident,  sold  his  newspaper,  and  removed  with
is  family  to  Dayton,  Ohio,  where  he  purchased
the  Dayton  "  Transcript,"  a  semi-weekly  news-
paper, which  he  turned  into  a  daily.  After  a
struggle  of  two  years,  this  enterprise  completely
failed,  not,  however,  from  any  want  of  industry,  for
all  the  sons  worked  at  the  case,  and  young  Howells
often  set  type  till  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  and  then
arose  at  four  in  the  morning  to  deliver  newspapers.
The  announcement  of  the  catastrophe  in  business
was  accepted  with  American  insouciance.  "  We
all,"  says  the  author,  "  went  down  to  the  Miami
river,  and  went  in  swimming."  In  expectation,
which  was  disappointed,  of  taking  the  superintend-
ence of  a  projected  paper-mill,  the  elder  Howells
took  his  family  to  Greene  county,  where  they  re-
mained a  year.  During  this  year,  in  a  log  house,
the  author  had  his  sole  experience  of  roughing  it,
away  from  the  amenities  of  civilization,  an  experi-
ence which  he  has  turned  to  account  in  a  charm-
ing sketch  of  his  boyhood.  In  1851,  when  the  fa-
ther was  clerk  of  the  house  at  the  state  capital,
Howells  worked  as  a  compositor  on  the  "  Ohio
State  Journal,"  earning  four  dollars  a  week,  which
he  contributed  to  the  family  treasury.  It  was  here
that  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  John  J.  Piatt,  an
intimacy  which  stimulated  his  poetical  tendency.
In  1851  the  family  removed  to  Ashtabula,  and  all
found  employment  on  the  "  Sentinel,"  which  the
elder  Howells  purchased ;  but  this  newspaper  was
subsequently  transferred  to  Jefferson,  where  it  con-
tinued under  the  management  of  the  family.  Be-
fore this  last  removal  the  talents  of  the  young  au-
thor had  attracted  attention  ;  at  the  age  of  nine-
teen he  was  the  Columbus  correspondent  of  the
Cincinnati  "  Gazette,"  and  when  he  was  twenty-
two  he  was  made  the  news  editor  of  the  "  State
Journal "  at  Columbus.  During  his  residence  in
Columbus  he  published  poems  in  the  "Atlantic
Monthly,"  the  first  entitled  "  By  the  Dead,"  and  in
one  year  five  others,  '•  The  Poet's  Friends,"  "  The
Pilot's  Story,"  "  Pleasure  Pain,"  "  Lost  Beliefs,"
and  "  Andenken."  Upon  the  nomination  of  Lin-
coln in  I860,  Howells  wrote  his  life,  and  from  the
profits  of  this  book,  $160,  he  made  his  first  excur-
sion into  the  world,  visiting  Montreal  and  Boston,
where  he  formed  the  acquaintance  of  James  Rus-
sell Lowell,  then  editor  of  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"
who  introduced  him  to  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.
By  President  Lincoln  he  was  appointed  consul  to


Venice,  and  he  resided  in  that  city  from  1801  till
1865,  devoting  his  leisure  hours  to  the  mastering
of  the  Italian  language  and  literature,  and  1 1  u
era!  cultivation  of  letters.  The  earliest  fruits  of
this  residence  were  a  series  of  papers  on  "  Venel  i;m
Life,"  first  published  in  book-form  in  England,  in
which  was  at  once  recognized  the  advent  of  a  ae*
writer  of  uncommon  power,  one  capable  of  com  ey-
ing to  the  reader  exquisite  delight  merely  by  the
charm  of  an  original  style,  as  vivid  as  it  was  subtle
and  flexible.  The  sketches  had  the  novelty  of  real-
ism ;  never  was  Venice  so  perfectly  photographed,
and  the  reader  was  agreeably  surprised  to  find  t  hat
the  intrinsic  romance  of  the  city  of  the  lagoons  was
heightened  rather  than  diminished  by  this  delicate
and  sympathetic  analysis.  Returning  home  well
equipped  for  newspaper  work,  by  a  knowledge  <>f
foreign  politics  and  literature,  and  the  acquisition
of  French  and  Italian,  Howells  was  for  some  time
an  editorial  writer  on  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "
and  the  "Times,"  and  a  salaried  contributor ot  the
"  Nation,"  and  in  1866  he  was  made  by  James  T.
Fields  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Atlantic  Mont  lily.*'
In  1872  he  became  its  editor,  which  post  he  re-
tained till  1881,  when  he  resigned  and  was  suca  fil-
ed by  Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich.  Besides  his  strictly
editorial  work  on  this  periodical,  he  contribute!
to  it  a  vast  amount  of  criticism,  miscellaneous
sketches,  and  fiction.  During  this  period  he  was
an  occasional  contributor  to  the  "  North  American
Review  "of  papers  on  Italian  literature, and,  resid-
ing in  Cambridge,  he  was  a  valuable  member  of  the
coterie  that  gathered  at  Longfellow's  house  to  as-
sist in  the  translation  of  Dante.  About  this  time
he  began  his  acquaintance  with  Spanish  literature.
While  editor  of  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  he  edited
with  delightful  introductory  essays  a  series  of
"  Choice  Autobiographies."  His  first  tentative  at-
tempt at  a  story  in  "  Their  Wedding  Journey  '"  was
so  successful  with  the  public  that  it  determined  his
career  as  a  writer  of  fiction,  and  since  he  dissolved
his  connection  with  the  "  Atlantic"  he  has  pursued
the  career  of  a  professional  man  of  letters,  derail
ing  himself  mainly  to  fiction,  with  the  occasional
production  of  plays,  travel  sketches,  and  literati
criticism.  Since  1881  most  of  his  work  has  had  a
preliminary  publication  in  "  The  Century "  and
"Harper's  Magazine."  In  1882-3  Mr.  Howells
was  again  in  Europe  with  his  family,  spending
some  time  in  England  and  revisiting  Italy.  .Since
his  return  his  residence  has  been  in  Boston.  In
1886  he  made  a  salaried  connection  with  "  Harp-
er's," taking  charge  of  a  new  and  critical  depart-
ment called  the  "Editor's  Study,"  and  contribut-
ing exclusively  to  its  pages.  In  this  department
he  exposes  and  explains  his  theory  of  modern  fic-
tion, taking  part  with  signal  courage  and  acumen
in  that  conflict  which  is  always  raging,  under  one
name  or  another,  between  the  idealists  and  the  real-
ists. To  his  apprehension  there  is  a  new  spirit  in
the  world,  or  a  new  era  in  fiction,  which  coin  ins
itself  with  life  as  it  actually  is,  has  a  profound  sym-
pathy with  humanity,  and  reckons  more  important
the  statement  of  the  facts  of  life  than  the  weaving
these  facts,  by  any  process  of  selection,  which  in  a
painter  would  be  called  "composition,"'  into  any
sort  of  story,  more  or  less  ideal.  Anything  ceases
to  be  commonplace  when  it  is  frankly  and  exactly
stated.  In  this  new  literary  movement,  the  novels
of  the  past  seem  unreal  and  artificial.  This  tend-
ency is  best  exemplified  in  the  modern  Russian
school,  which  is  remorseless  in  its  fidelity  to  the
actual,  the  lowly,  the  sordid,  the  sinful,  and  the
sorrowful  in  life,  and  accepts  the  inevitable,  the
fateful,  without  sarcasm,  but  with  a  tender  pit"'


HOWLAN


HOWLAND


287


Because  he  portrays  life  as  it  is,  or  rather  has  the
power  of  transferring  the  real,  throbbing,  human
life,  and  not  merely  its  incidents,  to  his  pages  as  no
writer  has  done  before,  Mr.  Howells  regards  Count
Leo  Tolstoi  as  the  first  of  all  novelists  that  have
written.  Howells  adds  to  his  theory  of  realism  the
notion  that  genius  is  merely  the  power  of  taking
conscientious  pains.  In  practice  he  is  a  methodical
and  industrious  worker,  with  a  keen  literary  con-
science, mindful  of  the  responsibilities  of  a  writer,
serious  in  mind,  but  genial  and  even  gay  in  tem-
perament, and  a  delightful  talker  and  companion.
Mr.  Howells  married  in  Paris,  24  Dec,  1862,  Eli-
nor G.  Mead,  sister  of  Larkin  G.  Mead,  the  sculp-
tor. They  have  three  children,  two  girls  and  a  boy.
Besides  his  occasional  uncollected  writings,  some
translations,  and  four  popular  farces,  "  The  Parlor

•Car,"  "  The  Sleeping  Car."  "  The  Register,"  and
44  The  Elevator,"  the  writings  of  Mr.  Howells  are
I  Poems  of  Two  Friends,"  with  John  J.  Piatt  (Co-
lumbus, Ohio,  1860) ;  "  Life  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "
(1860) ;  "  Venetian  Life  "  (London  and  New  York,
1866);  "Italian  Journevs "  (1867);  "Suburban
Sketches  "  (1868) ;  "  No  Love  Lost,  a  Poem  of  Trav-
el" (1868);  "Their  Wedding  Journey"  (Boston,
1871) ;  "  A  Chance  Acquaintance  "  (1873) ;  "  A
Foregone  Conclusion  "  (1874) ;  "  Out  of  the  Ques-
tion "  (Boston,  1876):  "Life  of  Rutherford  B.
Hayes  "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  A  Counterfeit  Pre-
sentment "  (1877)  ;  "  Choice  Biographies,"  edited
with  essays  (8  vols.,  1877-'8) ;  "  The  Lady  of  the
Aroostook"  (1878);  "The  Undiscovered  Country"
<1880) ;  "  A  Fearful  Responsibility,  and  other
Tales"  (1882);  "Dr.  Breen's  Practice"  (1883);  "A
Modern  Instance  "  (1883) ;  "  A  Woman's  Reason  "
(1884);  "Three  Villages"  (1885):  "The  Rise  of
Silas  Lapham  "  (1885) ;  "  Tuscan  Cities  "  (1885) ;
'  ■"  A  Little  Girl  among  the  Old  Masters,"  drawings
by  his  daughter  (1886) ;  "  The  Minister's  Charge  "
(1886) ;  "  Indian  Summer  "  (1886) ;  "  Modern  Italian
Poets"  (1887);  and  "April  Hopes"  (New  York.
1887).

HOWLAN,  George  William,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Waterford,  Ireland,  19  May,  1835.  He
emigrated  to  Prince  Edward  Island  in  1839,  was
educated  at  the  Central  academy  there,  and  be-
came a  merchant  and  ship-owner,  engaging  large-
ly in  the  fish-trade.  He  was  a  member  of  the  ex-
ecutive council  of  Prince  Edward  Island  in  1866,
and  remained  a  member  of  the  government  (part
of  the  time  as  co-leader)  almost  uninterruptedly
till  June,  1873.  He  was  a  delegate  to  Washing-
ton on  matters  relating  to  trade  in  1869,  and  to
Ottawa  in  May,  1873,  to  settle  terms  of  union
with  Canada,  which  terms  were  unanimously
adopted  by  both  houses  of  the  provincial  legisla-
ture. He  was  in  the  provincial  assembly  from
1862  till  June,  1873,when  he  was  appointed  collec-
tor of  customs  at  Charlottetown,  but  resigned  that
office  in  the  following  September,  and  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  the  Dominion  parliament.
He  was  called  to  the  senate  in  October,  1873,  and
resigned  in  1880,  but  was  reappointed  in  January,
1881.  He  is  a  vice-president  of  the  Dominion
hoard  of  trade,  a  governor  of  Prince  of  Wales  col-
lie, consular  agent  for  the  United  States,  and
Tice-consul  for  Sweden,  Denmark,  and  Norwav.

HOWLAND,  Alfred  Cornelius,  artist,  b.  in
Walpole,  N.  II..  12  Feb..  1838.  He  was  educated
at  Walpole  academy  and  high-school  and  at  West-
minster, Vt..  and  studied  art  at  the  academy  of
Dusseldorf,  Germany,  and  under  Emile  Lambinet
in  Paris.  On  returning  to  the  United  States  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  Artists'  fund  society  in
1873,  an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1874.


and  academician  in  1880,  serving  on  the  council  of
the  academv  in  1880-'4.  His  paintings  include
"A  Bovine  "Retreat"  (1869);  "Morning  on  the
River  Banks  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Sunlight  Path  "  (1871) ;
"  Old  Mill  on  the  Bushkill "  (1874) ;  "  On  the  Con-
necticut at  Brattleboro  "  (1876) :  "  Monday  Morn-
ing "(1876);  "The  Village  Band"  (1877);  "Win-
ter Sunset,  Williamstowu,  Mass."  (1878) ;  "  Driv-
ing a  Bargain  "  (1879) ;  "  They're  Coming  "  (1884) ;
"  A  Fourth  of  Julv  Parade  "  (1886) ;  and  "  On  the
Hoosac"  and  "The  Old  Farm"  (1887).  He  sent
"  Ford's  Glen  "  to  Paris  for  exhibition  in  1878.

HOWLAND,  Benjamin,  senator,  b.  in  Tiver-
ton, R.  I.,  in  1756 ;  d.  there,  9  May,  1821.  He  was
educated  at  the  public  schools,  was  a  member  of
the  state  general  assembly,  and  also  held  several
local  offices.  He  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  from
Rhode  Island,  as  a  Democrat,  to  fill  the  uncom-
pleted term  of  Samuel  J.  Potter,  deceased,  and
served  from  3  Dec,  1804.  till  3  March,  1807.

HOWLAND,  George,  educator,  b.  in  Conway,
Franklin  co.,  Mass..  30  July,  1824.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Amherst  in  1850,  was  tutor  there  in  1852-'5,
and  instructor  in  Latin  and  French  in  1855-'8,  when
he  removed  to  Chicago.  He  was  elected  as  assist-
ant teacher  in  the  Chicago  high-school  in  1858,
chosen  principal  in  1860,  and  held  this  office  con-
tinuously until  1880,  when  he  was  elected  superin-
tendent of  schools  for  the  city.  He  has  been  a
trustee  of  Amherst  college  since  1879,  and  in  1881
was  appointed  on  the  Illinois  state  board  of  educa-
tion, of  which  he  was  chosen  president  in  1883.
Mr.  Howland  has  attained  note  as  an  educator.
He  has  published  "A  Grammar  of  the  English
Language  "  (Chicago.  1867) ;  a  volume  of  poems
under  the  title  of  "Little  Voices"  (1878);  a  trans-
lation of  the  iEneid  into  English  hexameter,  which
has  been  much  admired  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1880-'4) ;
and  numerous  addresses  on  educational  topics.

HOWLAND,  John,  author,  b.  in  Newport,  R.I.,
31  Oct..  1757;  d.  in  Providence.  R.  I.,  5  Nov.,  1854.
He  was  descended  from  John  Howland,  a  pilgrim
of  1620,  and  an  assistant  of  the  Plymouth  colony.
The  younger  John  removed  to  Providence  in  1770,
and  served  thirteen  months  in  the  Revolutionary
army.  He  was  for  twenty-one  years  president  of
the  Rhode  Island  historical  society,  and  was  skilled
in  the  history  and  antiquities  of  Plymouth  colony.
He  was  the  author  of  addresses,  orations,  and  his-
torical papers.  See  his  "Life  and  Recollections,"
by  Rev.  Edwin  M.  Stone  (Providence,  1857).

HOWLAND,  Robert  Soutlnvorth,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  York  city,  9  Nov.,  1820;  d.  in  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  1  Feb.,  1887.  He  was  a  son  of  Gar-
diner G.  Howland,  a  New  York  merchant,  of  the
firm  of  Howland  and  Aspinwall,  and  an  active
member  of  charitable  organizations.  Robert  re-
ceived a  primary  education  in  France,  was  gradu-
ated at  St.  Paul's  college  in  1840,  and  then  studied
in  the  general  theological  seminary  of  the  Protes-
tant Episcopal  church  in  New  York  city.  His
studies  were  intermitted  for  three  years,  one  of
which  he  spent  in  Maryland,  where  he  assisted
Bishop  John  B.  Kerfoot  in  organizing  St.  James's
college,  and  two  in  foreign  travel.  He  was  ordained
deacon  by  Bishop  Brownell  and  priest  by  Bishop
Ives  of  North  Carolina  in  1846.  After  serving  as
assistant  in  St.  Luke's  church.  New  York  city,  he
became  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  holy  apostles,
and  in  1868  of  the  Church  of  the  heavenly  rest,
when  the  parish  was  organized.  Dr.  Howland  con-
tributed largely  of  his  own  means  toward  the
erection  of  its  church-building  on  Fifth  avenue,
and  was  instrumental  in  having  houses  erected  ad-
jacent to  the  edifice  of  such  a  style  of  architec-


288


ROWLAND


/^/?y^£~-^


ture  as  would  harmonize  with  it.  Columbia  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1863.— His  wife,  Mary
Woolsey,  poet,  is  known  as  the  author  of  a  short
poem  "  Requiescam,"  also  entitled  "  In  the  Hos-

Eital,"  which  was  believed  for  a  long  time  to  have
een  found  under  the  pillow  of  a  soldier  who  died
at  Port  Royal,  S.  C,  in  1864.

HOWLAND,  Sir  William  Pearce,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Pawling,  N.  Y.,  29  May,  1811.
He  is  descended  from  John  Howland,  who  landed

in  New  England
in  1620.  Sir  Will-
iam was  educated
at  the  Kinder-
hook  academy,Co-
lumbia  co.,  N.  Y.,
removed  to  Cana-
da in  1830,  and
settled  in  the
township  of  To-
ronto, where  he
engaged  in  mer-
cantile business
with  his  brother.
He  served  in  the
Canada  assembly
for  West  York  in
1857-'68,  and  was
a  member  of  the
executive  council
of  Canada  from  1862  till  1864,  and  from  24  Nov.,
1864,  till  the  union.  He  was  minister  of  finance
in  1862-'3,  and  receiver-general  from  that  date  till
29  March.  1864,  postmaster-general  in  1864-'6,  and
then  minister  of  finance  again  till  1867.  He  be-
came a  member  of  the  privy  council  of  Canada,
1  July,  1867,  and  was  minister  of  inland  revenue
from  that  date  until  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-
governor  of  Ontario  in  July,  1868,  which  position
he  held  till  November,  1873.  In  1865  the  govern-
ment made  him  a  commissioner  with  Alexander
T.  Gait  to  visit  Washington  in  the  interests  of
reciprocity  trade  between  Canada  and  the  United
States,  and  in  1866  was  reappointed  to  the  same
mission  with  others.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
London  conference  in  1866-'7  to  complete  terms
of  union  between  the  British  North-American
provinces.  He  was  created  a  companion  of  the
bath  in  1867,  and  a  knight  commander  of  the
order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George  in  1879.  For
several  years  Sir  William  was  president  of  the
board  of  trade  of  Toronto.

HOWLEY,  Richard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Liberty
county,  Ga.,  about  1740;  d.  about  1790.  He  re-
ceived a  liberal  education,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  attained  eminence  in  his  profession.  He  rep-
resented his  native  county  in  the  legislature,  and
was  elected  governor  of  Georgia,  4  Jan.,  1780.
When  the  state  was  overrun  by  the  British,  a
council  was  held  near  Augusta,  at  which  Gov.
Howley,  his  secretary  of  state,  and  several  Conti-
nental officers  were  present.  After  the  considera-
tion of  various  plans,  they  determined  to  retreat
to  North  Carolina,  and  narrowly  escaped  capture
on  the  way.  During  Gov.  Howley's  brief  term  of
office  the  value  of  paper  money  became  so  depre-
ciated that  he  is  said  to  have  dealt  it  out  by  the
quire  for  a  night's  lodging,  and,  if  the  fare  was
better  than  ordinary,  the  landlord  received  two
quires,  the  governor  gravely  signing  a  draft  upon
the  treasurer,  made  out  in  due  form,  for  their  de-
livery. In  1780-'l  Gov.  Howley  was  a  delegate
from  Georgia  to  the  Continental  congress.  In  the
latter  year,  some  apprehensions  being  entertained
that  it  was  the  design  of  that  body  to  give  up


HOXIE

Georgia  to  Great  Britain,  the  delegation  from  that
state  protested  against  such  a  step,  and  published
their  remonstrance  (Philadelphia,  1781).

HOWS,  John  William  Stanhope,  journalist,
b.  in  London,  England,  in  1797;  d.  in  New  Yon
city,  27  July,  1871.  He  was  professor  of  elocution
in  Columbia  from  1843  till  1857.  For  seven  years
he  was  dramatic  critic  of  the  "  New  York  Albion/'
and  edited  "The  Modern  Standard  Drama."  lie
was  the  author  of  "The  Practical  Elocutionist"
(1849;  6th  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1855) ;  and  edited  the
"Historical  Shaksperian  Reader"  (New  York,
1863);  "Golden  Leaves  from  the  British  Poets,"
"Golden  Leaves  from  the  American  Poets,'*  and
"  Golden  Leaves  from  the  Dramatic  Poets  "  (1865) ;
and  other  books. — His  son,  John  Augustus,  art-
ist, b.  in  New  York  city  in  1831 ;  d.  there,  27  Sept.,
1874,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1852,  and
studied  for  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church,  but  subsequently  studied  law.  He
finally  adopted  art  as  a  profession,  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1862,  and
contributed  to  its  exhibitions  "Vanitas  Vanita-
tum  " ;  "  An  Adirondack  Lake  "  and  "  The  Sanc-
tuary of  St.  Alban's  Church,  New  York"  (186TO
and  " Paul  Smith,  St.  Regis"  (1871).  He  devoted
much  attention  to  wood-engraving,  furnishing
successful  illustrations  for  "  Appletons'  Journal"  ;
"  The  Aldine  " ;  Bryant's  "  Forest  Hymn,"  the  first
attempt  to  illustrate  an.  American  volume  with
woodcuts ;  "  Forest  Pictures  in  the  Adirondaeks,"
with  original  verses  by  Alfred  B.  Street  (1865) ;  and
other  books.  At  one  time  he  was  associate  editor
of  "The  Churchman,"  and  of  "The  Home  Jour-
nal "  when  it  was  conducted  by  Willis  and  Morris.

HOXIE,  Joseph,  politician,  b.  in  Charlestown,
R.  I.,  13  Aug.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  18  Aug.,
1870.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  went  to  New
York  city,  engaged  in  the  clothing  business,  and
eventually  became  an  importer  and  dealer  in  cloth-
ing materials.  In  1837  he  was  chosen  county  clerk,
and  on  the  nomination  of  Gen.  William  H.  Harri-
son for  the  presidency  entered  heartily  into  the
canvass.  In  the  next  presidential  canvass  he  sup-
ported Henry  Clay.  In  1864  President  Lincoln
appointed  him  a  collector  of  internal  revenue.  In
1852  Mr.  Hoxie  established  a  fire-insurance  com-
pany, of  which  he  was  president  until  the  time  of
his  death.  He  acquired  much  undeserved  noto-
riety as  the  uncle  and  employer  of  Richard  P.
Robinson,  the  principal  person  concerned  in  the
"  Helen  Jewett  trial."  As  a  political  speaker,  Mr.
Hoxie  possessed  no  eloquence,  but  as  a  campaign
vocalist  he  was  unequalled,  and  he  appeared  as
such  in  most  of  our  large  cities  during  the  "  Har-
rison log-cabin  and  hard-cider  campaign."  His
small  band  of  singers  held  the  attention  of  thou-
sands, who  readily  joined  in  the  refrain  of  "  Tippe-
canoe and  Tyler  too,"  and  "  Van,  Van,  Van  s  a
used-up  man."  These  immense  vocal  gatherings
won  over  to  the  Whig  side  hosts  of  voters,  who
sang  themselves  into  convictions  that  were  beyond
the  reach  of  political  argument.

HOXIE,  Vinnie  Beam,  sculptor,  b.  in  Madison,
Wis.,  23  Sept.,  1846.  She  went  at  an  early  Bfl
to  Washington,  where  her  father  held  an  office,
and  then  removed  to  the  west,  and  was  educated  at
Christian  college,  Columbia,  Mo.  At  school  she
wrote  several  songs,  which  were  set  to  music  and
published.  During  the  civil  war  the  family  re-
turned to  Washington,  and  she  obtained  a  clerk-
ship in  the  post-office  department.  Subsequently
she  studied  art,  and  soon  devoted  her  exclusive  at-
tention to  sculpture.  One  of  her  first  efforts  was
the  head  of  an  Indian  chief,  with  which  she  was  so


I


HOYNE


HOYT


289


successful  that  she  made  busts  of  Gen.  Grant,
Revevdy  Johnson,  Albert  Pike,  John  Sherman,
and  Thaddeus  Stevens.  Her  larger  works  of  this
period  include  "  The  Indian  Girl,"  a  full-length
figure  cast  in  bronze.  A  design  for  a  fountain,
which  she  called  "  America,"  consisted  of  four  fe-
male figures,  representing  the  points  of  the  com-
pass, with  typical  emblems  of  the  four  sections  of
the  United  States. She  then  made, in  marble,

I  Miriam  as  she  met  the  Children  of  Israel  as  they
crossed  the  Red  Sea."  Her  most  important  piece
at  this  time  was  the  marble  statue  of  Abraham
Lincoln,  which  was  placed  in  the  eapitol  at  Wash-
ington. It  was  the  first  statue  ordered  by  the
government  from  a  woman.  Mrs.  Hoxie  spent
three  years  abroad  while  making  this  statue,  and
produced  medallions  of  Gustave  Dore,  Pere  Hya-
cinth, Wilhelm  von  Kaulbach,  the  Abbe  Liszt,  and
Thomas  Buchanan  Read.  On  her  return  to  the
United  States,  she  modelled  a  bust  of  Lincoln  for
Cornell  university,  a  life-size  statue  of  "  Sappho,"
"The  Spirit  of  the  Carnival,"  and  several  ideal
busts.  Her  later  work  includes  a  statue  of  Admi-
ral Farragut,  which  was  cast  in  bronze  from  metal
obtained  from  the  flag-ship  "  Hartford,"  and  placed
in  Farragut  square,  Washington.  She  married,  on
28  May,  1878,  Capt.  Richard  L.  Hoxie,  of  the  U.  S.
corps  of  engineers.

HOYNE,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  citv,

II  Feb.,  1817:  d.  near  Carleton  Station,  N.  Y.,  27
July,  1883.  He  began  a  mercantile  life  when  he
was  thiileen  years  old,  and  went  to  Chicago  in  1837,
where  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1839.  He  was  elected  city  clerk  in  1840,  and
removed  to  Galena,  111.,  in  1842,  but  returned  to
Chicago  in  1844.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  district
Attorney  for  Illinois  in  1853,  and  in  1859  was  made
U.  S.  marshal  for  the  northern  district  of  Illinois.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  a  member  of  the
Union  defence  committee.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  conservative  convention  held  in  Philadelphia
in  1866.  Mr.  Hoyne  took  an  active  interest  in  the
founding  of  the  University  of  Chicago,  and  in
recognition  of  his  services  the  trustees  established
the  Hoyne  professorship  of  international  and  con-
stitutional law.  He  was  also  active  in  establishing
the  astronomical  observatory  of  Chicago,  and  was
Connected  with  many  scientific  and  literary  bodies
in  that  city.  After  the  great  fire  of  1871  he  pre-
sided at  a  meeting  to  organize  the  free  public  libra-
ry of  Chicago,  and  was  president  of  its  first  board
of  directors.  In  1877  he  prepared  a  history  of  the
library  up  to  that  date.  Mr.  Hoyne  was  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Van  Buren  ticket  in  1848,
and  on  the  Greeley  ticket  in  1872,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  mayor  of  Chicago.  He  was  killed  in  a
railroad  accident  while  on  an  excursion.

HOYT,  Benjamin  Thomas,  educator,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, 18  Oct.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Greencastle,  Ind.,  24  May,
1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  seminary,
Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1846,  and  was  principal  of
the  high-school  there  from  1846  till  1849,  and  of
Chelsea,  Mass.,  from  1849  till  1852,  when  he  be-
came principal  of  the  institute  of  Lawrenceburg,
where  he  remained  till  1856.  He  was  then  ap-
pointed principal  of  Indiana  female  college,  in
which  he  also  taught  mental  and  moral  science,
and  remained  till  1858.  when  he  was  professor  of
Latin  in  Indiana  Asbury  university  till  1863,  and
then  of  literature  and  history  in  the  same  college
till  his  death.  He  rendered  great  service  to  the
cause  of  education  in  Indiana  as  superintendent  of
schools,  president  of  the  State  teachers'  associa-
tion, and  editor  of  the  "  Indiana  School  Journal."
—His  brother,  Francis  Southack,  clergyman,  b.

VOL.  III. — 19


in  Lyndon,  Vt.,  5  Nov.,  1822,  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  in  1844.  From  1854  till  1860  he  was
president  of  Willamette  university,  Salem,  Oregon,
and  from  1865  till  1872  was  professor  of  bibli-
cal theology  and  literature  in  Ohio  Wesleyan  uni-
versity. In  1872-'81  he  edited  the  "  Western  Chris-
tian Advocate."  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  gen-
eral conferences  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church
in  1860,  '76,  '80,  and  '84,  and  since  1884  has  held  the
office  of  presiding  elder.  He  has  edited  a  revised
edition  of  Angus's  "  Bible  nand-Book." — Another
brother,  Albert  Harrison,  editor,  b.  in  Sandwich,
N.  H.,  6  Dec,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  in
1850,  and  studied  law  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.  In
1852-'3  he  was  commissioner  of  common  schools
for  Rockingham  county,  N.  H.,  and  from  1853  till
1856  clerk  of  the  state  court.  In  1856  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  practised  law  in  Portsmouth
till  1862,  during  which  time  he  served  as  city
solicitor  and  president  of  the  common  council.
He  was  a  paymaster  in  the  army  in  1862-'6,  with
the  rank  of  major,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1865.  Since  1866  he  has  resided  prin-
cipally in  Boston,  where  he  has  been  engaged  in
business  and  literary  pursuits.  He  edited  the  "  New
England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register"
from  1868  till  1876,  and  the  fourth  volume  of  the
"  Memorial  Biographies "  published  by  the  New
England  historic  -  genealogical  society  (Boston,
1885).  He  has  also  published  numerous  papers  on
historical  and  genealogical  subjects,  among  which
are  "  Necrology  of  the  New  England  Colleges "
(1869-'70);  "Captain  Francis  Goelet's  Journal  of
his  Visit  to  Boston,  Salem,  etc.,  in  1745-'50  "  (1870) ;
"  Letters  of  Sir  William  Pepperrell,  Bart."  (1874) ;
"  History  of  the  New  England  Historical  and  Ge-
nealogical Register"  and  "Notes,  Historical  and
Bibliographical,  on  the  Laws  of  New  Hampshire  "
(1876):  and  "The  Name  Columbia"  (1886).

HOYT,  Epaphras,  historian,  b.  in  Deerfield,
Mass.,  31  Dec,  1765 ;  d.  there,  8  Feb.,  1850.  He
held  many  civil  and  military  offices,  was  major-
general  of  the  Massachusetts  militia,  and  devoted
his  life  to  perfecting  the  volunteer  militia  system  of
the  country.  He  published  "  Treatise  on  the  Mili-
tary Art "(1793);  "Military  Instructions,"  "Cav-
alry Discipline  "  (1797) ;  and  "  Antiquarian  Re-
searches "  (1824) ;  left  completed,  with  maps,  a
work  for  publication  entitled  "  Burgoyne's  Cam-
paigns," and  had  partly  finished  a  history  of  the
French  and  Indian  wars.

HOYT,  Henry  Martyn,  governor  of  Pennsyl-
vania, b.  in  Kingston,  Luzerne  co.,  Pa.,  8  June,
1830.  His  parents  were  natives  of  Connecticut
and  among  the  earliest  settlers  in  the  Wyoming
valley.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1849,
taught  for  a  year  in  Towanda,  Pa.,  and  in  1851-'3
was  professor  of  mathematics  in  Wyoming  semi-
nary. He  then  read  law  with  Chief-Justice  George
W.  Woodward,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1853.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  active  in
raising  the  52d  Pennsylvania  regiment,  of  which  he
was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel.  He  served  in  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  till  January,  1863,  was  en-
gaged in  the  siege  of  Morris  Island  under  Gen.
Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  and  was  captured  in  a  night
attack  on  Fort  Johnson,  in  which  he  successfully
led  a  division  of  boats,  landed,  and  entered  the
fort,  which  he  was  unable  to  hold  by  reason  of  the
failure  of  his  support  to  come  to  his  aid.  After
being  confined  some  time  in  Macon,  Ga.,  he  was
taken  back  to  Charleston  and  made  his  escape,
but  was  recaptured.  On  his  exchange  he  rejoined
his  regiment,  with  which  he  remained  till  the  close
of  the  war,  when  he  was  mustered  out  with  the


290


HOYT


HOYT


rank  of  brevet  brigadier-general.  He  then  resumed
his  law-practice,  and  in  1867  was  appointed  by
Gov.  Geary  additional  law- judge  of  the  courts  of
Luzerne  county.  In  1875-  6  he  was  chairman  of
the  Republican  state  committee.  He  was  elected
governor  of  Pennsylvania  in  November,  1878,  and
held  the  office  till  1883,  when  he  again  resumed
his  law  practice.  During  his  term  the  debt  of  the
state  was  reduced  to  $10,000,000,  and  refunded  at
the  rate  of  three  per  cent.  In  1881  he  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania and  also  from  Lafayette  college.  He  has
?ublished  "  Controversy  between  Connecticut  and
'ennsylvania  "  (Philadelphia,  1879) ;  and  "  Protec-
tion vs.  Free  Trade  "  (New  York,  1885).

HOYT,  John  Wesley,  educator,  b.  near  Wor-
thington,  Franklin  co.,  Ohio,  13  Oct.,  1831.  After
his  graduation  at  the  Ohio  Wesleyan  university  in
1849,  he  studied  law  under  Hon.  William  Denni-
son,  afterward  governor  of  Ohio.  He  then  entered
the  Cincinnati  law-school,  and  also  attended  lec-
tures at  the  Ohio  medical  college  and  at  the  Eclec-
tic medical  institute,  receiving  his  degree  from  the
latter  in  1853  when  appointed  to  the  chair  of
chemistry  and  medical  jurisprudence  in  this  col-
lege. He  then  became  professor  of  chemistry  and
physic  in  Antioch,  serving  in  1855-'6,  meanwhile
delivering  lectures  in  the  Medical  institute  in  Cin-
cinnati. In  1850  he  accepted  the  chair  of  chemis-
try and  medical  jurisprudence  in  the  Cincinnati
college  of  medicine,  and  in  1857  removed  to  Madi-
son, Wis.,  owing  to  impaired  health.  He  was
editor  and  publisher  of  the  "  Wisconsin  Farmer
and  Northwestern  Cultivator "  from  1857  till
1867,  and  secretary  and  managing  officer  of  the
Wisconsin  state  agricultural  society  from  1860  till
1872.  He  was  also  vice-president  of  the  U.  S.
agricultural  society  for  many  years,  and  was  active
in  securing  national  endowments  for  colleges  of
agriculture  and  the  mechanic  arts.  In  1862  he
was  state  commissioner  to  the  London  exhibition,
and  made  an  extensive  tour  through  Europe  in  the
interest  of  industry  and  education,  the  reports  of
which  were  published  by  order  of  the  Wisconsin
legislature.  He  was  state  and  U.  S.  commissioner
to  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867,  and  made  a  second
educational  tour.  Dr.  Hoyt  was  instrumental  in
securing  a  reorganization  of  the  Wisconsin  state
university,  together  with  large  additions  to  the  en-
dowment fund,  and  founded  the  Wisconsin  acade-
my of  sciences,  of  which  he  was  president  for  six
years,  during  which  time  he  also  directed  the
Chicago  historical  society.  He  was  executive  and,
for  a  time,  acting  chief  commissioner  for  the
United  States  at  the  Vienna  exposition  of  1873,
serving  also  as  president  of  the  international  jury
for  education,  by  appointment  of  the  Austrian  im-
perial commission,  receiving  a  grand  diploma,  and
being  knighted.  He  was  also  chairman  of  the
board  of  judges  for  education  and  science  at  the
centennial  exhibition  in  1876.  Dr.  Hoyt  served  as
governor  of  Wyoming  from  1878  till  1882,  after
which  he  organized  various  enterprises  for  the  de-
velopment of  industry  in  that  territory,  and  was
the  author  of  the  measure  for  establishing  free
public  libraries  in  every  county.  In  1885  he  was
chairman  of  the  international  jury  for  education
at  the  New  Orleans  "  world's  exposition."  He  is  a
member  of  various  learned  societies,  and  president
of  the  Territorial  and  historical  society  of  Wyoming.
He  has  now  (1887)  a  bill  before  congress  for  a  Na-
tional university  to  be  endowed  by  the  government.
In  May,  1887,  he  was  chosen  president  of  Wyoming
university.  His  publications  consist  of  exhaustive
reports  and  brochures. He  received  the  degree  of


LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Missouri  in  1876. —
His  wife,  Elizabeth  Orpha,  poet,  b.  in  Athens,
Ohio,  7  Dec,  1834,  is  the  daughter  of  John  Samp-
son, of  Massachusetts,  and  was  educated  principally
by  professors  in  Ohio  university.  From  1851  til]
1853  she  taught  higher  mathematics  and  metaphys-
ics in  Worthington  female  seminary,  and  in  \s:>\
she  married  Dr.  Hoyt.  She  has  published  poems  in
magazines  and  newspapers,  several  small  volumes  of
poems  for  children  (Cincinnati,  1855-'6),  and  philo-
sophical essays.  She  has  a  volume  entitled  "  The  Na-
ture of  Consciousness  "  ready  for  publication  (1887).

HOYT,  Joseph  Gibson,  educator,  b.  in  Dum-
barton, N.  H.,  19  Jan.,  1815;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
26  Nov.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1840,
was  instructor  in  mathematics  and  natural  phi-
losophy in  Phillips  Exeter  academy  in  1840-"58,  and
in  1859  became  chancellor  and  professor  of  Greek
in  Washington  university,  St.  Louis,  where  he
served  till  his  death.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Dartmouth  in  1859.  11  is
chief  work  was  a  carefully  revised  and  enlarged
edition  of  Colton's  "  Greek  Reader  "  (1845-'6),  and
a  volume  of  "  Miscellaneous  Writings,  Addresses,
Lectures,  and  Reviews  "  (Boston,  1861).  A  eulogy
upon  him  was  delivered  by  Prof.  Samuel  Water-
house  in  St.  Louis,  20  Jan.,  1863,  and  afterward
published  (Philadelphia,  1863).

HOYT,  Oliver,  merchant,  b.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,
15  Aug.,  1823 ;  d.  there,  5  May,  1887.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  common  schools  of  his  native  town,
and  began  life  as  a  currier.  In  1844  he  removed  to
New  York  city,  and,  with  his  brother,  William,
established  himself  as  a  leather -merchant,  the
firm  becoming  one  of  the  most  successful  in  the
trade.  Mr.  Hoyt  took  an  active  part  in  public
affairs,  and  served  three '  terms  as  senator  in  the
Connecticut  legislature,  during  two  of  which  he
acted  as  president.  He  was  also  an  active  member
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  a  liberal
patron  of  its  various  institutions.  He  contributed
largely  to  the  church  at  Stamford,  gave  $25,000  to
Wesleyan  university,  and  $2,000  to  the  Wesley
memorial  church  at  Savannah,  Ga.  He  was  for
many  years  a  leading  member  of  the  board  of
managers  of  the  General  missionary  society,  and
for  a  time  served  as  treasurer  of  the  Church  board
of  education.  He  was  a  founder  of  "  The  Meth-
odist," and  in  1881  represented  his  church  in  the
International  assembly  of  Methodists  in  London.
He  was  chosen  a  presidential  elector  in  1872,  and
cast  his  vote  for  Gen.  Grant,  of  whom  he  was  a  de-
voted admirer.  When  the  fund  of  $250,000  was
raised  for  the  latter  by  private  subscription,  Mr.
Hoyt  was  one  of  the  first  to  subscribe,  and  greatly
aided  the  enterprise  by  his  zeal  and  earnestness.
He  was  also  a  pall-bearer  at  Gen.  Grant's  funeral.
By  his  will  he  bequeathed  nearly  $100,000  to  va-
rious charitable  and  religious  institutions.

HOYT,  Ralph,  poet,  b.  in  New  York  city,  18
April,  1806 ;  d.  there,  11  Oct.,  1878.  Before  en-
tering the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  in  1842,  he  was  for  several  years  engaged
in  teaching  and  in  writing  for  the  press.  He  was
long  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Good  Shepherd
in  New  York  city,  which  he  established  chiefly  by
his  own  exertions  as  i\  missionary,  and  supported
its  feeble  fortunes  through  many  privations.  His
self-denial,  purity  of  life  and  character,  devoted
zeal  in  his  calling,  especially  in  his  relations  wit  h
the  poor,  were  remarkable.  His  poems  are  simple
in  expression,  many  being  devout  in  sentiment,
and,  touching  tenderly  upon  the  disappointments
of  life,  bear  a  sorrowful  refrain.  Others  are  hope-
ful  and  animated. His  longest  poem  is  "  The


HUAYNA  CAPAC


HUBBARD


291


True  Life  "  (New  York,  1875),  while  those  entitled
"Snow,"  "Rain,"  "New,"  and  "Old"  comprise
some  of  his  best  work.  His  publications  are
"  Echoes  of  Memory  and  Emotion  "  (1859) ;  and
"Sketches  of  Life  and  Landscape"  (latest  ed.,
1873).  His  complete  poetical  works  were  printed
for  private  circulation  (1875-'6),  but  were  never
published.  This  volume  included  his  latest  poems,
"jVIinny  Gray,"  "Skaters,"  "The  Pastoral,"  "True
Euclid,"  "  Bank  Note,"  and  others.

HUAYNA  CAPAC  (wy'-e-nah  ca-pack'),  Peru-
vian Inca,  b.  in  Cuzco,  Peru ;  d.  in  Tumipampa,
Ecuador,  in  1523.  He  was  the  son  of  the  Tupac
Inca  Iupanqui  and  the  empress  Mama  Ocllo,  and
succeeded  his  father  in  1483.  Before  this  event  he
commanded  the  army  against  the  provinces  of
Chachapoyas,  Pacamurus,  Canaris  and  others  in
the  north  of  the  empire.  After  he  began  to  reign.
he  undertook  wars  of  conquest,  and  extended  his
dominions  toward  the  north  to  the  river  Aucas-
mayu,  and  toward  the  south  to  that  of  Maule,  so
that  his  empire  included  the  kingdoms  of  Quito
and  Chili.  He  also  conquered  the  vast  territory
that  extends  between  Atacama  and  Chimu,  and  the
important  island  of  Puna.  Under  his  supervision
were  constructed  the  important  inca  roads  from
Tumbez  to  Paehacamac,  and  from  this  city  to
Cuzco.  In  his  time  the  magnificent  palaces  of
Quito,  Callii,  and  Tumipampa  were  built,  and  the
rich  temple  of  Curicancha  was  finished,  and  he
established  the  "  coptras  "  and  "  chasquis,"  which
were  houses  on  the  roads  for  the  better  service  of
the  mail.  He  was  bloodthirsty  and  vindictive  in
his  wars,  and  particular  in  exacting  the  respect
and  awe  of  his  people,  but  in  his  private  life  was
affectionate  and  tender.  He  married  his  sisters
Pilcu  Huaco,  Rahua  Ocllo,  and  his  cousin  Mama
Runtu,  daughter  of  Prince  Amaru.  Besides  these
he  had  GOO  other  wives,  one  of  whom,  a  princess  of
Quito,  was  the  mother  of  Atahualpa.  His  predi-
lection for  this  prince  brought  ruin  to  the  vast
empire  of  the  Peruvians,  because  at  his  death  he
divided  his  dominions  into  halves,  one  for  Huas-
car,  the  eldest  son  and  heir  of  the  crown  according
to  the  law  of  the  nation,  and  the  other  for  Ata-
hualpa. This  was  the  cause  of  dissension,  by
which  Francisco  Pizarro  profited.  Huayna  Capac
died  shortly  after  receiving  notice  of  the  landing
on  the  coast  of  the  first  expedition  of  the  Span-
iards, commanded  by  Pascual  de  Andagoya  (q.  v.).
He  had  prepared  large  armies  to  defend  the  coast.
as  he  feared  the  verification  of  an  old  tradition
that  Peru  would  be  subjugated  by  foreign  invaders
after  the  reign  of  the  twelfth  inca.  He  ordered
that  his  heart  should  remain  at  Quito,  but  his  body
be  transported  to  Cuzco.  During  the  passage  of
his  funeral  from  Tumipampa  to  Cuzco  thousands
of  human  victims  and  animals  were  sacrificed,  and
the  birds  are  said  to  have  fallen  from  the  air.
struck  by  the  voices  of  those  who  accompanied  the
corpse  on  the  way. — His  son,  Huascar  (wass'-car),
Inca  of  Peru,  b.  in  Cuzco  about  1490 ;  d.  in  An-
damarca  in  January,  1533.  His  real  name  was
Inti  Cusi  Huallpa,  or  "Sun  of  Joy."  but,  as  his
father  celebrated  his  birth  by  making  the  principal
chiefs  dance  in  the  square  of  Cuzco  with  a  thick
golden  chain  of  350  yards  long,  the  prince  was
henceforth  called  "  Huascar,"  from  this  chain.  In
his  youth  he  accompanied  his  father  on  his  con-
quering expeditions,  especially  to  the  kingdom  of
Quito,  and  proved  a  valiant  soldier.  After  Huayna
Capac's  death,  Huascar  ascended  the  throne,  and.  as
he  had  promised  his  father,  let  his  half-brother
Atahualpa  (q.  v.)  reign  in  the  north ;  but  later  it
seems  that  he  repented  of  this  measure,  and  de-


manded that  Atahualpa  should  acknowledge  him
as  suzerain.  The  latter,  not  feeling  strong  enough
to  resist  openly,  feigned  to  submit,  and  offered  to
go  with  a  numerous  following  to  Cuzco  to  render
homage  to  his  brother,  but  secretly  sent  a  strong
army  under  the  chieftains  Quisquiz  and  Challcu-
chima,  divided  into  many  small  bodies  and  with
concealed  weapons.  The  unsuspecting  Huascar
became  aware  too  late  of  this  treachery,  and,  gath-
ering an  army,  met  the  invaders  near  Cuzco,  but
was  defeated  and  made  prisoner  in  1528.  Al-
though Atahualpa  ordered  the  massacre  of  the
greater  part  of  the  imperial  family,  he  spared
Huascar's  life,  so  as  to  force  him,  in  case  of  need,
to  order  the  submission  of  the  nation,  and  kept
him  a  close  prisoner  at  Jauja.  After  the  invasion
of  Peru  by  the  Spaniards,  when  Atahualpa  from
his  prison  treated  for  his  ransom  with  Pizarro,  he
feared  that  Huascar's  existence  might  become  dan-
gerous for  his  own  safety,  and  ordered  him  to  be
brought  to  Cuzco  and  killed  on  the  road.  His
orders  were  executed  by  drowning  the  prisoner  in
the  river  Andamarca.

HUBARD,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Will-
iamsburg, Ya.,  in  1740;  d.  near  Smithfield,  Va.,  in
1802.  His  grandfather.  James,  came  from  Eng-
land to  Gloucester  county,  Ya.,  about  1700.  Will-
iam was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1760,
ordained  deacon  by  the  Bishop  of  London  in  1773,
and  priest  in
1776.  He

was  in  charge
of  Warwick
parish,  Ya.,
in  1773 -'6,
and  in  the
latter  year  be-
came rector
of  St.  Luke's
church,  New-
port parish,
Isle  of  Wight
co.,Ya., where
he  remained
till  his  death.
Mr.  Hubard  was  a  leader  in  the  community,  and
served  many  years  as  a  magistrate.  The  remains
of  his  church,  which  is  often  called  "Old  Sniiili-
field  Church  "  or  the  "  Old  Brick  Church."  are  rep-
resented in  the  accompanying  illustration.  It  was
erected  in  1632.  and  is  now  the  oldest  Protestant
church-building  in  the  United  States.  The  tower,
which  is  fifteen  feet  square  and  forty-five  feet
high,  is  still  (1887)  strong  and  massive,  and  the
walls  of  the  nave  are  in  fair  condition,  but  most  of
the  wood-work  has  disappeared.

HUBBARD,  Bela,  clergyman,  b.  in  Guilford.
Conn.,  27  Aug.,  1739;  d.  in  New  Haven.  Conn..  6
Dec,  1812.  lie  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1758.  and
five  years  afterward  went  to  England  for  ordina-
tion." After  his  return  he  officiated  as  reptor  of
Episcopal  churches  in  Guilford  and  Killingworth,
Conn.,  until  1767.  when  he  was  transferred  by  the
Society  for  propagating  the  gospel  to  West  Haven
and  New  Haven,  and  appointed  its  missionary.
His  loyalty  to  the  crown  was  well  known,  but  by
his  discreet  and  inoffensive  conduct  he  escaped
personal  indignity,  and  was  allowed  to  perform  his
duties  without  molestation.  In  the  yellow-fever
epidemic  in  New  Haven  in  1795  he  remained  at
his  post,  and  endeared  himself  to  the  community
by  his  services,  not  only  to  his  own  congregation,
but  to  members  of  other  churches.  In  the  latter
part  of  his  life  he  was  rector  of  Trinity  church,
New  Haven. Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.


292


HUBBARD


HUBBARD


in  1804. — His  son,  Thomas  Hill,  statesman,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1780;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  22
May,  1857,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1798,  and  be-
gan the  practice  of  law  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.  He
was  surrogate  of  Madison  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1806-16,
presidential  elector  on  the  Madison  and  Gerry
ticket  in  1812,  and  served  in  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat from  1817  till  1819,  and  from  1821  to  1823.
He  was  also  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Polk  and
Dallas  ticket  in  1844,  and  on  the  Pierce  and  King
ticket  in  1852.— Thomas  Hill's  son,  Bela,  geologist,
b.  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  23  April,  1814,  was  graduated
at  Hamilton  in  1834,  and  soon  afterward  settled  in
Michigan.  In  1837  he  was  appointed  assistant
geologist  of  that  state,  which  office  he  held  for  three


years.


He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Detroit  dur-


ing 1842,  and  subsequently  devoted  his  attention
chiefly  to  real  estate.  Mr.  Hubbard  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  Association  of  American
geologists  and  naturalists,  and  was  first  president
of  Michigan  agricultural  society,  besides  being  a
member  of  other  associations.  He  has  published
various  technical  papers  and  pamphlets,  many  of
which  he  has  collected  into  "  Memorials  of  a  Half-
Century  "  (New  York,  1887).

HUBBARD,  David,  congressman,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1806.  He  removed  at  an  early  age  to  Ala-
bama, practised  law,  and  became  solicitor  of  his
judicial  district.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1830,  and  served  in  the  legislature  in
1831-53.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  state-
rights  Democrat  in  1838,  served  till  1841,  was  a
presidential  elector  on  the  Polk  and  Dallas  ticket
in  1845,  and  was  re-elected  to  congress  in  1849,
serving  till  1851.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on
the  Breckenridge  ticket  in  1860,  a  member  of  the
1st  Confederate  congress,  and  in  1861  was  appoint-
ed by  it  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs.  After  the
close  of  the  civil  war  he  removed  to  Nashville,
Tenn.,  where  he  has  since  resided.

HUBBARD,  Gurdon  Saltonstall,  trader,  b.
in  Windsor,  Vt.,  22  Aug.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
14  Sept.,  1886.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to
Montreal,  Canada,  when  he  was  thirteen  years  old,
and  was  employed  by  the  American  fur  company,
who  sent  him  to  Mackinaw  as  an  Indian  trader.
In  November,  1818,  he  arrived  at  Port  Dearborn
(now  Chicago,  111.),  and  during  the  next  seven
years  made  twenty-six  trips  from  his  trading-posts
in  Illinois  and  Michigan  by  way  of  Chicago  to
Mackinaw.  In  1827  he  began  business  in  his  own
name,  and  established  several  posts  in  Illinois.
When  the  Indian  title  to  lands  became  extinct,
and  trading  unprofitable,  he  removed  to  Chicago,
and  soon  after,  when  the  Winnebago  war  seemed
imminent,  he  volunteered  to  go  to  the  Wabash
country,  raised  a  volunteer  company  of  150  men,
and  returned  the  seventh  day,  having  travelled  250
miles  by  "Hubbard's  Trail."  During  the  Black
Hawk  war,  with  the  Indians  of  the  Sac  and  Fox
tribes,  he  served  in  a  Danville,  111.,  regiment.  In
1832  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  Mr.  Hub-
bard was  a  leader  in  all  the  most  important  of
Chicago's  early  enterprises.  He  built  the  first
warehouse,  was  the  originator  of  the  first  line  of
packets  from  Chicago  to  Buffalo,  one  of  the  com-
pany that  established  the  first  line  of  steamers  to
Lake  Superior,  a  director  of  the  first  savings-bank,
a  founder  of  the  first  Episcopal  church,  a  director
of  the  first  state  bank,  built  the  first  large  hotel,
the  Lake  house,  and  was  a  director  of  the  first
company  to  supply  the  village  with  water  in  1836.

HUBBARD,  Henry,  senator,  b.  in  Charleston,
N.  H.,  3  May,  1784;  d.  there,  5  June,  1857.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1803,  studied  law


under  Jeremiah  Mason,  was  admitted  to  the  barr
and  began  practice  in  Charleston,  N.  II.  He  was
in  the  legislature  from  1812  till  1827,  serving  as
speaker  during  the  last  three  years,  was  state
solicitor  for  Cheshire  county,  N.  H.,  in  1823-'8,
and  judge  of  probate  from  1827-'9.  He  took  his
seat  in  congress  in  1829,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Democrat,  and  served  till  1835.  In  May,  1834,  he-
was  speaker,  pro  tempore,  of  the  house.  He  was.
U.  S.  senator  from  1835  till  1841,  when  he  became
governor  of  New  Hampshire,  and  in  1846-'9  was
U.  S.  sub-treasurer  at  Boston.

HUBBARD,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Townsend,
Mass.,  8  Aug.,  1759 ;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  in  1810.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1785.  and  after
studying  theology,  became  preceptor  of  the  New
Ipswich  and  Deerfield  academies,  Mass.  From
1798  till  1802  he  was  judge  of  probate  of  Cheshire
county,  N.  H.,  and  from  1804  until  his  death  was-
professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy
at  Dartmouth.  He  published  an  "  Oration,"  deliv-
ered 4  July,  1799 ;  "  The  Rudiments  of  Geogra-
phy "  (1803) ;  "  The  American  Reader  "  (1808) ;  and
an  "  Essay  on  Music  "  (1809).

HUBBARD,  John,  politician,  b.  in  Readville,.
Me.,  22  March,  1794;  d.  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  6  Feb.,
1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1816,
taught  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  and  in  Dinwiddie  county,
Va.,  and  practised  medicine  there  in  1822-'9.  He
returned  to  Hallowell  in  1830,  was  state  senator  in
1842-'3,  and  a  hearty  supporter  of  the  liquor  pro-
hibition act,  known  as  the  "  Maine  Law."  He  wa&
governor  of  the  state  in  1850-'3,  having  been  cho-
sen as  a  Democrat,  agent  of  the  U.  S.  treasury  in
1857-9,  and  in  1859-61  a  commissioner  under  the
reciprocity  treaty  with  Great  Britain.

HUBBARD,* Jonathan  Hatch,  jurist,  b.  in
Windsor, -Vt,  in  1768;  d.  there,  20  Sept.,  1849.
After  receiving  a  liberal  education  he  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1790,  and  practised
his  profession  with  success  until  his  election  to
congress  in  1808.  He  served  till  1811,  and  in  1813
became  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Vermont,,
continuing  in  office  until  1845.

HUBBARD,  Joseph  Stillman,  astronomer,  b.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  7  Sept.,  1823;  d.  there,  ID  Aug.,
1863.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1843,  whither
he  had  been  attracted  by  Ebenezer  P.  Mason,  then
one  of  Yale's  enthusiastic  astronomers.  Subse-
quently he  studied  mathematics  and  astronomy  at
home,  and  also  taught  for  a  while  in  a  classical
school,  but  early  in  1844  he  went  to  Philadelphia
as  assistant  of  Sears  C.  Walker,  who  had  charge
of  the  observatory  of  the  high-school  in  that  city.
In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he  was  appointed
computer  of  the  observations  of  latitude  and  longi-
tude made  on  Capt.  John  C.  Fremont's  expedition
across  the  Rocky  mountains.  This  work  was  ac-
complished so  successfully  that  Prof.  Alexander
D.  Bache.  Col.  John  C.  Fremont,  and  Senator
Thomas  H.  Benton  used  their  influence  with  Sec.
George  Bancroft  to  have  him  appointed  professor
of  mathematics  in  the  navy.  He  was  so  commis-
sioned on  7  May,  1845,  and  was  immediately  as-
signed to  duty  at  the  Washington  observatory,
of  which  he  continued  to  be  an  officer  during  the
remainder  of  his  life.  The  first  extended  compu-
tation made  by  Prof.  Hubbard  after  his  assign-
ment to  the  observatory  was  the  determination  of
the  zodiacs  of  all  the  known  asteroids,  except  four
previously  published  in  Germany.  In  November,
1848,  he  presented  to  the  Smithsonian  institution
the  zodiacs  of  Vesta,  Astrea,  Hebe,  Flora,  and
Metis.  During  the  following  year  he  prepared
those  of  Hygea,  Parthenope,  and  Clio,  followed


HUBBARD


HUBBARD


293


later  by  that  of  Egeria;  and,  although  he  pub-
lished no  others,  it  was  his  intention  to  prepare
the  zodiac  for  each  successively  discovered  asteroid.
His  skill  as  an  observer  and  computer  is  further
shown  in  valuable  material  published  in  the  vol-
umes of  the  "  Washington  Observations,"  and  his
work  comprised  many  special  investigations.  Of
these  the  most  important  include  his  discussions
of  "  The  Orbit  of  the  Great  Comet  of  1843,"  origi-
nally contributed  and  published  through  several
issues  of  Gould's  "Astronomical  Journal.  His  later
but  equally  valuable  researches  "  On  the  Orbit  of
Biela's  Comet  in  1845-'6  "  (1858),  "  Results  of  Ad-
ditional Investigations  respecting  the  two  Nuclei
of  Biela's  Comet "  (1854),  and  "  On  Biela's  Comet "
(1858),  which  form  the  accepted  authority  on  the
subject,  also  appeared  in  the  "  Astronomical  Jour-
nal," to  which  he  was  a  frequent  contributor,  and
twice  during  Dr.  Benjamin  A.  Gould's  absence
from  the  country  he  was  its  acting  editor.  In  1845
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National  institute
of  Washington,  and  in  1852  a  fellow  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society.  He  was  an  original  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.

HUBBARD,  Lucius  Frederick,  governor  of
Minnesota,  b.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1836.  He
was  but  three  years  old  when  he  lost  his  father,
Charles  F.  Hubbard,  sheriff  of  Rensselaer  county,
and  was  sent  to  live  with  an  aunt  at  Chester,  Vt.

He  was  educated  in
the  academy  at  G  ran-
ville.  N.  Y.,  and  ap-
prenticed to  the  tin-
ner's trade,  at  which
he  worked  in  Chica-
go for  three  years,
and  in  1857  he  re-
moved to  Red  Wing,
Minn.,  where  he  es-
tablished the  "  Re-
publican." He  was
elected  register  of
deeds  in  1858.  and  in
1861  was  a  Repub-
lican candidate  for
the  state  senate,  but
lacked  seven  votes
of  being  elected.  He
enlisted  as  a  private
in  the  5th  Minnesota  infantry  in  December,  1861,
became  captain  in  February,  and  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  March,  1862,  and  was  severely  wounded  in
the  first  battle  of  Corinth.  He  was  promoted  colo-
nel, 31  Aug.,  1862,  commanded  his  regiment  in
the  battle  ofluka  and  the  2d  brigade  of  the  1st  di-
vision, Army  of  the  Mississippi,  in  the  battles  of
Jackson  and  Mississippi  Springs,  and  remained  in
command  of  the  brigade  till  the  spring  of  1863,
when  the  5th  Minnesota  was  transferred  to  the  15th
army  corps  and  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.
After  the  fall  of  that  city  he  resumed  command  of
his  brigade,  which  in  March,  1864,  was  assigned  to
the  16th  corps  under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  took  part
in  Gen.  Banks's  Red  River  expedition,  and  within  a
very  brief  period  was  in  seven  battles,  the  last  being
that  of  Greenfield.  La.,  where  the  enemy  was  routed
and  the  Mississippi  river  relieved  from  blockade.
Afterward  he  was  in  several  engagements  in  north-
ern Mississippi,  marched  across  Arkansas  and  Mis-
souri to  the  Kansas  line  to  attack  Price's  force,
and  then  returned  to  Memphis,  where  Col.  Hub-
bard's regiment  re-enlisted  as  veterans  and  was
furloughed.  Under  his  command  his  brigade,  in
the  battle  of  Nashville,  16  Dec,  1864,  was  in  the
first  line  of  the  assaulting  column,  and  captured


*Os^ JUlt^C/'x.


x^^-S


seven  pieces  of  artillery,  several  stand  of  colors,
and  many  prisoners.  But  it  suffered  heavy  loss,
and  Col.  Hubbard  was  severely  wounded.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  for  "  conspicuous  gal-
lantry "  in  this  battle.  In  the  campaign  of  Mobile,
under  Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Canby,  his  brigade  was  one  of
the  foremost  in  the  siege  and  capture  of  Spanish
Fort.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  service  in  Octo-
ber, 1865.  In  1866  he  engaged  in  the  grain  business
at  Red  Wing,  and  afterward  in  milling.  He  pro-
jected and  secured  the  construction  of  the  Midland
railway  from  Wabashaw  to  Zumbrota,  and  the  Can-
non Valley  railway  from  Red  Wing  to  Waterville.
In  1872  and  1874  he  was  elected  as  a  Republican  to
the  state  senate.  He  was  one  of  the  arbitrators  to
settle  the  dispute  between  the  state  and  the  prison
contractors,  and  also  one  of  a  commission  to  in-
vestigate the  state  railroad  bonds.  In  1881  he  was
elected  governor  of  Minnesota  by  a  majority  of
27,857.  He  entered  upon  his  office  10  Jan.,  1882,
and  was  re-elected  in  1883,  serving  till  January,
1887.  In  1886  he  contributed  a  paper  on  Minne-
sota to  the  "  North  American  Review."

HUBBARD,  Oliver  Payson,  chemist,  b.  in
Pomfret,  Conn.,  in  March,  1809.  He  studied  at
Hamilton  in  1825-'6,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1828,  where  he  also  acted  as  assistant  to  the  elder
Silliman,  whose  daughter  he  subsequently  married.
In  1836  he  was  appointed  professor  of  chemis-
try and  pharmacy,  mineralogy  and  geology,  at
Dartmouth,  which  chair  he  held  until  1866,  when,
until  1871,  he  delivered  lectures  on  these  subjects,
after  which  he  again  became  connected  with  the
faculty  as  professor  of  chemistry  and  pharmacy,
continuing  as  such  until  1883,  when  he  was  made
professor  emeritus.  He  was  associated  with  Prof.
Silliman  in  the  examination  of  the  United  States
for  the  cultivation  of  sugar  made  at  the  instance
of  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1832  and  was
especially  assigned  to  the  eastern  states.  During
1863-'4  he  was  a  member  of  the  New  Hampshire
state  legislature.  In  1837  he  received  the  degree
of  M.  D.  from  the  South  Carolina  medical  college,
and  in  1861  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Hamilton.  Prof.
Hubbard  has  been  one  of  the  overseers  of  the
Thayer  school  of  civil  engineering  of  Dartmouth
since  its  establishment  in  1871.  He  was  one  of
the  secretaries  of  the  American  association  of
geologists  and  naturalists  in  1844,  and  was  for
many  years  corresponding  secretary  of  the  New
York  academy  of  sciences.  He  has  contributed
papers  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
is  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Dartmouth  Medical
College  and  Dr.  Nathan  Smith,  its  Founder  "  (Con-
cord. N.  H.  and  Washington,  D.  C,  1880).

HUBBARD,  Richard  Dudley,  statesman,  b.
in  Berlin.  Conn.,  7  Sept.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn..  28  Feb.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1839,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842,  and  prac-
tised his  profession  until  his  death.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Connecticut  legislature  in  1842,
and  in  1855-'8.  From  1846  till  1868  he  was  state's
attorney  for  Hartford  county.  He  was  a  Demo-
cratic member  of  congress  in  1867,  but  declined  a
re-election.  As  Democratic  candidate  for  governor
of  Connecticut  he  was  defeated  in  1872.  elected  in
1876,  and  defeated  again  in  1878.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  an  earnest  Unionist.

HUBBARD,  Richard  William,  artist,  b.  in
Middletown,  Conn.,  15  Oct.,  1810.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Middletown  academy  and  Yale,  and  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  afterward  to  Brooklyn,
where  he  opened  studios.  He  now  (1887)  resides
in  New  York.  In  1858  he  was  elected  an  academi-
cian. He  is  president  of  the  Artists'  fund  society  and


294


HUBBARD


HUBLEY


of  the  Brooklyn  art  association,  and  has  travelled
and  studied  extensively  in  France  and  England.
Among  his  earlier  works  are  "Mansfield  Mountain
at  Sunset,"  "Showery  Day  at  Lake  George,"
"  Meadows  near  Utica/'  "  Twilight,"  "  High  Peak,
North  Conway,"  and  "Vermont  Hills."  He  ex-
hibited at  the  Centennial  of  1876  "  The  Coming
Storm,"  "  Early  Autumn,"  and  "  Glimpse  of  the
Adirondacks " ;  and  at  the  National  academy
"  Hartford,  Conn."  (1882) ;  "  Afternoon  in  Summer''
(1884) ;  "  Down  on  the  Meadows  "  and  "  The  Wa-
tering-Place"' (1885);  "Lake  Cazenovia,"  "The
Old  Mill  at  Coxsackie,"  and  "The  Head  of  the
Dam,  Mount  Moore,  N.  Y."  (1886).

HUBBARD,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  2  June,  1785 ;  d.  there,  24  Dec,  1847.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,  studied  law,  and
settled  in  Biddeford,  Me.  In  1810  he  returned  to
Boston,  and  became  a  partner  of  his  former  law
tutor,  Judge  Charles  Jackson.  His  ability  and
character  won  him  the  foremost  place  at  the  bar.
From  1842  until  his  death  he  was  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Massachusetts.  Harvard  con-
ferred on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1842.

HUBBARD,  Samuel  Dickinson,  congressman,
b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  10  Aug.,  1799 ;  d.  there,
8  Oct.,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1819,
and  studied  law,  but,  on  inheriting  a  large  property,
engaged  in  manufacturing.  In  1845-'9  he  served
in  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  in  1852-'3  was  post-
master-general. For  many  years  he  was  president
of  the  Middletown  Bible  society,  and  was  a  gener-
ous contributor  to  benevolent  and  educational  en-
terprises. Wesleyan  university  conferred  upon  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1854.

HUBBARD,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Smith-
field,  R.  I.,  in  1776;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  16
June,  1838.  He  received  his  medical  instruction
from  Dr.  Albigense  Waldo,  a  surgeon  in  the  IT.  S.
army,  and  was  for  thirty-four  years  a  physician  in
Pomfret,  Conn.,  his  practice  extending  into  the
bordering  towns  of  Rhode  Island  and  Massachu-
setts. He  was  several  times  in  the  legislature,  and
once  in  the  state  senate,  was  president  of  the  Con-
necticut medical  society,  active  in  the  establish-
ment of  deaf,  dumb,  blind,  and  insane  asylums,
and,  during  the  last  year  of  his  life,  was  engaged,
by  authority  of  the  legislature,  in  establishing  a
hospital  for  the  insane  poor.  In  1829  he  removed
to  New  Haven,  and  occupied  the  chair  of  surgery
at  Yale  until  his  death.

HUBBARD,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1621  ;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  14  Sept.,  1704.
He  emigrated  with  his  parents  to  this  country  in
1630,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1642.  In
1665  he  was  ordained,  and  became  first  assistant
and  then  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in
Ipswich,  Mass.,  continuing  in  this  charge  till  1703,
when  age  compelled  his  resignation.  He  is  repre-
sented to  have  been  "  hospitable,  amiable,  equal  to
any  of  his  contemporaries  in  learning  and  candor,
and  superior  to  all  as  a  writer."  His  "  History  of
New  England,"  for  which  the  state  of  Massachu-
setts paid  him  £50,  was  saved  from  the  flames  by
Dr.  Andrew  Eliot,  in  the  attack  on  Gov.  Thomas
Hutchinson's  house  by  the  mob  in  August,  1765,
and  presented  by  Dr.  Eliot's  son  to  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  society,  by  whom  it  was  printed
in  1815.  Mr.  Hubbard's  other  works  are  "  A  Narra-
tive of  Troubles  with  the  Indians  "  (Boston,  1677) ;
"  Sermons  "  (1684) ;  and  "  Testimony  of  the  Order
of  the  Gospel  in  Churches  "  (1701).

HUBBELL,  Jay  Abel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Avon,
Mich.,  15  Sept.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Michigan  in  1853,  studied  law,  and


was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855,  when  he  re-
moved to  Ontonagon,  Mich.  He  was  elected  dis-
trict attorney  of  the  upper  peninsular  in  1857,  and
again  in  1859.  He  removed  to  Houghton,  Mich.,
in  1860,  and  was  elected  prosecuting  attorney  of
Houghton  county  in  1861,  1863,  and  1865.  He
practised  law  till  1870.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Republican,  and  re-elected  four  times,  serving
from  1873  till  1883,  and  being  a  member  of  the
committees  on  banking  and  currency,  and  on  com-
merce, appropriations,  and  ways  and  means,  lie
declined  a  renomination,  but  served  in  the  Michi-
gan senate  in  1885  and  1887.  He  has  been  largely
identified  with  mineral  interests  in  northern  Michi-
gan, and  was  active  in  establishing  the  Michigan
mining-school,  a  state  institution,  in  Houghton.

HUBBELL,  Levi,  jurist,  b.  in  Ballston,  N.  Y.,
15  April,  1808 ;  d.  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  8  Dec,  1876.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1827,  after  which
he  studied  law.  He  was  adjutant-general  of  the
state  from  1833  till  1836,  and  in  1841  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly.  In  1844  he  removed  to  Wis-
consin, and  became  a  Democratic  politician.  He
was  elected  judge  of  the  2d  judicial  circuit,  and
served  as  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  for  one
year.  Impeachment  proceedings  were  instituted
against  him  in  1853,  but  the  trial  resulted  in  his
acquittal.  In  1856  he  resigned  his  judgeship.  He
was  elected  to  the  assembly  in  1864  as  a  war  Demo-
crat, and  held  the  office  of  U.  S.  district  attorney
from  1871  till  1875.

HUBBELL,  Martha  Stone,  author,  b.  in  Ox-
ford, Conn.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  North  Stonington,  Conn.,
in  1856.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Noah  Stone,
and  married  Rev.  Stephen  Hubbell  in  1832.  She
wrote  children's  stories  for  the  American  and
Massachusetts  Sunday-school  Union,  and  "  The
Shady  Side,  or  Life  in  a  Country  Parsonage,  by  a
Pastor's  Wife  "  (Boston,  1853).  This  was  intended
as  a  counterpart  to  Mrs.  Phelps's  "  Sunny  Side,"
and  40,000  copies  were  sold  in  a  year.

HUBBELL,  William,  pioneer,  b.  in  Vermont
about  1750 ;  d.  in  Scott  county,'  Ky.,  about  1835.
He  served  five  years  and  a  half  in  the  Revolution-
ary army  as  private,  sergeant,  and  lieutenant, -taking
part  in  the  capture  of  St.  John  and  Montreal  and
in  several  skirmishes.  After  the  close  of  the  war
he  removed  to  Kentucky  and  settled  in  Scott
county,  where  he  resided  until  his  death  at  an  un-
usually advanced  age.  He  is  chiefly  noted  for  his
contest  with  a  band  of  Indians  as  he  was  returning
to  Kentucky  from  the  east.  His  party  numbered
twenty.  After  passing  Pittsburg  he  thought  he
saw  traces  of  Indians  along  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,
which  suspicion  was  confirmed  by  information  at
Gallipolis.  Having  been  appointed  regular  com-
mander of  the  flat-bottomed  boat  in  which  they
voyaged,  Capt.  Hubbell  divided  the  nine  men  into
three  night-watches.  Early  in  the  night  an  Indian
canoe  was  seen,  and  more  evidence  of  the  approach
of  hostile  savages.  On  the  following  morning,  24
March,  1791,  they  were  attacked  by  Indians  in
large  canoes.  Each  man  took  his  position,  having
been  ordered  not  to  fire  till  the  savages  were  so
near  that  "  the  flash  from  the  guns  might  singe
their  eyebrows."  After  a  bloody  conflict,  only  two
of  the  nine  men  .escaping  unhurt,  they  reached
Limestone.  The  fleet,  which  they  had  passed  the
night  before  the  battle,  arrived  the  next  day,  the
Indians  having  suffered  it  to  sail  unmolested.  It
is  believed  that  after  Hubbell's  encounter  no  boat
on  the  Ohio  was  ever  attacked  by  Indians.

HUBLEY,  Adam,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster
county,  Pa.,  9  Jan.,  1740 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in
May,  1798. He  was  commissioned  as  major  of  the


HUDDE


HUDSON


295


10th  Pennsylvania  regiment  on  6  Dec,  1776,  com-
manded the  11th  regiment,  with  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel, from  5  June,  1779,  and  retired  on
1  Jan.,  1781.  From  1783  till  1789  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly,  and  in  1790  a  state  senator.
flis  "  Journal  of  Events  in  1779 "  was  published
in  the  "  Pennsylvania  Archives  "  (2d  series,  vol.  xi.).
HUDDE,  Andreas,  Dutch  commander,  b.  in
Holland  about  1600 ;  d.  in  Delaware,  4  Nov.,  1663.
He  came  to  New  Netherlands  (now  New  York)  in
1629,  and  from  the  time  of  his  arrival  until  a  few
days  before  his  death  was  almost  constantly  in  the
employment  of  the  Dutch  West  India  company.
He  was  the  first  commissary  of  wares  to  the  com-

?any.  In  1635  he  was  sent,  by  Gov.  Wouter  van
'wilier,  on  a  mission  to  Fort  Hope,  now  Spring-
field, Mass.,  to  make  protest,  in  behalf  of  the  Dutch,
to  William  Pyncheon,  because  of  his  action  in  es-
tablishing a  trading-house  and  plantation  at  this
point.  In  1642  he  was  made  surveyor  at  Manhat-
tan, and  in  1645  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Kieft  to
take  the  place  of  Jan  Jansen  van  Ilpendam  as  com-
missary, or  deputy  governor,  of  the  Dutch  colony  on
the  South  (Delaware)  river,  and  took  up  his  resi-
dence at  the  noted  Fort  Nassau,  built  by  Capt.
Cornelius  Jacobus  Mey  in  1623.  In  1646  he  pur-
chased lands  from  the  Indians,  a  portion  of  which
are  covered  by  the  present  site  of  Philadelphia.
Here  he  built  a  block-house,  and  set  up  a  pole,  on
which  he  placed  the  arms  of  the  United  Nether-
lands. This  action  brought  on  a  spirited  contro-
versy with  the  Swedes,  which  lasted  through  Hud-
de's  administration.  By  order  of  their  governor,
Printz,  the  Swedes  destroyed  the  house  and  tore
down  the  arms.  In  1651  Capt.  Hudde,  under
orders  from  Gov.  Stuyvesant,  destroyed  Fort  Nas-
sau, and  built  Fort  Casimar,  at  a  point  below  the
Swedish  Fort  Christina.  His  command  of  the
Dutch  on  the  Delaware  continued  until  1655,  when
a  naval  expedition  under  Stuyvesant,  ascended  the
river,  captured  Fort  Christina,  and  overthrew  the
government  of  the  Swedes.  The  authority  of  the
Dutch  being  now  fully  established.  John  Paul  Jac-
quet  was  created  vice-director  and  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  colony.  Hudde  was  appointed  a  mem-
ber of  his  council,  made  surveyor  of  the  colony  and
clerk  of  the  parish,  and  in  1657  was  placed  in
command  of  the  forts  Altona  (Christina)  and  New
Gottenburg.  Finally,  being  in  advanced  veal's,  and
having  saved  but  little  for  himself,  he  determined  to
withdraw  from  public  life,  and  removed  to  Mary-
land and  entered  the  brewing  business.  After  many
earnest  entreaties  to  be  released  from  his  office,  he
was,  in  October,  1663,  dismissed,  and  on  1  Nov.
set  out  with  his  family  for  Maryland,  was  taken  ill
on  the  way,  and  died  at  Appoquining,  Del.,  on  the
4th,  '•  of  an  ardent  fever,"  but  a  few  months  before
the  Dutch  power  itself  on  the  river  ceased  to  exist.
"  Thus  ended  the  life,"  says  Hazzard,  "  of  this
long-tried  and  faithful  servant  of  the  Dutch  .  .  .
Throughout  the  whole  course  of  the  Dutch  he  has
been  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  useful  men."
He  was,  undoubtedly,  a  man  of  good  education,  as
is  abundantly  shown  by  his  voluminous  report  to
Stuyvesant  and  numerous  other  documents  among
the  archives  at  Albany,  N.  Y.

HUDEN,  Lucas  Van,  Flemish  adventurer,  b.
in  Ghent  in  1509 ;  d.  in  Araucania  in  1553.  He
served  in  the  expedition  that  conquered  Venezuela
in  1535,  and,  attaching  himself  to  the  fortunes  of
Valdivia,  passed  with  him  to  Peru  and  joined
Francisco  Pizarro.  Valdivia  was  instructed  by  the
latter  to  conquer  Chili  in  1540,  and  Huden,  follow-
ing his  protector,  greatly  distinguished  himself  in
the  subsequent  campaigns. He  took  a  prominent


part  in  the  battle  of  the  valley  of  Aconcagua,  and
decided  the  issue  of  the  action  through  a  timely
movement.  When  Valdivia  founded  the  city  of
Santiago,  in  the  valley  of  Mapocho,  12  Feb.,  1541,
Huden  was  made  a  member  of  the  cabildo  or  com-
mon council,  and  given  command  of  the  fortress
that  was  built  upon  the  mountain  of  Santa  Lucia.
After  the  assassination  of  Pizarro,  Huden  assisted
in  the  election  of  Valdivia  as  adelantado.  He
commanded  the  artillery  which  decided  the  victory
in  the  battle  (1541)  with  the  powerful  Indian  chief
Michimalonco,  who  had  succeeded,  during  the  ac-
tion, in  setting  fire  to  Santiago.  He  offered  after-
ward to  go  to  Cuzco  to  re-establish  communica-
tions with  Peru,  and  bring  re-enforcements.  In
company  with  Alonso  de  Monroy,  Pedro  de  Mi-
randa, and  four  cavalrymen,  he  set  out  on  a  perilous
journey  in  which  his  escorts  met  their  death,  and
Monroy  himself  was  made  prisoner  by  the  Indians.
Returning  to  Santiago  in  September,  1543,  with  a
vessel  full  of  provisions,  tools,  and  ammunition,
sent  by  the  governor  of  Peru,  Vasca  de  Castro,  he
took  part  in  an  expedition  sent  by  Valdivia  to  ex-
plore the  south  coast,  commanded  by  an  Italian
mariner,  Pastene,  and  Capt.  Geronimo  de  Alderete.
They  discovered  the  Chiloe  islands  in  1544,  and  ad-
vanced along  the  coast  of  Chili  as  far  as  the  Strait
of  Magellan.  Huden  was  a  member  of  the  council
of  government,  appointed  by  Valdivia  to  assist  his
deputy,  Villagra,  when  he  left  for  Peru,  in  Decem-
ber, 1547,  to  assist  President  La  Gasca  ;  afterward
held  several  commands,  and  was  sent,  in  1543,  to
re-enforce  the  fortress  of  Tucapel  in  Araucania.  be-
sieged by  the  Indians.  The  governor  resolved  to
evacuate  the  fortress,  but  Huden  opposed  the  plan
and  remained  almost  alone  in  Tucapel,  where  he
was  killed  in  an  assault  bv  the  Indians.

HUDSON,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Marlborough,
Mass.,  14  Nov.,  1795;  d.  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  4
May,  1881.  His  father,  Stephen  Hudson,  a  Revolu-
tionary soldier,  was  captured  by  the  British  and
confined  in  the  Philadelphia  jail.  The  son  taught
for  a  time,  studied  theology,  and  was  licensed  as  a
Universalist  preacher  in  i819,  with  a  charge  in
Westminster.  Mass.,  over  a  society  of  Restoration-
ists,  which  he  served  as  pastor  for  twenty  years.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives from  1828  till  1833.  and  of  the  state  senate
from  1833  till  1839.  In  1839  he  was  a  member  of
the  executive  council,  serving  till  1841.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  1841  till
1849.  when  he  removed  to  Lexington,  where  he  re-
sided till  his  death.  He  served  as  naval  officer  of
the  port  of  Boston  from  1849  till  1853.  He  was  a
member  of  the  state  board  of  education,  and  held
other  public  offices,  among  which  was  that  of  U.  S.
assessor  of  internal  revenue  from  1864  till  1868.
For  many  years  he  edited  the  "  Boston  Daily  At-
las," a  Whig  journal,  and  was  an  active  student  of
local  history.  His  publications  include  "Letters
to  Rev.  Hosea  Ballou  "  (1827) ;  "  Reply  to  Walter
Balfour  "  (1829) ;  "  History  of  Westminster  "  (Bos-
ton, 1832) ;  "  Doubts  Concerning  the  Battle  of  Bun-
ker Hill  "  (1857);  "Historical  Address  at  the  Cen-
tennial at  Westminster "  (1859) ;  "  History  of
Marlborough  "  (1862) ;  and  a  "  History  of  Lexing-
ton," with  "Genealogical  Register  of  Lexington
Families  "  (1868).  He  prepared  congressional  re-
ports on  the  "  Protective  Policy,"  legislative  re-
ports on  "  Capital  Punishment,"  "  The  Northeast-
ern Boundary,"  and  "  The  Incompetency  of  Wit-
nesses on  Account  of  Religious  Belief,"  besides  ar-
ticles for  periodicals  and  newspapers.  He  presided
at  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  battle  of  Lex-
ington in  1875,  and  delivered  a  spirited  address.


296


HUDSON


HUDSON


HUDSON,  Erasmus  Darwin,  surgeon,  b.  in
Torringford,  Conn.,  15  Dec,  1805 :  d.  in  Riverside,
Greenwich,  Conn.,  31  Dec,  1880.  He  was  educated
by  a  private  tutor  and  at  Torringford  academy,  and
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Berkshire  medical
college  in  1827.  He  practised  in  Bloomfield,  and  be-
came a  member  of  the  Connecticut  medical  society.
In  1828  he  lectured  on  temperance,  and  from  1837
till  1849  was  lecturing  agent  of  the  Connecticut
anti-slavery  society  and  general  agent  of  the  Ameri-
can anti-slavery  society.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  government  to  fit  ap-
paratus to  special  cases  of  gunshot  injuries  of  bone,
resections,  ununited  fractures,  and  amputations  at
the  knee-  and  ankle-joints.  He  invented  several
prothetic  and  orthopaedic  appliances,  which  received
awards  at  the  Exposition  universelle  of  Paris  in
1857,  and  at  the  Centennial  exhibition,  Philadel-

Shia.  1876.  Prom  1850  till  his  death  he  resided  in
Tew  York,  devoting  himself  to  orthopaedic  surgery
and  mechanical  apparatus  for  deformities,  artificial
limbs,  etc  He  was  a  contributor  to  "  The  Libera-
tor "  and  the  "  Anti-Slavery  Standard "  (Boston
and  New  York,  1837-49),  was  co-editor  of  " The
Charter  Oak  "  (Hartford,  1838-'41).  and  published
numerous  reported  cases  in  the  "  Medical  and  Sur-
gical History  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  "  (Wash-
ington, 1870-'2).  He  wrote  an  "  P]ssay  on  Temper-
ance "  (1828).  and  published  monographs  on  "  Re-
sections "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  Syme's  Amputa-
tion" (New  York,  1871);  and  "  Immobile  Appara-
tus for  Ununited  Fractures "  (New  York,  1872).—
His  son,  Erasmus  Darwin,  physician,  b.  in  North-
ampton, Mass.,  10  Nov.,  1843 ;  d.  9  May,  1887,  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York
in  1804.  and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons, New  York  city,  in  1867.  He  was  house-sur-
geon of  Bellevue  hospital  in  1867-'8,  and  held  the
office  of  health  inspector  of  New  York  city  in
1869-'70.  In  1870  he  was  attending  physician  to
the  class  for  diseases  of  the  eye,  out-door  depart-
ment of  Bellevue  hospital,  and  from  1870  till  1872
was  attending  physician  at  the  Northwestern  dis-
pensary, and  from  1870  till  his  death  was  attending
physician  to  Trinity  chapel  parish  and  Trinity
home.  He  was  professor  of  principles  and  practice
of  medicine  in  the  Woman's  medical  college  of
New  York  infirmary  from  1872  till  1882,  and  pro-
fessor of  general  medicine  and  physical  diagnosis
in  the  New  York  Polyclinic  from  1882  until  his
death.  He  has  published  "  Diagnostic  Relations
of  the  Indigestions  "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  Doctors,
Hygiene,  and  Therapeutics  "  (1877) ;  "  Methods  of
Examining  Weak  Chests "  (1885) ;  "  Limitations  of
the  Diagnosis  of  Malaria "  (1885) ;  "  Home  Treat-
ment of  Consumptives "  (1886) :  and  "  Physical
Diagnosis  of  Thoracic  Diseases  "  (2d  ed.,  1887).

HUDSON.  Frederic,  journalist,  b.  in  Quincy,
Mass.,  in  1819;  d.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  21  Oct.,  1875.
After  receiving  a  limited  education  in  the  com-
mon schools  of  Concord  and  Boston,  Mass.,  he  re-
moved to  New  York  city  in  1836,  and,  entering  the
office  of  the  "  Herald,"  rose  through  the  various
grades  till  he  became  managing  editor  of  that
journal.  After  a  connection  of  nearly  thirty  years
with  the  "  Herald,"  he  retired  in  April,  1866,  and
resided  in  Concord,  Mass.,  until  his  death.  He  was
the  author  of  "Journalism  in  the  United  States
from  1690  till  1872  "  (New  York,  1873).

HUDSON,  Henry  (sometimes  called  Hendrik
Hudson),  English  navigator,  b.  in  the  latter  half
of  the  16th  century.  He  was  a  citizen  of  London,
had  a  house  there,  and  belonged  to  a  family  that
counted  among  its  members  another  Henry  Hud-
son, perhaps  his  grandfather,  who  was  an  alderman


of  London,  and  one  of  the  founders,  with  Sebastian
Cabot,  of  the  Muscovy  or  Russia  company,  which
was  intended  to  promote  the  discovery  of  a  northerly
passage  to  China.  From  its  establishment  in
1555  till  1607,  when  Henry  Hudson  first  appears
upon  the  scene  as  a  captain  in  its  employ,  various
Hudsons  were  eminent  in  the  counsels  of  the  Mus-
covy company,
or  were  engaged
in  its  explora-
tions. Chris-
topher Hudson
was  agent  of  the
company  in  Rus-
sia as  early  as
1559-'60,  took  a
deep  interest  in
the  voyage  of
discovery  to
America  of  Sir
Humphrey  Gil-
bert in  1583,  and
advised  the  com-
pany to  assist  in
raising  the  re-
quisite funds.  John  Hudson  was  a  member  of  the
Muscovy  and  Virginia  companies.  Thomas  Hud-
son, a  resident  of  Limehouse,  was  a  captain  of  the
Muscovy  company  in  1579,  and  commanded  its
expedition  to  Persia  in  the  following  year.  On
24  Jan.,  1583,  Thomas  Hudson  advised  Capt.  John
Davis  concerning  his  search  for  a  northwest  pas-
sage to  China,  which  resulted  in  the  discovery  of
Davis  strait,  and  twenty-six  years  later  exercised
a  powerful  influence  upon  Henry  Hudson  in  a
voyage  that  eventually  carried  the  latter  into  Del-
aware bay  and  Hudson  river.  Stephen  Hudson,
a  member  of  the  East  India  company,  which  was
originally  promoted  by  some  of  the  foremost  mem-
bers of  the  Muscovy  company,  is  mentioned  in  the
"Court  Minutes"  of  the  former  corporation,  un-
der date  of  13  Dec,  1602,  as  having  paid  to  Mr.
Chamberlaine,  the  treasurer,  "Xli  for  his  supply
toward  the  discovery  of  the  Northwest  passadge,
and  desired  the  Company  to  have  him  excused  for
non-payment  thereof  till  now,  for  that  he  haith
bene  in  the  cuntry  all  this  sumer  and  never  hard
thereof."  Educated  in  the  company's  service  and
familiar  with  its  aims,  Henry  Hudson  was  entire-
ly devoted  to  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  a
northerly  passage  to  China,  and  the  various  dis-
coveries that  he  made  were  the  outcome  of  this
original  idea.  Of  Hudson's  four  voyages,  of  which
we  know  anything,  the  first  two  were  made  for  the
Muscovy  company,  while  the  fourth  and  last  was
set  on  foot  by  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  chief  governor
of  the  Muscovy  company.  The  journal  of  Hud-
son's first  recorded  voyage  contains  the  earliest
known  incident  in  the  life  of  the  great  mariner,
and  indicates  his  religious  feeling  while  it  also  il-
lustrates the  devout  spirit  of  the  age.  Purchas
records :  "  Anno  1607,  Aprill  the  nineteenth,  at  St.
Etheburge  in  Bishop's  Gate  Street,  did  communi-
cate with  the  rest  of  the  parishioners  these  persons,
seamen,  purposing  to  goe  to  sea  foure  days  after,
for  to  discover  a  passage  by  the  North  Pole  to
Japan  and  China."  Then  follow  eleven  names,  be-
ginning with  "  Henry  Hudson,  master,"  and  ending
with  his  son  '•  John  Hudson,  a  boy."  The  little
"  Hopewell,"  of  sixty  tons,  associated  with  the
gallant  Frobisher's  last  voyage  twenty-nine  years
before,  was  now  under  Hudson's  command,  and  in
her"  he  tried  the  eastern  coast  of  Greenland,  and
followed  the  ice  barrier  around  and  up  to  about
82°  N. Having  reached  the  neighborhood  of  Spitz-


HUDSON


HUDSON


297


bergen  without  finding  an  entrance,  he  sought
once  more  to  penetrate  into  Davis  strait  by  the
north  of  Greenland  by  Lumley's  inlet  and  the
"furious  overfall."  Again  frustrated  by  ice,  he
returned  to  the  Thames,  15  Sept.  He  had  attained
a  higher  degree  of  latitude  than  any  previous  navi-
gator, was  the  first  to  note  the  amelioration  of  the
temperature  in  his  northward  progress,  and,  to  sug-
gest the  existence  of  an  open  polar  sea,  and,  more-
over, by  his  recommendations  he  laid  the  founda-
tions of  the  English  whale-fisheries  in  the  neigh-
borhood of  Spitzbergen.  In  this  voyage  he  was
influenced  by  the  map  of  Molineux  or  Wright,

Sublished  by  Hakluyt  in  1600,  which  the  learned
[r.  Coote  identifies  with  the  "new  map"  re-
ferred to  by  Shakespeare  in  "  Twelfth  Night."
Hudson's  second  voyage  for  the  Muscovy  com-
pany, for  the  "  finding  a  passage  to  the  East  Indies
by  the  North-East,"  began  on  22  April,  1608,  and
he  had  with  him  his  son  John  and  Robert  Juet,
who  accompanied  him  in  his  two  later  voyages,  and
finally  basely  conspired  against  him.  On  3  June  he
reached  the  northern  point  of  Norway,  and  on  11
June  was  in  lat.  75°  24'  N.,  between  Spitzbergen
and  Nova  Zembla.  Striving  in  vain  to  pass  to  the
northeast  of  the  latter,  and  "  voide  of  hope  of  a
North-East  passage  (except  by  the  Vaygats,  for
which  I  was  not  fitted  to  trie  or  prove),"  he  resolved,
6  July,  to  use  all  means  to  sail  to  the  northwest,
once  more  hoping  to  pass  what  Capt.  Davis  named
Lumley's  inlet  and  the  furious  overfall.  But,  hav-
ing made  little  headway,  on  7  Aug.  he  returned  to
England,  arriving  on  26  Aug.

The  fame  of  Hudson's  voyages  soon  reached  the
ears  of  the  recently  established  Dutch  East  India
company,  and,  although  its  charter  only  conferred
the  privilege  of  trading  with  India  by  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  stimulated  by  its  fears  of  English
rivalry,  it  determined  also  to  despatch  an  expedi-
tion in  search  of  a  northeast  passage,  and  invited
Hudson  to  command  it.  The  Muscovy  company
having  temporarily  abandoned  the  quest,  and
turned  its  attention  to  the  whale-fisheries,  which
Hudson  had  suggested,  he  was  at  liberty,  and,  hav-
ing conferred  in  person  with  the  Amsterdam
chamber,  accepted  the  mission.  Just  as  he  had
closed  the  affair,  an  invitation  arrived  from  the
king  of  France,  desiring  him  to  undertake  a  simi-
lar voyage,  and  offering  4,000  crowns  for  the  pur-
pose. Henry  C.  Murphy,  while  U.  S.  minister  at
the  Hague,  discovered  a  copy  of  Hudson's  contract.
which  shows  that  the  original  was  executed,  6  Jan.,
1609,  at  Amsterdam,  that  he  signed  his  name
Henry  Hudson,  and  that  in  the  body  of  the  instru-
ment he  was  also  named  Henry  (and  not  Hendrik)
Hudson ;  and  that  an  interpreter  was  required,  as
Hudson  did  not  understand  Dutch.  It  appears
from  the  contract  and  abstract  of  instructions  that
the  directors  agreed  to  furnish  a  vessel  of  about
sixty  tons  to  "  search  for  a  passage  to  the  north,
around  by  the  north  side  of  Nova  Zembla."  For
his  outfit,  and  for  the  support  of  his  wife  and
children,  $  320  were  to  be  paid ;  and  in  case  he  lost
his  life,  the  directors  were  to  give  his  widow  $80.
If  he  found  "  the  passage  good  and  suitable  for  the
company  to  use,  the  directors  declared  that  they
would  reward  him  in  their  discretion.  Hudson  re-
ceived important  advice  from  his  friends  Jodocus
Hondius,  engraver  and  map-maker,  and  the  cele-
brated geographer  the  Rev.  Peter  Plancius,  and
from  the  latter  also  translations  of  Barentson's
voyage  memoranda  in  1595,  and  the  treatise  of  Ivar
Bardson  Boty,  which  had  belonged  to  Barentson,
and  also  the  log-books  of  George  Waymouth.  He
also  had  with  him  certain  letters  "  which  his  friend,


Capt.  John  Smith,  had  sent  him  from  Virginia,
and  by  which  he  informed  him  that  there  was  a
sea  leading  into  the  western  ocean,  by  the  north  of
the  English  colony."  Hudson  sailed  from  Am-
sterdam on  4  April,  1609,  his  vessel  being  the
"Half  Moon"  (see  illustration),  of  about  eighty
tons,  manned  by  a  motley  crew  of  sixteen  English
and  Dutch  sailors.  Robert  Juet,  who  had  been
his  mate  in  the  previous  voyage,  now  acted  as  his
clerk,  and  fortunately  kept  the  curious  journal  of
the  voyage  preserved  in  Purchas's  third  volume.
Hudson's  own  journal,  which  De  Laet  had  before
him  when  he  wrote  the  "  Nieuwe  Werelt,"  has  en-
tirely disappeared,  together  with  such  documents
as  Hudson  may  have  forwarded  to  the  Dutch  East
India  company.  Van  Meteren  tells  us  that  Hud-
son doubled  the  Cape  of  Norway  on  5  May,  and
directed  his  course  along  the  northern  coasts  to-
ward Nova  Zembla  ;  but  he  there  found  the  sea  as
full  of  ice  as  in  the  preceding  year,  so  that  he  lost
hope  of  effecting  anything.  This  and  the  cold,
which  some  of  his  men,  accustomed  to  the  East
India  heat,  could  not  bear,  caused  dissensions
among  the  crew,  upon  which  Hudson  proposed  to
go  to  the  coast  of  America  to  the  latitude  of
40°  (an  idea  suggested  by  Capt.  John  Smith's  maps
and  letters),  or  to  direct  the  search  to  Davis  strait.
The  latter  idea  Hudson  had  abandoned,  when  in  a
somewhat  similar  position,  on  his  last  voyage,  and
he  again  renounced  it,  and,  "  contrary  to  his  in-
structions," says  Mr.  Van  Dam  (which  were  to  re-
trace his  steps  and  return  to  Amsterdam  in  case  of
failure  to  find  a  passage  to  the  northeast),  he
shaped  his  course  toward  the  setting  sun,  hoping
to  find  a  passage  to  India  north  of  the  infant  colo-
ny of  Virginia.  A  fortnight  later  he  replenished
his  water-casks  in  one  of  the  Faroe  group,  on  2
July  was  sounding  off  the  grand  bank  of  New-
foundland, on  the  12th  was  in  Penobscot  bay,  on
4  Aug.  at  Cape  Cod,  and  two  weeks  later  found
himself  off  King  James's  river,  in  Virginia.  Re-
sisting the  temptation  to  visit  his  friend  Smith,  he
again  steered  northward,  and  on  Friday,  28  Aug.,
entered the  ^__=__— _

great  bay  now  ^<r"~~

called  Dela-
ware, whence
he  emerged,
after  twenty-
four  hours
of  fruitless
search  for  a
passage  to  In-
dia, and,  fol-
lowing the
New  Jersey
coast,  cast
anchor  on  3
Sept.  within
Sandy  Hook.
A  month  was
passed  in  the

great  river  in  ascertaining  that  for  about  one  hun-
dred and  fiftv  miles  (to  a  point  just  above  the  site  of
the  present  citv  of  Albanv)  its  waters  were  naviga-
ble for  light-draught  vessels,  and  that  the  surround-
ing country  was  attractive  and  fertile,  abounding
in  valuable  game,  and  frequented  by  peaceful  In-
dians. He  was  unaware  that  Samuel  Champlain
was  at  the  same  time  exploring  the  country  not
manv  miles  north  of  him.  (See  Champlain.)  Hud-
son arrived  at  Dartmouth,  on  his  return  voyage,
7  Nov..  and  immediately  wrote  to  the  Dutch  East
India  companv,  proposing  to  leave  Dartmouth  on
1  March  for  a  search  in  the  northwest  for  the  pas-


298


HUDSON


HUDSON


sage  to  India.  His  employers,  in  reply,  ordered
his  speedy  return  to  Holland.  But  as  Hudson  and
the  other* Englishman  were  about  to  sail  they  were
ordered  by  their  government  to  remain  and  serve
their  own  country.  After  eight  months'  detention
in  England,  the  "  Half  Moon  "  arrived  in  Amster-
dam in  the  summer  of  1610.  In  the  preceding
April,  Hudson  had  once  more  sailed,  under  English
auspices,  in  search  of  a  northwest  passage.  In  his
ship  the  "  Discouerie,"  of  seventy  tons,  he  pene-
trated the  long  straits  and  discovered  the  great
bay  that  bears  his  name,  at  the  southern  extremity
of  which  his  men  wintered.  Again  surrounded  by
a  mutinous  crew,  he  encountered  hardships  and
sufferings  from  their  criminal  misconduct,  which
the  artful  inventions  of  the  survivors  skilfully
concealed.  Though  he  had  divided,  even  with
tears,  his  last  bread  with  his  men,  yet  on  midsum-
sumer's  day,  1611,  while  near  the  eastern  coast,
half  way  back  to  the  straits,  his  ungrateful  crew,
thrusting  him  into  a  frail  boat,  with  his  son  John
and  five  sailors  sick  and  blind  with  scurvy,  cut  him
adrift,  to  perish  in  the  great  waste  of  waters,  which,
bearing  his  name,  "is  his  tomb  and  his  monu-
ment." It  is  said  that  a  document  has  been  dis-
covered among  the  archives  of  the  Hudson  bay
company  at  their  headquarters  at  York  Factory,
which  is  the  confession  of  one  of  the  mutineers,
that  the  manuscript,  written  in  a  large,  firm  hand,
consists  of  ten  slips  of  paper,  apparently  torn
from  a  book  and  tied  together  for  better  preserva-
tion, and  is  now  in  the  office  of  the  Hudson  bay
company  in  London.  But  personal  application  at
the  latter  office,  by  the  author  of  this  article,  was
met  by  the  emphatic  reply  of  the  authorities  that
not  only  had  no  such  manuscript  ever  been  in  the
London  office,  but  no  one  there  had  ever  heard  of
its  existence.  There  is  no  authentic  portrait  or
autograph  of  Hudson;  and  the  picture  given  on

Eage  296  is  believed  to  be  apocryphal.  It  is  possi-
le,  however,  that  his  intimate  friend,  Jodocus  Hon-
dius,  engraved  Hudson's  portrait,  and  that  it  may
yet  be  found.  It  is  apparent,  from  the  contract  be-
tween the  Dutch  East  India  company  and  Hudson,
that  he  had  several  children  besides  the  "  only  son  "
so  often  referred  to  by  writers  during  the  past  two
hundred  years.  The  "  Court  Minutes  of  the  Eng-
lish East  India  Company  "  also  reveal  the  follow-
ing extremely  interesting  facts :  "  April  19,  1614,
Being  informed  that  Mrs.  Hudson,  the  wife  or
widow  of  Mr.  Hudson  who  was  left  in  the  North
West  discovery,  desired  their  favour  for  employing
a  youth,  a  Son  of  his,  she  being  left  very  poor,  and
conceiving  that  they  were  partly  obliged  in  charity
to  give  assistance  in  regard  that  his  Father  per-
ished in  the  service  of  the  Commonwealth,  resolved
to  recommend  him  to  the  care  of  some  one  who  is
to  go  the  voyage  [to  the  East  Indies]."  Again,
"April  19,  1614,  Mrs.  Hudson's  son  recommended
to  the  care  of  Hunt,  master's  mate  in  the  '  Samari-
tan,' 51.  to  be  laid  out  upon  him  for  apparel  and
necessaries."  See  "  Historical  Inquiry  Concerning
Henry  Hudson,"  by  John  Meredith  Read  (Albany,
1866) ;  "  Henry  Hudson  in  Holland,"  by  Henry  C.
Murphy  (New  York,  1859) ; "  Henry  Hudson,  the  Nav-
igator," by  Dr.  Asher  (London,  I860) ;  and  "  Hud-
son's Sailing  Directions,"  by  Rev.  B.  F.  de  Costa.

HUDSON,  Henry  Norman,  Shakespeare  schol-
ar, b.  in  Cornwall,  Addison  co.,  Vt.,  28  Jan.,  1814 ;
d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  16  Jan.,  1886.  In  early
life  he  worked  at  the  trades  of  baker  and  wheel-
wright. He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1840,
went  south,  and  taught  in  Kentucky  and  in  Hunts-
ville,  Ala.  There  he  met  a  lady,  also  a  teacher,
whom  he  had  known  in  New  England. In  their


conversations,  he  said  she  was  continually  quoting
Shakespeare,  until  he  finally  asked  her  one  day,
"What  is  it  about  Shakespeare?"  She  replied:
"  Have  you  not  read  Shakespeare  ?  "  "  Never  a  line,"
said  he,  "  except  in  quotation."  "  Then,"  she  said,
"  I  advise  you  to  read  Shakespeare  without  delay."
"  I  acted  upon  her  advice,"  he  said,  "  and  very  soon
found  that  there  was  another  world  inside  of  the
world  in  which  I  was  living,  about  which  I  knew
nothing."  In  his  dissertation  on  the  "character
of  Desdemona  "  may  be  found  a  beautiful  passage,
referring  in  a  most  appreciative  manner  to  this
lady,  who  was  so  directly  instrumental  in  shaping
his  career.  He  was  thirty  years  of  age  when  he
received  this  advice.  In  less  than  a  quarter  of  a
century  after  he  had  acquired  a  wide  reputation,
and  was  accepted  as  one  of  the  great  authorities
in  Shakesperean  lore,  and  was  the  means  of  arous-
ing an  enthusiasm  in  behalf  of  the  bard  of  Avon,
so  great  as  to  inspire  a  man  of  wealth  to  endow  a
professorship  of  Shakespeare  in  Boston  university.
In  1848  Mr.  Hudson  published  his  "  Lectures  on
Shakespeare  "  (2  vols.,  Boston).  A  second  edition
was  called  for  the  same  year,  and  the  work  has
finally  been  expanded  to  three  volumes.  In  1849
he  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Episcopal  church.
He  also  published  an  edition  of  Shakespeare,  with  a
life  of  the  poet,  and  notes,  original  and  selected  (11
vols.,  Boston,  1851-'6).  Subsequently  he  devoted
his  time  and  attention  to  the  life  and  works  of  the
poet  Wordsworth,  and  published  "  Studies  in
Wordsworth  "  (Boston,  1884).  For  a  few  years  he
edited  the  New  York  "  Churchman,"  and  on  his
retirement  from  the  editorship  of  this  paper  he
undertook  the  publication  of  the  "American
Church  Monthly."  He  was  ordained  a  priest,  and
from  1858  till  1860  was  rector  of  a  church  in  Litch-
field, Conn.  He  published  one  volume  of  sermons
(Chicago,  1874),  the  style  of  the  composition  of
which  reminds  one  very  forcibly  of  Lord  Bacon.
When  the  civil  war  began  Mr.  Hudson  obtained
a  chaplaincy  in  a  corps  of  engineers,  which  was  or-
dered to  Virginia.  After  his  return  to  the  north
he  published  "  A  Chaplain's  Campaigns  with  Gen-
eral Butler  "  (New  York,  1865),  which  produced  a
great  sensation.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Saturday
Evening  Gazette  "  for  two  years.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Middlebury  college  in  1881.
He  was  professor  of  Shakespeare  in  Boston  uni-
versity. Besides  the  works  already  mentioned  he
published  a  "  School  Shakespeare  "  (Chicago,  1870) ;
"  Shakespeare,  his  Life,  Art,  and  Characters "
(1872) ;  a  series  of  text-books  containing  selections
from  the  works  of  classic  authors.

HUDSON,  William  Leverreth,  naval  officer,
b.  in  New  York,  11  May,  1794;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  15  Oct.,  1862.  He  entered  the  navy,  1  Jan.,
1816,  and  became  lieutenant,  28  April,  1826 ;  com-
mander, 2  Nov.,  1842 ;  and  captain,  14  Sept.,  1855.
He  took  part  in  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes's  exploring
expedition,  being  second  in  command,  and  his  ves-
sel, the  sloop-of-war  "  Peacock,"  was  lost  on  the
bar  at  the  mouth  of  Columbia  river,  owing  to  the
pilot's  carelessness.  For  several  years  he  was
commandant  of  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard.  In  1857
he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  "  Niagara  "
on  her  first  Atlantic  cable  expedition,  and  again
in  1858,  when  this  effort  was  successful.  For  his
service  on  this  occasion  he  received  valuable  gifts
and  marks  of  distinction  from  the  governments
of  Great  Britain  and  Russia.  On  his  return  he
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Charlestown
navy-yard.  He  was  retired  in  August,  1862,  and
appointed  one  of  the  board  of  lighthouse-inspec-
tors, which  office  he  held  until  his  death.


HUEBNER


HUELEN


299


HUEBNER,  John  Andrew,  Moravian  bishop,
b.  in  Aschersleben,  Prussia,  16  June,  1737;  d.  in
Berthelsdorf,  Saxony,  26  Dec,  1809.  In  1780  he
was  appointed  pastor  of  the  church  at  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  which  he  served  until  1790,  when,  on  11  April,
he  was  consecrated  bishop,  and  then  resided  at
Litiz.  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  but  had  a  seat  in  the
governing  board  at  Bethlehem.  He  succeeded
Bishop  Hehl  in  the  superintendence  of  the  churches
of  southern  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland.  In  1801
he  returned  to  Europe,  having  been  elected  to  the
supreme  executive  board,  known  as  the  "  Unity's
Elders'  Conference,"  at  Berthelsdorf.

HUEBSCH,  Adolph,  Hebrew  scholar  and  rabbi,
b.  in  St.  Xicolaus,  Hungary,  18  Sept.,  1830 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  10  Oct.,  1884.  While  a  student,  he
participated  in  the  Hungarian  revolution  of  1848-'9,
and,  when  it  was  suppressed,  after  resuming  his
studies,  officiated  as  rabbi  in  various  towns.  In
1861  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Prague
university,  and  preached  in  that  city  for  a  short
time.  In  1866  he  was  called  to  New  York  as  rabbi
of  a  synagogue,  where  he  preached  until  his  death.
Dr.  Huebsch  was  a  Talmudic  and  Semitic  scholar
of  high  attainments,  a  preacher  of  rare  power,  with
a  personality  that  charmed  old  and  young. He  was

Eeculiarly  successful  in  his  ministry.  He  pub-
shed  "  Gems  from  the  Orient,"  a  selection  of  Tal-
mudic and  oriental  proverbs,  and  a  volume  of  his
sermons  and  addresses  was  issued  in  1885.

HUEBSCHMANN,  Francis,  physician,  b.  in
Riethnordhausen,  grand -duchy  of  Weimar,  19
April,  1817;  d.  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  21  March,
1880.  He  was  educated  at  Erfurt  and  Weimar,
and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Jena  in  1841.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1842,  and  settled
in  Milwaukee,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He
was  school-commissioner  from  1843  till  1851,  a
member  of  the  first  constitutional  convention  in
1846,  and  served  on  the  committee  on  suffrage  and
elective  franchise.  He  was  the  especial  champion
of  the  provision  in  the  constitution  granting  for-
eigners equal  rights  with  Americans.  He  was  presi-
dential elector  in  1848,  a  member  of  the  city  coun-
cil and  county  supervisor  from  1848  till  1867,  and
state  senator  in  1851-2,  1862,  and  1871-2.  From
1853  till  1857  he  was  superintendent  of  Indian
affairs  of  the  north.  During  the  civil  war  he  en-
tered the  national  service  in  1862  as  surgeon  of  the
26th  Wisconsin  volunteers.  He  was  surgeon  in
charge  of  a  division  at  the  battle  of  Chancellorsvillc,
and  of  the  9th  army  corps  at  Gettysburg,  where  he
was  held  by  the  Confederates  for  three  days.  He
was  also  at  the  battle  of  Chattanooga,  in  charge  of
the  corps  hospital  in  Lookout  valley  in  1864,  and
brigade  surgeon  in  the  campaign  to  Atlanta.  He
was  honorably  discharged  in  that  year,  and,  re-
turning to  Milwaukee,  became  connected  with  the
United  States  general  hospital.

HUEFFEL,  Christian  Gottlieb,  Moravian
bishop,  b.  in  Kleinwelke,  Germany,  in  1762 ;  d.  in
Herrnhut,  Saxony,  7  June,  1842.  After  filling
various  important  offices  in  his  native  country,
among  others  that  of  president  of  the  German
Moravian  theological  seminary,  from  which  he  was
graduated  in  earlier  years,  he  was  consecrated
bishop,  24  Aug.,  1814,  and  came  to  the  United
States  in  1818  as  presiding  bishop  of  the  northern
district.  In  this  office  he  labored  with  great  suc-
cess until  1826,  when  he  returned  to  Europe,  hav-
ing been  elected  a  member  of  the  supreme  execu-
tive board  of  the  Moravian  church.  He  took  a
circuitous  route  by  way  of  the  West  Indies,  and
visited  the  extensive  missions  in  those  islands.  He
was  a  scientist  and  a  musician  of  rare  gifts.


HUEH  CETEMIXC  ATL  (way  -  way  -  tay  -  mix-
cat'-tle),  Toltec  statesman,  b.  in  the  second  quarter
of  the  11th  century;  d.  in  the  beginning  of  the
12th  century.  He  was  educated  by  the  Toltec  king,
Tecpantcalzin,  and  served  under  him  in  the  army.
This  king  died  in  1071,  and  Topiltzin,  the  last  of
the  Toltec  kings,  ascended  the  throne.  The  first
year  of  his  government  was  notable  for  a  super-
abundance of  rain,  which  destroyed  the  crop  of
grain,  and  in  the  following  year  plagues  of  grass-
hoppers and  mice  destroyed  everything  in  the
country.  The  superstition  of  the  people  interpret-
ed these  calamities  as  predicted  by  Huematzin,  and
considered  that  their  last  days  had  arrived.  At
this  crisis  the  news  arrived  at  Tula  that  the  people
of  the  south  were  in  rebellion,  and  intended  to
attack  Tula  and  destroy  the  city.  The  king  tried
to  settle  the  matter  in  a  peaceful  manner,  and  sent
an  embassy  to  the  rebels ;  but  they  answered  that
they  were  ready  to  go  to  Tula,  and  were  not  will-
ing to  accept  a  peace,  but  would  subjugate  the
nation.  When  Topiltzin  heard  this  answer,  he
communicated  it  to  his  people,  and  Huehuetemix-
catl  volunteered  to  go  and  punish  the  rebels.  Ac-
cordingly he  gathered  a  strong  army,  and  began
the  campaign  in  1099.  The  war  lasted  three  years,
in  which  time  Huehuetemixcatl  distinguished  him-
self, preventing  the  rebels  from  advancing  to  the
capital.  But  a  revolution  broke  out  in  Tula  itself,
the  capital  was  finally  occupied  by  the  rebels,  and
King  Topiltzin  was  put  to  death.  Huehuetemix-
catl then  surrendered,  and  went  to  Tula  to  pre-
serve the  historical  paintings  or  sacred  book,  and
to  exert  his  influence  among  the  conquerors  to
prevent  the  total  ruin  of  his  race  and  country.
Seeing  that  it  was  impossible  to  live  among  the
barbarians,  he  departed,  accompanied  by  a  few  of
his  countrymen,  and  founded  several  of  the  cities
in  the  valley  of  Mexico.  The  ruin  of  Tula  took
place  in  the  year  1103.  Some  historians  contend
that  this  warrior  and  his  sons  were  the  founders  of
the  celebrated  nations  of  Yucatan,  and  others  of
those  of  Chiapas  and  Central  America.

HUELEN  (way-leng),  Araucanian  soldier,  b.  in
Angol  about  1540;  d.  near  Osorno  in  1603.  He
was  cacique  of  the  tribe  of  Trapan,  and  from  his
early  youth  acquired  military  knowledge  in  the
wars  against  the  Spaniards,  so  that  after  the  death
of  toqui  Colcur,  he  was  called  by  the  united  tribes
to  the  chief  command  of  the  Araucanian  forces  in
the  beginning  of  1599.  Immediately  he  began  to
attack  the  forces  of  Gen.  Yiscarra,  whom  he  kept
at  bay.  and  in  July  of  that  year  gave  battle  to
Gen.  Quinones  in  the  plain  of  Yumbel,  which
lasted  a  whole  day,  and  resulted  in  victory  for  the
Spaniards,  but  with  enormous  losses.  Two  days
afterward  Huelen  gathered  his  forces  again  and
furiously  attacked  the  unsuspecting  Spaniards,
whom  he  defeated.  He  had  learned  from  the
Spaniards  their  military  tactics,  and  introduced
great  modifications  into  the  Indian  army,  whom
he  also  taught  the  management  of  the  horses  cap-
tured from  the  enemy.  On  14  Nov..  1599,  he  sur-
rounded the  city  of  Yaldivia  with  an  army  of  4,000
men,  of  whom  200  were  covered  with  Spanish
cuirasses,  and  60  armed  with  arquebuses.  He  de-
feated the  garrison  in  a  sally,  stormed  the  city,
and  put  the  whole  garrison  and  many  citizens  to
the  sword,  carried  off  the  women,  and  after  plun-
dering the  city  burned  it  to  the  ground.  For  two
years  he  continued  to  harass  the  Spaniards  con-
tinuously. In  1601  he  routed  the  forces  under
Alonso  de  Rivera,  near  Concepcion,  and  immedi-
ately attacked  the  city,  which  fell  into  his  power
and  was  razed  to  the  ground. In  1602  he  destroyed


300


HUELVA


HUGER


several  colonies  south  of  Bio-Bio,  and  in  the  be-
ginning of  1603,  with  a  powerful  army,  besieged
the  city  of  Osorno,  but,  after  desperate  efforts  to
capture  it,  retreated  with  the  loss  of  many  men.
Scarcely  a  month  had  elapsed  when  he  gathered  a
new  army  and  appeared  again  before  the  fortress :
but  his  advanced  age  and  the  results  of  many  old
wounds  brought  about  his  death  before  the  siege
had  made  any  progress.

HUELVA,  Alonso  Sanchez  de  (wail'-va),  Span-
ish navigator,  lived  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century.  He  was  born  in  the  small  town  of  Huelva,
near  Moguer,  and  from  that  town  he  took  his  sur-
name. He  is  generally  credited  with  the  first  dis-
covery of  the  New  World,  as  it  is  asserted  that  he
was  cast  by  a  tempest  on  the  shores  of  North
America,  and,  being  saved  with  three  or  four  sail-
ors, returned  to  the  island  of  Madeira ;  and  that
from  him  Columbus  obtained  his  first  information
of  the  continent,  and  was  guided  by  this  in  his
discovery.  As  Huelva's  original  manuscript  was
lost,  the  tradition  of  his  voyage  was  set  down  as
fabulous,  but  later  researches  seem  to  confirm  the
tradition,  and  such  writers  as  George  Horn,  Lae't,
Alderete,  Jose  de  Acosta,  Grotius,  and  Hakluyt
appear  to  give  it  full  credit.  Mariana  affirms
that  there  are  authentic  proofs  of  Huelva's  landing
at  Madeira.  Garcilaso  de  la  Vega  credits  Huelva
with  the  discovery  of  South  America.  Ferdinand
Denis,  in  his  "  Articles  critiques,"  Fray  Geronimo
de  la  Concepcion,  in  his  "Cadiz  Ilustrado,"  and
Diego  da  Costa,  in  "  Ocios  de  Espaholes  Emigra-
dos,"  also  mention  Huelva's  discovery.

HUEMATZIN  (way-mat-seen'),  Toltec  scholar,
lived  about  the  end  of  the  8th  century.  He  was
the  most  celebrated  philosopher  of  Tula,  and  is
generally  believed  to  be  the  collector  of  the  histori-
cal paintings  called  "  Teomaxtly,"  the  divine
book,  a  kind  of  cyclopaedia  of  the  history,  laws,
customs,  sciences,  and  arts  known  to  the  Tol-
tecs.  It  also  describes  the  migrations  of  the  na-
tion after  they  left  the  shores  of  Asia  till  their
arrival  in  the  Anahuac  valley,  and  relates  the  dif-
ferent sojourns  of  the  tribes  on  the  banks  of  the
river  Gila  before  crossing  it.  The  "  Teomaxtly  "
was  included  in  that  magnificent  library  of  Aztec
and  Toltec  volumes  condemned  to  be  burned  by
the  Bishop  of  Mexico,  Zumarraga,  under  the  pre-
tence that  they  were  works  of  infidels.  Huematzin
was  not,  as  it  is  generally  believed,  an  Aztec.  Ac-
cording to  the  most  recent  researches  of  the  Vicar
of  Rabinal,  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  he  belonged
to  the  more  cultured  race  of  the  Toltecs,  which,
although  subjugated  afterward  by  the  Aztecs,  re-
tained the  monopoly  of  science  and  sacerdotal  edu-
cation in  the  ancient  Mexican  empire.

HUEPON  (way-pong'),  Araucanian  soldier,  b.  in
the  valley  of  Yanapocho  about  1511 ;  d.  near  Se-
rena early  in  1548.  He  was  cacique  of  the  tribe  of
Promaneos,  and,  when  Chili  was  invaded  by  the  ex-
pedition of  Valdivia  in  1541,  Huepon  was  elected
by  the  assembled  caciques  their  commander-in-
chief  against  the  invaders,  and  was  the  first  to  at-
tack the  conquerors.  During  the  construction  of
the  city  of  Santiago  by  Valdivia,  he  continually
fought  the  Spaniards,  and  several  times  destroyed
the  fortifications,  keeping  them  in  perpetual  alarm
and  scattering  their  forces.  In  1542  he  took  ad-
vantage of  the  absence  of  Valdivia  on  an  expedi-
tion to  the  south  to  surprise  the  city,  destroy  the
intrenchments,  and  oblige  the  citizens  to  take  ref-
uge in  the  fort  on  the  hill,  which  he  also  attacked,
and  compelled  the  commander,  Alonso  de  Mouroy,
to  abandon  it  and  accept  a  battle  in  the  plains,
where  he  was  defeated. The  new  colonv  would


probably  have  been  destroyed  entirely  but  for  the
opportune  arrival  of  Valdivia,  who  defeated  Hue-
pon. During  that  year  and  in  1543-'4  he  contin-
ued to  oppose  the  Spaniards,  but  was  not  fortunate
and  resolved  to  abandon  the  valley  of  Mapocho
with  his  tribe,  and  join  the  northern  tribes  of
Copiapo,  who  continued  the  warfare  against  the
Spaniards,  and  by  those  tribes  he  was  appointed
general-in-chief  of  the  northern  confederation  on
account  of  his  military  skill.  In  1545  he  attacked
Alonso  de  Monroy  on  the  march  to  Peru  in  search
of  re-enforcements,  who  narrowly  escaped  with  one
companion,  while  all  the  rest  of  the  force  was  de-
stroyed. In  the  valleys  Coquimbo  and  Copiapo
the  Spanish  forces  found  no  rest  from  Huepon,
who  killed  a  great  number  of  them,  and,  on  account
of  his  sudden  and  unexpected  appearances,  they
called  him  "  the  ghost."  In  1546  Valdivia,  to  get
some  rest  from  Huepon,  signed  a  treaty  of  peace
with  him,  which  was  soon  broken  by  the  latter,
who  in  1547  destroyed  the  new  settlement  of  Se-
rena, and  continued  his  depredations  till  he  was
murdered  by  some  warriors  of  the  northern  tribes,
who  disliked  to  be  commanded  by  a  southerner.

HUET  DE  NAVARRE,  French  governor  of
Cayenne,  b.  in  Conde  sur  Noireau  in  1611 ;  d.  in
Surinam  in  1658.  Several  merchants  of  Rouen
founded  in  1640  the  Society  of  the  Cap  Nord,  and
obtained  from  Louis  XIII.  the  concession  of  the
vast  countries  between  the  Orinoco  and  the  Ama-
zon on  condition  that  they  should  establish  there
a  French  colony.  An  expedition  of  300  men  sailed
accordingly  from  Dieppe  on  1  Sept.,  1643,  arriv-
ing on  the  banks  of  Cayenne  on  25  Nov.  Poncet
de  Bretigny  was  the  commander,  and  Huet  de
Navarre  acted  as  his  lieutenant.  The  new  colo-
nists established  themselves  in  the  island  of  Cay-
enne, and  built  a  fortress  on  the  mountain  Ceperon,
as  a  barrier  against  the  incursions  of  the  Indians.
Meanwhile  the  violent  temper  of  Bretigny  created
trouble ;  he  was  murdered  by  soldiers,  and  Huet  de
Navarre  was  elected  to  his  place  in  1644.  Under
the  wise  administration  of  the  new  governor,  the
young  colony  prospered,  and  a  re-enforcement  of
forty  laborers,  received  in  the  following  year,
enabled  him  to  pass  to  the  continent  and  extend
the  possessions  of  the  company.  But  troubles  arose
again  among  the  colonists,  caused  principally  by
the  unhealthful  climate.  Many  returned  to  France,
and  Huet  to  Fort  Ceperon,  awaiting  anxiously
new  re-enforcements,  1647.  The  Company  of  Cap
Nord  relinquished  its  rights  to  a  new  society  (1652),
which  took  the  name  of  Les  12  seigneurs,  com-
pagnie  de  la  France  equinoxiale,  and  sent  from
Havre  an  expedition  of  800  men  under  the  com-
mand of  Chevalier  de  Royville.  The  latter  died  at
sea,  and  on  landing  at  Cayenne,  30  Sept.,  1652,  the
new  colonists  elected  Huet  president  of  the  board
of  four  members,  who  represented  the  company.
The  French  establishments  prospered  for  several
years,  and  had  extended  far  inland,  when  a  disas-
trous fire,  caused  by  a  lunatic,  destroyed  all  the
stores  of  the  colonists  in  1656.  The  Gali'bis  Indians
took  that  opportunity  to  renew  their  attacks,  and
the  French  resolved  to  seek  refuge  at  Surinam.
Huet  opposed  the  evacuation  of  Cayenne,  but  want
of  provisions  compelled  him  to  yield,  and,  after
severe  fighting  with  the  Galibis,  his  forces  reached
Surinam ;  but  he  was  so  exhausted  by  the  journey
that  he  died  a  few  days  later.

HUGER,  Daniel  (u'-gee),  refugee,  b.  in  Loudun,
France,  1  April,  1651 ;  d.  near  Santee  river,  S.  C,
24  Dec,  1711.  His  father,  John  Huger,  was  a  no-
tary. Before  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nan-
tes he  fled  from  France,  and  eventually  settled  in


drifa


xMcuZC  (flu &&?*:


HUGER

South  Carolina,  where  he  had  a  grant  of  land. — His
grandson,  Daniel,  patriot,  b.  on  Limerick  Planta-
tion, on  Cooper  river.  S.  C,  20  Feb.,  1741 :  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  1  July,  1799,  was  educated  in
Europe.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress  from  1786  till  1788,  and  a  representative
to  the  first  congress,  serving  from  1789  till  1793.
— The  second  Daniel's  brother,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  on
Limerick  Plantation,  S.  C,  19  March,  1742 ;  d.  17
Oct.,  1797,  after  receiving  an  education  in  Europe,
was  commissioned  lieutenant  in  a  battalion  raised

by  the  colony,
and  commanded
by  Col,  Thomas
Middleton,  for
service  against
the  Cherokee  In-
dians in  1760.
At  the  begin-
ning of  the  Rev-
olutionary war
he  was  made
lieutenant -colo-
nel of  the  1st
regiment,  and  in
1776  was  pro-
moted to  the  col-
onelcy of  the  5th
regiment,  South
Carolina  conti-
nental line.  He
was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.
army,  9  Jan.,  1779,  and  participated  in  every
battle  of  consequence  fought  by  the  southern
army.  He  opposed  the  invasion  of  Georgia  by
Gen.  Archibald  Campbell,  commanded  the  left
wing  at  the  battle  of  Stono,  20  June,  1779,  and  was
wounded  while  leading  his  men.  He  also  led  the
Georgia  and  South  Carolina  militia  in  the  unsuc-
cessful attack  on  Savannah,  and  during  the  siege
of  Charleston  was  employed  with  a  body  of  light
troops  to  cut  off  supplies  from  the  enemy  and  keep
open  communication  between  the  town  and  coun-
try ;  but  his  force  was  defeated  and  dispersed  by
Tarleton  and  Webster  at  Monk's  Corner,  S.  C.  He
joined  the  army  of  Gen.  Greene,  and  commanded
the  Virginians  at  the  battle  of  Guilford  Court-
House,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  At  Hob-
kirk's  Hill  he  commanded  the  right  wing  of  the
army.  On  the  restoration  of  peace  he  was  made
vice-president,  and  Maj.-Gen.  Moultrie  president.
of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  of  the  state  of
South  Carolina. — Another  brother,  John,  patriot,
b.  on  Limerick  Plantation,  S.  C,  5  June,  1744 ;  d.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  22  Jan.,  1804,  completed  his
education  in  Europe.  He  was  a  member  of  the
commons  house  of  assembly,  and  in  1775  of  the

Srovincial  congress,  and,  with  his  brothers  Daniel,
lenjamin.  and  Isaac,  took  an  active  part  in  the
revolutionary  movement  of  South  Carolina.  He
was  a  member  of  the  council  of  safety  which  as-
sumed the  sovereign  control  of  the  province  until
the  adoption  of  its  first  state  constitution.  In  1792
he  was  intendent  of  Charleston,  and  continued  at
intervals  in  the  service  of  his  state  and  city  until
his  death.  He  was  secretary  of  South  Carolina  for
a  number  of  years.  He  was  also  a  large  and  suc-
cessful rice-planter. — Another  brother,  Francis,
soldier,  b.  19  June,  1751;  d.  18.  Aug.,  1811,  was
educated  in  Europe.  He  was  commissioned  cap-
tain in  the  2d  South  Carolina  regiment,  of  which
William  Moultrie  was  colonel,  and  took  part  in  the
defence  of  Fort  Moultrie  against  the  fleet  under
Sir  Peter  Parker,  28  June,  1776.  Soon  afterward
he  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  and  made  dep-


HUGER


301


uty  quartermaster  to  Gen.  Mifflin,  for  the  south-
ern department,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1778.
Subsequently  he  resided  on  his  plantation,  "  Mid-
way," on  Cooper  river. — Another  brother,  Ben-
jamin, patriot,  b.  on  Limerick  Plantation,  S.  C,  30
Dec,  1746;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  11  May,  1779,
was  a  member  of  the  house  of  assembly  and  of  the
provincial  congress,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in
the  revolutionary  movement  in  South  Carolina.
On  25  Feb.,  1776,  he  was  made  major  of  the  1st
regiment  of  riflemen,  afterward  known  as  the  5th
South  Carolina  regiment  on  the  continental  estab-
lishment, and  had  become  known  as  a  capable  and
promising  officer,  when  his  career  was  suddenly
ended  by  the  fire  from  the  lines  of  Charleston  as
he  returned  from  reconnoitring  the  position  of  the
British  under  Gen.  Prevost.  then  before  the  town.
— Daniel's  son,  Daniel  Elliott,  jurist,  b.  in  South
Carolina,  28  June,  1779;  d.  on  Sullivan's  island,
S.  C,  21  Aug.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1798,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811,
and  began  practice  in  Charleston.  He  became  a
judge  in  1819.  presided  over  various  courts,  and  for
nearly  fifty  years  was  identified  with  the  public
service  of  his  State.  He  was  a  member  successively
of  both  houses  of  the  legislature,  and  was  elected
U.  S.  senator  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,  in  place
of  John  C.  Calhoun,  serving  from  1843  till  1845,
when  he  resigned.  When  the  Federal  party,  of
which  he  was  a  member,  opposed  the  war  of  1812,
he  refused  to  continue  with  them.  During  the
nullification  excitement  in  1832  he  was  one  of  the
small  minority  of  Union  men. — John's  son.  Alfred,
statesman,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  1  Nov.,  1788 :  d.
there,  14  May,  1872,  was  educated  at  Princeton,
and  on  his  return  to  Charleston  studied  law,  which
he  soon  abandoned  to  take  charge  of  his  plantation
on  Cooper  river.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  for  ten  years,  and  was  conspicuous  for  his
loyalty  to  the  Federal  government  during  the  nulli-
fication agitation.  In  the  convention  of  1832  he
was,  with  his  friend  and  cousin  Judge  Huger,  of
the  small  minority  that  voted  against  that  action.
His  powerful  speech  in  the  senate  in  opposition  to
resolutions  denouncing  President  Jackson's  course
led  to  a  request  from  a  large  body  of  his  constitu-
ents for  his  resignation,  which  he  declined,  deny-
ing their  right  to  "  instruct "  him.  He  was  ap-
pointed postmaster  of  Charleston  by  President
Jackson,  which  office  he  declined,  being  unwilling
to  depose  Thomas  W.  Bacot,  who  had  been  placed
there  by  Gen.  Washington.  But  when  Bacot  died
Mr.  Huger  was  reappointed,  and  held  the  office
from  19  Dec,  1834,  till  the  close  of  the  civil  war.
He  was  again  offered  this  post  by  President  John-
son, but  was  unwilling  to  take  the  "  iron-clad  oath."
He  was  ruined  by  the  war,  and  in  his  old  age  was
sent  to  the  convention  of  1866,  which  was  his  last
appearance  in  public  life.  He  was  a  finished  ora-
tor, and  in  impromptu  address  had  no  superior. —
Benjamin's  son,  Francis  Kinloch,  patriot,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  in  September,  1773;  d.  there,  14
Feb.,  1855,  was  sent  to  England  for  his  education,
and  studied  under  the  celebrated  Dr.  John  Hunter.
He  became  a  surgeon,  and  in  1794  was  for  a  short
time  attached  to  the  medical  staff  of  the  English
army,  then  in  Flanders.  Thence  he  went  to  Vi-
enna, where  his  family  associations  with  the  Mar-
quis de  Lafayette  induced  him  to  join  in  an  attempt
to  liberate  Gen.  Lafayette  from  the  Austrian  fort-
ress of  Olmutz.  The  rescue  was  successful,  though
Lafayette  was  recaptured  near  the  frontier.  Mr.
Huger,  having  given  up  the  horse  to  his  compan-
ion, Dr.  Eric  Bollmann,  was  arrested  near  the  spot
and  taken  to  Olmutz,  where  he  was  harshly  treated.


302


HUGHES


HUGHES


After  an  imprisonment  of  nearly  eight  months,  he
was  released  in  1798,  and  sent  across  the  frontier.
He  then  returned  to  America,  and  was  soon  after-
ward commissioned  a  captain  in  the  U.  S.  army.
In  1811  he  married  a  daughter  of  Gen.  Thomas
Pinckney.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812
he  was  made  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  2d  artillery,
and  placed  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Pinckney.  On  6
April,  1813,  he  became  adjutant-general  with  the
rank  of  colonel.  Subsequently  he  served  in  the
state  legislature. — John's  grandson,  Thomas  Bee,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  12  July,  1820 ;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  10  May,  1862,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy
as  a  midshipman,  July,  1835.  During  the  Mexican
war  he  was  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  serving  with
the  land  forces.  On  the  secession  of  South  Caro-
lina he  resigned  his  commission  and  returned  home.
During  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  he  com-
manded a  battery  on  Morris  island.  As  lieuten-
ant-commander in  the  Confederate  navy,  he  fought
his  vessel,  the  "  McCrae,"  a  converted  merchant
steamer,  when  the  National  fleet  under  Parragut
forced  its  way  up  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  fell
mortally  wounded,  24  April,  1862.  He  married  Miss
Mariamne  Meade,  a  sister  of  Gen.  George  G.  Meade
of  the  U.  S.  army. — Francis  Kinloch's  son,  Benja-
min, soldier,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1806 ;  d.
there,  7  Dec,  1877,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1825,  and  brevetted  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  3d  artillery.  He  served  on  topo-
graphical duty  till  1828,  when  he  went  to  Europe
on  leave  of  absence.  He  became  a  captain  of  ord-
nance, 30  May,  1832,  and  was  in  command  of  Fort
Monroe  arsenal,  Va.,  from  1832  till  1839.  From
1839  till  1846  he  was  a  member  of  the  ordnance
board,  and  in  1840-'l  of  a  military  commission  on
professional  duty  in  Europe,  and  he  was  again  in
command  of  Fort  Monroe  arsenal  from  1841  till
1846.  In  1847-'8  he  was  chief  of  ordnance  in  the
army  under  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  having  charge  of  the  siege-train  at  Vera
Cruz,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry,  29
March,  1847.  He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel
at  Molino  del  Rey,  8  Sept.,  1847,  and  colonel  at
Chapultepec,  13  Sept.,  1847.  In  1852  South  Caro-
lina presented  him  with  a  sword  of  honor  for
meritorious  conduct  and  gallantry  in  the  war  with
Mexico.  From  1848  till  1851  he  again  held  com-
mand of  the  Fort  Monroe  arsenal,  and  from  1849
till  1851  was  a  member  of  a  board  to  devise  "a
complete  system  of  instruction  for  siege,  garrison,
sea-coast,  and  mountain  artillery,"  adopted,  20  May,
1851,  for  the  U.  S.  service.  In  1851-4  he  com-
manded the  armory  at  Harper's  Ferry,  Va.  He
became  major  on  15  Feb.,  1855,  and  was  stationed
at  Pikesville  arsenal,  Md.,  in  1854-'60,  and  the
Charleston  arsenal,  S.  C,  in  1860.  On  22  April,
1861,  he  resigned,  and  was  made  a  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  Confederate  army.  He  commanded,
with  the  rank  of  major-general,  at  Norfolk,  before
its  occupation  by  the  National  forces,  10  May,  1862,
and  subsequently  led  a  division  in  the  seven  days'
fight  in  front  of  Richmond.  He  was  relieved  from
command  of  his  division  in  consequence  of  his
failure  to  cut  off  McClellan's  retreat  after  the  bat-
tle of  Malvern  Hill,  1  July,  1862.  He  was  assigned
to  duty  in  the  ordnance  department  in  the  trans-
Mississippi,  where  he  continued  until  the  end  of
the  war. He  then  became  a  farmer  in  Virginia.

HUGHES,  Aaron  K.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Elmira,
N.  Y.,  31  March,  1822.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman,  20  Oct.,  1838 ;  became  a  lieutenant,  9
Sept.,  1853 ;  commander,  16  Nov.,  1862  ;  captain,  10
Feb.,  1869;  commodore  in  1875,  and  rear-admiral  in
1882.  He  made  a  voyage  to  Puget  sound  in  the  sloop-


of-war  "Decatur"  in  1855,  and  had  a  fight  on  shore
at  the  town  of  Seattle  with  500  Indians,  whom  he
defeated,  25  Jan.,  1855.  He  commanded  the  "  Wa-
ter-Witch," of  the  Gulf  squadron,  in  1861-'2  ;  the
steamer  "  Mohawk,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  squad*
ron,  1862-'3,  and  the  steamer  "  Cimmaron  "  of  that
squadron  in  1863-4,  and  participated  in  the  bom-
bardment of  the  other  works  in  Charleston  har-
bor. In  1884  he  was  retired  from  the  service.

HUGHES,  Ball,  sculptor,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 19  Jan.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  March,
1868.  He  early  showed  a  fondness  for  modelling,
and  procured  his  first  supply  of  wax  by  collecting
candle-ends,  with  which  he  made  a  bass-relief  copy
of  a  picture,  representing  the  judgment  of  Solo-
mon, that  was  afterward  cast  in  silver.  His  father
placed  him  in  the  studio  of  Edward  H.  Baily,
with  whom  he  remained  for  seven  years.  During
this  time  he  gained  important  prizes,  including  a
large  silver  medal  that  was  given  by  the  Royal
academy  for  the  best  copy  in  bass-relief  of  the
Apollo  Belvedere,  a  silver  medal  from  the  Society
of  arts  for  a  copy  of  the  Barberine  Faun,  a  large
silver  medal  for  the  best  original  model  from  life,
and  a  gold  medal  for  an  original  composition  called
"  Pandora  brought  to  Earth  by  Mercury."  He  also
executed  several  ideal  statues,  and  busts  of  George
IV.  and  the  Dukes  of  Cambridge,  Sussex,  and
York,  besides  a  statuette  of  George  IV.,  that  was
afterward  cast  in  bronze.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1829,  and  settled  first  in  New  York,  where
he  made  in  marble  a  statue  of  Alexander  Hamil-
ton for  the  Merchants'  exchange,  but  it  was  de-
stroyed by  fire  in  1835.  The  life-size  monumental
high-relief  of  Bishop  Hobart  of  New  York,  now
in  the  vestry  of  Trinity  church,  New  York  city,
was  made  by  him  about  this  time.  Later  he  re-
sided in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  and  there  made  "  Little
Nell "  and  the  group  "  Uncle  Toby  and  Widow
Wadman,"  which  are  preserved  in  plaster  at  the
Boston  athenamm.  but  never  have  been  carved  in
marble.  Among  his  later  works  are  a  model  of
an  equestrian  statue  of  Washington,  intended
for  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  a  "  Crucifixion,"  a
statue  in  bronze  of  Nathaniel  Bowditch  that  is
now  in  Mount  Auburn  cemetery,  a  statuette  of
Gen.  Joseph  Warren,  a  bust  of  Washington  Irving,
and  a  "Mary  Magdalen."  Mr.  Hughes  also  lec-
tured upon  art,  and  attracted  attention  by  his
sketches  that  he  made  on  wood  with  a  hot  iron.

HUGHES,  Christopher,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md..  in  1786 ;  d.  there,  18  Sept.,  1849.
He  married,  in  1811,  Laura  Sophia,  a  daughter  of
Gen.  Samuel  Smith.
He  was  commissioned
secretary  to  the  U.  S.
legation  at  London
on  3  Feb.,  1814,  and
transferred  to  Stock-
holm on  26  Sept.,
1816.  When  Jona-
than Russell  retired
in  1818  he  left  Mr.
Hughes  in  charge,
and  for  the  next  thir-
ty-five years  the  Unit-
ed States  had  no  min-
ister at  that  capital.
Hughes  was  commis-
sioned charge  d'af-
faires on  20  Jan.,
1819.  On  15  July,  1825,  he  retired,  having  been
appointed  charge  d'affaires  to  the  Netherlands,
with  special  instructions.  He  returned  to  Sweden
as  charge  d'affaires  on  3  March,  1830,  and  remained


£/ih^z-<?.  ^2^_^//_^a.


HUGHES


HUGHES


303


there  till  9  Sept.,  1841.  Mr.  Hughes  was  recom-
missioned  in  1842,  and  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1845.  He  was  the  bearer  to  this  country
in  1815  of  the  treaty  of  peace,  signed  at  Ghent,
between  the  American  and  English  commission-
ers. Mr.  Hughes  was  a  brother-in-law  of  Col.
George  Armistead,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  John
Q.  Adams  and  Henry  Clay.  He  was  a  welcome
guest  in  the  best  society  of  his  native  city,  and
well  known  for  his  wit  and  humor.

HUGHES,  Francis  Wade,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county,  Pa.,  20  Aug.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Potts-
ville,  Pa.,  25  Oct.,  1885.  He  was  educated  at  Milton
academy,  Pennsylvania,  studied  at  the  law-school
in  Carlisle,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837,  and
began  practice  in  Pottsville.  He  was  appointed
deputy  attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania  in  1839,
resigned  the  office  there  several  times,  but  was
reappointed  and  held  it  for  eleven  years.  In
1843  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  as  a  Demo-
crat by  the  largest  majority  ever  given  in  the
county  of  Schuylkill ;  but  he  resigned  this  office
in  the  following  year  and  returned  to  his  practice.
In  1851  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  state,  and  in
1853  attorney-general  of  the  state,  which  office  he
filled  until  1855.  He  was  a  Democratic  presidential
elector  in  1856,  and  was  a  delegate  to  many  state
and  national  conventions,  over  some  of  which  he
presided.  In  February,  1861,  he  was  a  member  of
the  state  convention  at  Harrisburg,  known  as  the
Peace  convention,  and  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee on  resolutions.  When  the  war  began,  his
support  of  the  Union  was  prompt,  energetic,  and
valuable.  He  aided  in  fitting  out  one  of  the  first
five  companies  that  reached  Washington,  and
maintained  with  voice  and  pen  the  legal  right  of
the  government  to  put  down  rebellion  by  force  of
arms.  He  originated  and  aided  in  many  extensive
enterprises,  among  which  were  the  opening  and
working  of  coal  and  iron  mines,  and  the  establish-
ment of  iron-works  and  other  factories.

HUGHES,  George  Wurtz,  engineer,  b.  in  El-
mira,  N.  Y.,  30  Sept.,  1806 :  d.  in  West  River.  Anne
Arundel  co.,  Md.,  3  Sept.,  1870.  He  was  educated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  but  was  not  com-
missioned. He  was  employed  under  the  canal
commissioners  of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1829.
and  in  1838  was  appointed  to  the  army  as  a  captain
of  topographical  engineers.  In  1840  he  was  sent
by  the  war  department  to  Europe  to  examine  and
report  on  public  works,  mines,  -and  other  subjects.
He  was  chief  engineer  on  Gen.  Wool's  staff  in
Mexico in 1846,  and  on  that  of  Gen.  Worth  in

1847,  commanded  a  regiment  of  Maryland  volun-
teers, and  was  civil  and  military  governor  of  the
Department  of  Jalapa  and  Perote,  Mexico,  from
December,  1847.  till  the  evacuation  of  Mexico  in

1848.  He  was  brevetted  major,  18  April.  1847,  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  Cerro  Gordo,
and  lieutenant-colonel.  30  May,  1848.  Col.  Hughes
was  chief  engineer  of  the  Panama  railroad,  serving
at  first  with  permission  of  the  government,  in
1849-*50,  and  in  1853  was  sent  by  the  Crystal  pal-
ace association  as  its  representative  to  most  of  the
European  governments.  He  resigned  his  commis-
sion in  the  army  on  4  Aug.,  1851.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Baltimore  and  Susquehanna  railroad  in
1854-'5,  was  quartermaster-general  of  Maryland  in
1855,  and  brigadier-general  of  militia  in  1856.  He
was  elected  to  congress  from  Maryland  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  served  from  5  Dec,  1859,  till  3  March.
1861.  From  that  date  until  his  death  he  was  a
consulting  engineer  and  planter  at  West  River.

HUGHES.  James  Laughlin,  Canadian  educa-
tor, b.  near  Bowmanville,  Ontario,  20  Feb.,  1846.


He  was  educated  in  the  public  schools,  and  in  the
normal  school,  Toronto,  and  spent  the  following
four  years  on  his  father's  farm.  At  eighteen  he
began  teaching,  in  1871  was  appointed  head  master
of  the  provincial  model  school  at  Toronto,  and  in
May,  1874,  became  inspector  of  schools,  Toronto.
He  was  a  member  of  the  central  committee  of  ex-
aminers from  1877  till  1882,  and  was  appointed  by
the  Ontario  government  a  special  commissioner  to
investigate  the  frauds  in  teachers'  examinations
in  1877.  He  was  sent  by  the  Ontario  government
to  St.  Louis  in  1883,  to  report  on  the  kindergarten
system  in  that  city,  and  mainly  through  his  instru-
mentality it  was  introduced  into  the  province,  as
was  also  the  phonic  method  of  teaching  reading,
and  systematic  hand-training  as  a  means  of  intel-
lectual development.  He  is  the  author  of  "A
Humorous  Reciter "  (Toronto,  1874) ;  "  A  Prohi-
bition Reciter  "  (1874) :  "  Mistakes  in  Teaching  "
(twice  republished  in  the  United  States,  1877);
"  How  to  secure  and  retain  Attention "  (1878) ;
"Topical  Historv  of  Canada"  (New  York,  1881);
"  Topical  History  of  England  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Prac-
tical Speller "  (1883) ;  edited  "  Gage's  Canadian
Readers "  (Toronto,  1884) ;  and  has  written  often
for  educational  publications.

HUGHES,  John,  archbishop,  b.  in  Annalo-
gham,  County  Tyrone.  Ireland,  24  June,  1797;  d.
in  New  York  city,  3  Jan.,  1864.  He  was  the  son
of  a  small  farmer,  and  his  eai-ly  education  was
meagre,  most  of
his  time  being
given  to  work  in
the  fields  and  in
the  gardens  of  one
of  the  neighboring
gentry.  In  1816
his  father  emigrat-
ed to  the  Unit-
ed States,  settling
at  Chambersburg,
Pa.  John  follow-
ed him  the  next
year,  and  found
work  at  first  with
a  gardener  near
Baltimore.  After-
ward he  was  a  day-
laborer  at  Cham-
bersburg and  else-
where. He  had
determined,  however,  even  before  he  left  Ireland,
to  be  a  priest,  and  finally  entered  Mount  St.
Mary's  college,  near  Einmettsburg.  Md.,  where  he
was  to  pay  for  his  board  and  private  tuition  by
taking  care  of  the  garden.  He  was  now  twenty-
two  years  old,  and  his  schooling  was  far  in  ar-
rears; but  in  a  few  months  he  was  qualified  for
admission  to  the  college  on  the  footing  of  a  pupil
teacher.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1826.  and  be-
gan his  ministry  in  Philadelphia,  where,  after  serv-
ing successivelv  at  St.  Augustine's  and  St.  Joseph's,
he  built  in.  1831-2  the  church  of  St.  John,  which
became  under  his  pastorship  the  principal  Roman
Catholic  place  of  worship  in  the  city.  He  had
been  scarcely  three  years  a  priest  when  he  was
stronglv  recommended  for  the  coadjutor-bishopric
of  Philadelphia.  The  Roman  Catholic  body  in
the  United  States  at  this  time  was  nowhere  strong.
The  churches  and  priests  were  few,  the  dioceses
were  far  too  large  for  episcopal  supervision,  the
institutions  of  learning  were  insignificant,  the  peo-
ple were  nearly  all  poor.  Polemical  warfare  was
general  and  extremely  acrimonious,  and  the  secu-
lar press  devoted  an  undue  attention  to  the  con-


304


HUGHES


HUGnES


troversies  of  the  churches.  The  Roman  Catholic
clergy  embraced  many  men  of  character  and  dis-
tinction, but,  with  the  exception  of  Bishop  England,
of  Charleston,  none  of  them  had  any  special  talent
or  taste  for  polemics.  Father  Hughes  possessed
the  gift  for  which  there  seemed  to  be  just  then  the
most  pressing  demand.  He  had  native  pugnacity,
great  courage,  adroitness  in  debate,  and  the  art  of
forcible  statement.  He  had  partly  repaired  the
defects  of  his  early  training  by  hard  reading ;  and,
although  he  never  became  a  scholar,  he  had  a  wide
acquaintance  with  those  branches  of  theology  and
history  that  were  most  likely  to  be  of  service  in
popular  discussions.  He  dashed  into  the  conflict
with  an  energy  that  attracted  notice  far  and  near,
measuring  his  skill  with  many  eminent  Protestant
divines,  and  rarely  permitting  a  serious  attack
upon  his  church  to  pass  unnoticed.  His  most
celebrated  controversy  was  with  the  Rev.  John
Breckinridge,  of  the*  Presbyterian  church,  with
whom  he  exchanged  a  series  of  public  letters  in
1833,  printing  them  afterward  in  book-form  under
the  title  "Controversy  between  Rev.  Messrs.
Hughes  and  Breckinridge  on  the  Subject,  '  Is  the
Protestant  Religion  the  Religion  of  Christ f"
(Philadelphia,  1833).  An  oral  debate  between  the
same  adversaries  took  place  before  a  Philadelphia
literary  society  in  1835,  and  an  imperfect  record
of  it,  prepared  by  the  two  disputants  jointly,  was
afterward  published  (1836).  This  debate  abound-
ed in  offensive  personalities,  and  was  never  re-
farded  with  much  complacency  by  either  side.  In
anuary,  1838,  Mr.  Hughes  was  consecrated  coad-
jutor to  Bishop  Dubois,  of  New  York.  He  took
the  full  administration  of  the  diocese  the  next
year,  and  succeeded  to  the  bishopric  on  the  death
of  Dr.  Dubois  in  1842.  The  territory  over  which
he  was  called  to  rule  embraced  the  whole  state  of
New  York  and  a  large  part  of  New  Jersey.  It>
contained  200,000  Roman  Catholics,  for  whom
there  were  about  twenty  churches,  eight  of  them
being  in  the  city  of  New  York.  There  were  no
colleges  or  seminaries,  and  very  few  schools.  The
churches  were  heavily  in  debt,  and  the  trustees  of
the  cathedral,  taking  up  the  cause  of  a  suspend-
ed priest,  were  at  war  with  the  bishop,  whose
salary  they  threatened  to  stop  unless  he  satisfied
their  demands.  The  young  coadjutor  was  required
to  organize  the  diocese  almost  from  the  founda-
tion. He  obtained  priests  and  teachers  from  Eu-
rope, founded  St.  John's  college  at  Fordham,  and,
after  a  short  and  sharp  contest  with  the  malcon-
tents at  the  cathedral,  he  permanently  broke  up
the  abuses  of  the  trustee  system,  and  established
the  absolute  right  of  the  bishop  to  appoint  and  re-
move pastors  and  otherwise  administer  spiritual
concerns.  In  this  case  he  won  his  victory  by  ap-
pealing to  the  congregation,  who  enthusiastically
sustained  him  against  the  trustees;  and  thus  at
the  beginning  of  his  episcopate  he  demonstrated
the  rare  gift  as  a  popular  leader  which  distin-
guished his  later  career.  His  influence  over  the
Roman  Catholic  body  was  signally  illustrated  in
the  course  of  an  exciting  agitation  of  the  public-
school  question  in  1840-'2.  The  distribution  of
the  school  money  in  the  city  of  New  York  at  that
time  was  made  at  the  discretion  of  a  corporation
known  as  the  Public-school  society.  While  the
bishop  was  in  Europe  an  effort  was  made  to  ob-
tain a  part  of  the  appropriation  for  certain  Roman
Catholic  schools,  and  a  discussion  began,  which
was  marked  on  both  sides  by  great  acrimony.  Dr.
Hughes,  on  his  return,  immediately  placed  himself
at  the  head  of  the  movement,  took  decisive  meas-
ures to  separate  it  from  political  interests,  and,


after  addressing  a  series  of  mass-meetings,  drew
up  a  petition  to  the  board  of  aldermen,  containing
a  statement  of  the  Roman  Catholic  case  and  a  re-
quest for  the  admission  of  eight  Roman  Catholic
schools  to  a  participation  in  the  common-school
fund.  The  question  was  publicly  debated  before
the  board  during  two  days,  by  the  bishop  on  one
side,  and  counsel  for  the  Public-school  society  and
Ave  Protestant  divines  on  the  other.  The  petition
was  rejected,  and  the  bishop  then  appealed  to  the
legislature.  There  a  measure  was  introduced,  on
the  recommendation  of  the  secretary  of  state,  ex-
tending to  the  city  of  New  York  the  general
school  system  of  the  state,  and  transferring  to
elected  commissioners  the  powers  of  the  Public-
school  society.  It  granted  nothing  that  the  Ro-
man Catholics  asked;  but  the  bishop  supported
it  as  an  improvement  upon  the  existing  condi-
tion of  things,  and  the  Roman  Catholic  masses
implicitly  followed  his  advice.  The  school  ques-
tion became  an  issue  in  the  election  of  1841.
Finding  that  most  of  the  candidates  of  both  par-
ties were  pledged  against  any  change,  Bishop
Hughes  caused  the  Roman  Catholics  to  nominate
an  independent  ticket,  and  at  the  municipal  elec-
tion in  the  following  spring  this  was  repeated.
The  result  was  the  passage  of  a  bill  that  became
practically  the  basis  of  the  present  common-school
system,  the  bishop,  Gov.  Seward,  Thurlow  Weed,
and  Horace  Greeley  being  previously  consulted  as
to  its  provisions,  one  of  which  was  that  no  money
should  be  given  to  denominational  schools.  Thus
the  chief  purpose  of  the  two  years'  agitation  was
defeated  with  the  assent  of  the  bishop  himself.
The  principal  result  to  Dr.  Hughes  was  a  great
increase  of  his  power  over  his  own  people,  and  of
his  reputation  among  Protestants,  a  life-long
friendship  with  Gov.  Seward,  and  several  newspa-
per wars,  the  most  furious  of  which  was  with  the
"  New  York  Herald."  At  the  time  of  the  "  native
American  "  riots  in  Philadelphia  in  1844,  when
there  was  imminent  danger  of  a  repetition  of  the
outrages  in  New  York,  he  was  strong  enough  to
keep  the  Irish  population  quiet  under  great  provo-
cation, but  he  publicly  declared  that  the  Roman
Catholics  would  fight  if  they  were  attacked,  and
caused  a  large  body  of  armed  volunteers  to  occupy
the  churches.  During  the  Mexican  war  President
Polk  asked  him  to  accept  an  unofficial  mission  to
Mexico,  where  it  was  believed  that  his  influence
with  the  clergy  might  promote  the  conclusion  of
peace,  but  he  declined  this  proposal.  A  few  years
later,  in  1852,  the  U.  S.  government  made  an  in-
formal request  at  Rome  for  his  elevation  to  the
rank  of  cardinal,  and  in  1861  a  direct  and  official
application  of  the  same  nature  was  made  by  the
administration  of  President  Lincoln.  He  was
created  archbishop  in  1850,  with  suffragans  at  Bos-
ton, Hartford,  Albany,  and  Buffalo,  to  which  were
soon  added  the  new  sees  of  Brooklyn,  Newark,  and
Burlington,  Vt.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  although  he  was  a  severe  censor  of  the  aboli-
tionists, he  showed  himself  a  fervent  defender  of
the  Union,  and  he  wrote  often  to  the  president
and  Sec.  Seward  about  the  most  effectual  means
for  carrying  on  the  war.  At  their  request  he  vis-
ited Europe,  to  exert  his  personal  influence  and
social  tact,  especially  in  high  circles  in  France,
for  the  benefit  of  the  national  cause.  He  sailed
in  November,  1861,  in  company  with  Thurlow
Weed,  who  was  charged  with  a  similar  mission,
and  he  remained  abroad  until  the  following  sum-
mer, stoutly  defending  the  national  interests,  and
holding  a  long  and  interesting  conversation  on
American  affairs  with  the  French  emperor. This


HUGHES


HUGUES


305


was  his  last  important  public  service.  His  health
had  long  been  failing,  and  his  closing  years  were
spent  in  great  debility.  He  was  an  active  agent
in  the  foundation  of  the  American  college  in
Rome,  established  the  present  theological  semi-
nary of  the  province  at  Troy,  began  the  new  St.
Patrick's  cathedral,  introduced  numerous  relig-
ious orders,  especially  those  employed  in  teaching,
and  promoted  free  parish  schools.  The  introduc-
tion into  the  legislature  of  a  bill  for  the  regula-
tion of  church  property  led  to  a  vigorous  newspa-
per controversy  between  the  archbishop  and  Eras-
tus  Brooks  (q.  v.)  respecting  the  tenure  of  such
property  in  New  York  (1854).  The  archbishop  re-
published the  letters,  with  the  title  "  Brooksiana  "
(New  York,  1855);  and  they  were  also  reprinted
by  Mr.  Brooks.  Controversies  in  fact  of  a  per-
sonal or  theological  nature  crowded  upon  him
with  hardly  any  cessation  until  almost  his  last
days.  The  archbishop  was  a  man  of  irreproach-
able private  life,  generous,  kind-hearted,  high-
minded,  frank,  simple  in  his  habits,  stately  and
polished  in  his  manners,  an  agreeable  talker,  and
a  firm  friend.  In  the  pulpit  a  dignified  and  at-
tractive presence  added  to  the  effect  of  his  fine
but  unstudied  delivery.  His  style  in  speaking  was
clear  and  forcible.  His  writings  were  diffuse  and
hasty,  but  they  had  the  great  merit  of  fastening
the  attention  of  the  public,  and  they  always  served
their  purpose.  His  strong  attachment  to  his  na-
tive land  was  often  shown  in  conspicuous  ways,
but  he  was  an  ardent  American,  and  vehemently
opposed  every  project  that  tended  to  separate  the
Irish  in  this  country  from  their  native  fellow-citi-
zens. He  had  a  great  dislike  for  most  of  the  Irish-
Catholic  newspapers  and  a  contempt  for  the  Irish
revolutionary  party.  He  had  a  high  estimate  of
the  episcopal  office,  ruling  somewhat  haughtily,
but  winning  ready  and  cheerful  obedience.  On
his  own  part  he  was  a  loyal  subject  of  the  holy
see,  and  his  devotion  to  the  interests  of  his  church
was  absolutely  unselfish.  He  lived  to  see  extraor-
dinary changes  in  the  condition  of  the  -church
under  his  care,  as  well  as  in  the  public  temper,
which  no  longer  enjoyed  the  hot  polemics  of  his
earlier  years.  But  he  had  been  a  great  force  in  an
era  when  a  fighting  bishop  was  needed.  When
the  nuncio,  Archbishop  Bedini,  asked  an  Ameri-
can priest  to  explain  wny  Archbishop  Hughes  was
held  in  so  much  higher  popular  consideration  than
other  prelates,  the  answer  was :  "  I  think  it  is  be-
cause he  is  always  game."  His  miscellaneous
'•Writings,"  comprising,  besides  works  already
mentioned,  a  great  number  of  controversial,  his-
torical, and  expository  lectures,  pamphlets,  letters,
etc.,  were  collected  by  Laurence  Kehoe  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1865).  See  also  "Life  of  the  Most
Reverend  John  Hughes,  D.  D.,  First  Archbishop  of
New  York,  with  Extracts  from  his  Private  Corre-
spondence," by  John  R.  G.  Hassard  (1866).

HUGHES, 'Robert  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Pow-
hatan county,  Va.,  6  June,  1821.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Caldwell  institute,  N.  C,  and  taught
in  the  high-school  at  Hillsborough,  N.  C,  in
1840-'2.  He  removed  to  Richmond,  Va.,  and
edited  the  "  Examiner  "  until  1857,  and  in  1858-'9
was  one  of  the  staff  of  the  Washington  "  Union."
He  served  in  the  Confederate  army  throughout  the
civil  war,  in  1865-'6  edited  the  Richmond  "Re-
public," and  contributed  to  the  "State"  and
"  Journal."  In  June,  1869,  while  connected  with
the  "State,"  he  fought  a  duel  with  William  E.
Cameron  of  the  Richmond  "  Index,"  in  which  the
latter  was  wounded.  He  was  U.  S.  attorney  of  the
western  district  of  Virginia  in  1871-3,  Republican
vol.  in. — 20


candidate  for  governor  in  1873,  and  from  1874  till
the  present  date  (1887)  he  has  been  United  States
judge  for  the  eastern  district  of  Virginia.  He  has
published  "  The  American  Dollar  "  (Richmond,
1866) ;  biographies  of  Gen.  John  B.  Floyd  and  Gen.
Joseph  E.  Johnston  (New  York,  1867) ;  and  "  The
Currency  Question  "  (1879).

HUGHES,  Thomas,  British  author,  b.  in  Uff-
ington,  Berkshire,  England.  20  Oct.,  1823.  He
was  educated  at  Rugby  under  Dr.  Arnold,  and  at
Oriel  college.  Oxford,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1845.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848,  and
was  member  of  parliament  for  Lambeth  from  1865
till  1868,  when  he  was  elected  for  Frome,  which
he  represented  till  January,  1874.  In  1869  he  was
appointed  queen's  counsel,  and  in  1869-'70  made
the  tour  of  the  United  States,  and  lectured  in  the
principal  cities.  On  5  Oct.,  1880,  Mr.  Hughes
formally  opened  Rugby  colony,  Tenn.,  of  which  he
has  been  superintendent  ever  since.  Mrs.  Hughes,
the  mother  of  the  superintendent,  has  made  her
home  at  Rugby,  and  there  Mr.  Hughes  spends  his
annual  vacation.  Among  other  works  he  has
written  "  Tom  Brown's  School  Davs "  (London,
1856) ;  "  Tom  Brown  at  Oxford  "  (1861) ;  "  Religio
Laici"  (1862);  "Alfred  the  Great"  (1869);  and
"Memoirs  of  a  Brother"  (1873).  He  has  also
written  prefaces  to  English  editions  of  Lowell's
"  Biglow  Papers  "  and  Walt  Whitman's  poems.

HUGUES,  Victor,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Mar-
seilles in  1761 ;  d.  near  Bordeaux  in  November,
1826.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  was  sent  to  Santo
Domingo,  where  he  prospered,  and  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  French  revolution  in  1789  he  professed
the  new  democratic  principles.  In  the  ensuing
troubles  in  the  island  he  was  transported  to  France.
The  committee  of  public  safety  appointed  him
prosecutor  of  Brest,  and  afterward  of  Rochefort.
The  convention  which  succeeded  the  committee  of
safety  chose  him  in  February,  1794,  as  commis-
sioner to  the  French  West  Indies,  with  orders  to
reconquer  Guadeloupe  from  the  English.  Hugues
sailed  from  Aix  on  23  April,  1794,  on  the  frigate
"  La  Pique,"  with  only  a  small  force.  He  sighted
Pointe  a  Pit  re  on  24  May,  and  found  it  occupied
by  a  strong  British  garrison.  He  then  resolved  to
attack  Basse  Terre,  and,  landing  there  on  30  May,
captured  the  fortress  Fleur  de  l'Epee,  which  com-
manded the  bay,  drove  the  English  out  of  the  city,
and,  following  them,  besieged  and  took,  6  June,
Pointe  a  Pitre,  which  was  defended  by  4,000  men.
Meanwhile  the  English  admiral  Jervis  had  brought
to  the  besieged  some  re-enforcements,  and,  unable
to  defend  Pointe  a  Pitre  against  overwhelming
forces,  Hugues  retreated  to  the  country,  and.  call-
ing to  his  aid  the  negroes,  armed  2,000  of  them,
with  which  force  he  again  assumed  the  offensive.
On  6  Oct.,  he  obliged  the  English  general  to  sur-
render in  his  camp  of  Barville  with  his  whole  force,
in  which  were  comprised  800  French  emigres  and
900  colored  soldiers.  Hugues  ordered  300  of  the
emigres  to  be  shot  as  traitors,  and  condemned  100
of  the  colored  soldiers  to  the  public  works.  After
this  bloody  execution,  he  set  himself  at  work  to
pacify  and  organize  the  colony,  visiting  every  city
of  importance  and  carrying  with  him  the  guillo-
tine. For  his  cruelties  he  was  soon  called  the
"  Robespierre  "  of  the  West  Indies.  Yet  under  his
military  rule  Guadeloupe  prospered  greatly.  Hav-
ing received  some  re-enforcements  from  France,
Hugues  sent  out  several  expeditions,  which  recon-
quered from  the  English  Marie-Galante,  Les
Saintes,  La  Desirade,  and  Sainte-Lucie  et  Saint
Martin,  and  he  restored  the  latter  island  to  its
former  owners,  the  Dutch,  in  1795. The  English


306


HUGUET-LATOUR


Srepared  an  expedition  against  Hugues;  bnt  he
ecreed  conscription  in  the  island,  raised  15,000
men,  armed  the  coast  with  floating  batteries,  and
sent  out  privateers,  which  in  two  years  captured
over  150  merchant  vessels.  But  they  also  attacked
vessels  of  the  United  States,  which  complained  to
the  French  government.  Hugues's  corsairs  were
among  the  chief  causes  that  brought  about,  in
1798.  the  rupture  between  the  United  States  and
France.  In  the  spring  of  1798  Hugues  met  an
English  invasion  of  20,000  men  under  command  of
Gen.  Abercrombie.  The  latter  took  Sainte-Lucie,
but  his  army  suffered  such  losses  in  the  action  that
he  could  only  hold  his  position.  The  directory,'
which  had  succeeded  the  convention,  recalled
Hugues,  who  left  the  government  of  the  colony  to
Gen.  Desfourneaux  in  December,  1798.  In  the
following  year  Gen.  Bonaparte  appointed  him  gov-
ernor of  Cayenne,  but  gave  him  instructions  to
deal  with  the  inhabitants  in  a  milder  way  than  he
did  in  Guadeloupe.  Hugues  held  that  office  ten
years,  till  12  Jan.,  1809,  when  he  signed  a  capitula-
tion, and  surrendered  the  colony  to  the  English
fleet.  He  was  accused  of  incapacity  and  treason,
and  tried  in  France  by  a  court-martial,  which
acquitted  him  (1814).  In  1817  Hugues  was  sent
again  to  Cayenne  as  special  commissioner  of  Louis
XVIII.,  and  governed  the  colony  for  two  years
more.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office  he
remained  as  a  private  citizen  in  the  colony,  and
devoted  his  time  to  his  immense  estate.  In  the
beginning  of  1826  he  returned  to  France.

HUGUET-LATOUR,  Louis  A.,  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  the  province  of  Quebec  about  1830.  He
has  been  identified  with  the  cause  of  temperance
for  many  years,  and  is  distinguished  as  a  natural-
ist. He" was  constituted  a  chevalier  of  St.  Gregory
the  Great  in  1877,  received  the  medal  of  the  Mon-
treal natural  history  society  in  1881,  and  the  same
year  was  appointed  by  the  pope  representative  in
Canada  of  the  Latin  patriarchate  of  Jerusalem.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Annales  de  la  temperance  "
(Montreal,  1854) ;  and  "  Annuaire  de  Ville  Marie."

HUHNE,  Bernhard,  German  navigator,  b.  in
Heidelberg  in  1547;  d.  in  Nuremberg  in  1611.  He
entered  the  Spanish  service,  and  was  chief  pilot
attached  to  the  colony  of  New  Spain  in  1599.
Philip  III.,  believing  in  the  fabulous  strait  of
Anian,  where  legend  placed  an  immensely  rich
city,  and  dissatisfied  with  the  preceding  explora-
tions of  Viscaino  and  Alarcon,  ordered  the  Count
of  Monterey,  governor  of  New  Spain,  to  send  out
a  new  expedition.  Monterey  gave  the  mission  to
Hiihne  and  Juan  Fernandez,  and  they  sailed  from
Acapulco  in  May,  1660,  with  two  vessels,  touching
at  Zalagua,  where  they  separated  Juan  Fernandez
sailed  to  Cape  Mendocino,  and  promised  to  wait
there  for  Hiihne,  who  resolved  to  enter  the  country
and  obtain  information  from  the  natives.  But  the
Indians  of  California  attacked  the  Spanish,  killed
a  great  number  of  them,  and  obliged  Hiihne  to  re-
embark.  He  despatched  a  small  schooner  to  Fer-
nandez to  call  him  back,  and  together  they  sailed
for  Acapulco,  arriving  in  September.  In  March,
1661,  Hiihne  sailed  again,  but  was  more  cautious.
He  spent  nine  months  at  sea  before  sighting  Cape
San  Sebastian,  January,  1602,  on  the  Bay  of  Mon-
terey, where  he  resolved  to  winter.  He  succeeded
in  establishing  friendly  intercourse  with  the
aborigines,  and  was  soon  convinced  that  the  city
of  Anian  was  fabulous.  Although  the  clever  pilot
could  not  realize  the  object  of  his  mission,  he
nevertheless  resolved  to  render  it  useful  in  some
way,  and  he  set  to  work  to  correct  the  chart  made
by  Alarcon,  and  construct  an  exact  one  of  the


HUIDEKOPER

Gulf  of  California.  He  consumed  two  years  in  the
work,  and  performed  it  so  well  that  future  navi-
gators, using  his  charts,  were  able  to  go  from
Acapulco  to  Monterey  in  two  months,  when  before
ten  months  was  considered  a  quick  passage.  The
charts  made  by  Hiihne  were  in  use  for  over  a  cen-
tury. They  were  published  in  Acapulco  in  1661,
and  reprinted  in  Lisbon  (1667)  and  Seville  (1670).
The  "Allgemeine  Encyklopaedie "  of  Ersch  and
Griiber  savs  he  left  an  undiscovered  manuscript.

HUIDEKOPER,  Harm  Jan,  philanthropist,
b.  in  Hoogeveen,  Holland,  3  April,  1776 ;  d.  in
Meadville,  Pa.,  22  May,  1854.  After  studying  two
years  at  a  high-school  in  Crefeld,  he  came  to  the
United  States  in  1796,  and  resided  four  years  at
Olden  Barneveldt,  now  Trenton,  N.  Y.  During
four  years  following  he  was  clerk  in  the  office  of
the  Holland  land  company  at  Philadelphia.  On
1  Jan.  of  1805  he  took  charge  of  the  agency  in
what  now  constitutes  the  four  counties  of  Erie,
Crawford,  Venango,  and  Warren,  and  by  his  judg-
ment saved  this  part  of  the  country  from  the  dis-
turbances that  were  experienced  in  western  New
York.  Mr.  Huidekoper  organized  the  Unitarian
church  in  Meadville,  and  issued,  during  two  years,
a  monthly  religious  publication,  "The  Unitarian
Essayist."  He  also  purchased  and  gave  to  the
Meadville  theological  school  the  building  which  it
first  used,  and  subsequently,  by  his  subscription  of
$10,000,  prompted  the  endowment  of  $50,000  that
enabled  it  to  employ  two  salaried  professors. —
His  son,  Frederic,  b.  in  Meadville,  Pa.,  7  April,
1817,  entered,  in  1834,  the  sophomore  class  of  Har-
vard, but  had  barely  begun  the  next  year's  studies
when  failing  eyesight  forced  him  to  leave.  He
worked  four  years  on  a  farm,  devoting  ten  minutes
daily  to  study,  travelled  in  Europe  in  1839-'41,  and
after  his  return  pursued  a  private  course  in  the-
ology in  1841-'3.  At  the  request  of  a  friend  he
agreed  to  take  students,  a  plan  which  was  enlarged
by  the  formation,  in  1844,  of  the  Meadville  theo-
logical school,  in  which  he  took  gratuitous  charge
during  five  years  of  the  New  Testament,  and  from
1845  till  1877  of  ecclesiastical  history,  being  also
librarian  and  treasurer  of  the  school.  In  1853
Mr.  Huidekoper  was  consulted  by  Joshua  Brookes,
of  New  York,  as  to  the  benevolent  application  of
some  money.  He  sketched  a  plan,  and  received  in
answer  a  draft  for  $5,000,  to  which,  six  months
later,  an  additional  $5,000  was  added,  an  amount
that  was  subsequently  augmented  by  a  bequest  of
$10,000.  The  income  of  this  fund  (vested  in  the
trustees  of  the  Meadville  theological  school)  has,
since  1854,  been  applied,  under  the  care  of  Mr.
Huidekoper,  chiefly  in  distributing  nearly  3,800
small  libraries  to  ministers,  exclusive  of  825  added
from  other  sources.  Mr.  Huidekoper  has  also  de-
voted much  time  during  twenty  years  of  his  life  to
redeeming  a  square  half-mile  of  his  native  town
from  unsightliness,  substituting  wide  and  beauti-
ful streets,  bordered  by  lawns.  He  was,  moreover,
active  in  laying  out  Greendale  cemetery.  A  painless
diminution  of  sight,  beginning  probably  with  illness
in  boyhood,  has  imposed  upon  him,  since  1883,  the
need  of  a  guide  when  in  the  street.  His  writings
have,  on  many  points,  been  regarded  as  presenting
and  proving  entirely  new  views  of  ancient  history.
His  argument  for  the  gospels  is  new,  and  has  been
deemed  unusually  convincing.  His  works  are  "  Be-
lief of  the  First  Three  Centuries  concerning  Christ's
Mission  to  the  Underworld"  (Boston,  1854);  "Ju-
daism at  Rome,  B.  C.  76  to  A.  D.  140  "  (New  York,
1876) ;  and  "  Indirect  Testimony  of  History  to  the
Genuineness  of  the  Gospels  "  (1879).  He  also  had
printed  the  "Acts  of  Pilate,"  that  had  been  copied


HUITZILIHUITL


HULL


307


for  him  from  the  Greek  manuscript  in  the  Paris
library. — Harm  Jan's  grandson,  Henry  Shippen,
soldier,  b.  in  Meadville,  Pa.,  17  July,  1839,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1862.  He  served  in  the
civil  war  from  July,  1862,  till  March,  1864,  com-
manding the  150th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  at  Gettysburg,
where  he  was  wounded  twice  and  lost  his  right
arm.  After  the  war  he  served  in  the  National
guard  of  Pennsylvania  fifteen  years,  with  one  com-
mission as  brigadier-general  and  three  as  major-
general.  During  the  railroad  riots  of  1877  he  com-
manded the  7th  division,  and  at  Scranton,  by
prompt  decision  and  timely  action,  he  saved  the
city  from  a  mob.  Gen.  Huidekoper  was  postmas-
ter of  Philadelphia  in  1880-'5,  and  now  (1887)  re-
sides in  New  York.  He  has  published  a  "  Manual
of  Service,"  which  is  an  authority  in  military  mat-
ters (Meadville,  Pa.,  1879).

HUITZILIHUITL  (weet-see-lee-weetle),  the
name  of  two  Aztec  kings.  The  second  was  4th
king  of  Mexico  (2d  according  to  some  accounts),
b.  in  the  latter  half  of  the  14th  century;  d.  2
Feb.,  1414.  After  the  death  of  his  father,  Acama-
pixtli.  in  1402,  the  priests  tried  to  prevent  the  elec-
tion of  a  new  sovereign,  in  order  to  usurp  the
power,  and  only  after  an  interregnum  of  four
months  and  long  debates  was  Huitzilihuitl  elected
king.  His  election  was  approved  by  Tezozomoc,
king  of  Azcapotzalco,  then  suzerain  of  Mexico,  who
gave  him  his  daughter  in  marriage,  of  which  union
Moctheuzoma  Ilhuycamina,  or  Montezuma  I.,  was
born.  By  his  second  wife  he  had  eighteen  chil-
dren, the  eldest  of  whom,  Chimalpopoca,  became
his  successor,  and  the  second,  a  daughter.  Matlalt-
zihuatzin,  was  mother  of  the  poet  Notzahualcoyotl.
These  are  his  family  relations  according  to  modern
researches,  and  exact  interpretations  of  the  Aztec
hieroglyphics.  Huitzilihuitl  II.  was  an  able  and
talented  ruler,  and  was  one  of  the  best  of  the  Aztec
kings  of  Mexico.  In  1405  he  succeeded  in  attract-
ing several  scattered  tribes,  descendants  of  the
extinct  Toltec  nation,  from  Xalisco.  and  thereby
increased  his  power  and  the  wealth  of  his  nation.
Huitzilihuitl  died,  according  to  the  Aztec  almanac.
on  the  9th  day  of  the  first  week  in  the  year  of  the
three  rabbits,  corresponding  in  our  calendar  to  2
Feb.,  1514. — His  eldest  son,  Montezuma,  ought  to
have  been  his  successor,  but,  owing  to  the  influence
of  his  second  wife,  her  son,  Chimalpopoca  {q.  v.),
succeeded  him,  and  thereafter,  an  illegitimate  son,
Izcohuatl,  and  only  after  his  death  did  Montezuma
I.  ascend  the  throne.  But,  according  to  former
historians,  Chimalpopoca  and  Izcohuatl  were  Huit-
zilihuitl's  brothers,  and  thereafter  the  successor  to
the  crown  was  always  the  brother  of  the  late  mon-
arch, or,  in  default  of  a  brother,  a  nephew.

HUITZILIHUITZIN  (weet-see-lee-weet-seen'),
Texcocan  priest,  b.  in  Texcoco  about  the  end  of  the
14th  century ;  d.  in  1448.  He  was  a  nobleman  and
priest,  and  his  advice  was  highly  appreciated  by
the  king,  Ixtlilxochitl  I.,  who  nominated  him  coun-
cillor of  the  kingdom,  and  afterward  tutor  of  his
son,  Netzahualcoyotl.  In  this  office  Huitzilihuitzin
not  only  gave  his  pupil  the  physical  and  intellec-
tual training  customary  in  his  time  and  nation,  but
initiated  him  in  the  knowledge  of  one  true  God,
whose  existence  he  claimed  to  have  discovered  by
meditation.  It  being  impossible  to  have  in  the
capital  of  Texcoco  all  the  plants  and  animals  of
the  kingdom,  the  learned  Huitzilihuitzin  asked  the
king  to  employ  painters  to  represent  them  on  the
walls  of  the  palace,  and  the  work  was  accomplished
under  his  supervision.  He  was  also  one  of  the
chroniclers  of  the  nation. When,  by  the  treason  of


Tezozomoc,  the  king,  Ixtlilxochitl  I.,  was  slain,
Huitzilihuitzin  made  strenuous  efforts  to  raise  an
army  to  defend  the  rights  of  Prince  Netzahual-
coyotl. His  labors  were  highly  esteemed  by  the
Texcocans,  and  many  wonderful  stories  are  related
of  him.  He  distinguished  himself  in  many  bat-
tles when  Netzahualcoyotl  was  reconquering  his
kingdom.  Once  he  had  just  left  Netzahualcoyotl
sleeping  in  a  wood  when  he  was  surprised  by  the
enemy,  and,  though  they  tortured  him  to  compel
him  to  declare  the  place  where  the  prince  was  con-
cealed, he  remained  silent.  Finally  he  was  doomed
to  be  sacrificed  to  the  gods ;  but,  when  he  had  as-
cended to  the  summit  of  the  temple,  a  furious  storm
frightened  the  priests,  who  left  him  alone  for  a
moment,  and  two  of  his  sons  rescued  him.  When
King  Netzahualcoyotl  had  finally  triumphed  over
his  enemies,  he  offered  a  reward  to  his  tutor,  who
declined  it,  and  devoted  the  rest  of  his  life  to  study
and  to  the  organization  of  the  academies  of  the
roval  citv.  where  he  died  at  an  advanced  age.

HUITZITON,  Mexican  soldier,  lived  about  the
6th  century.  He  was  elected  leader  of  the  Mexi-
cans in  their  long  and  dangerous  peregrinations
from  the  north  of  the  continent  to  the  valley  of
Mexico.  During  the  march,  the  Mexicans  had  to
fight  many  battles  against  the  nations  in  their  way.
but,  under  the  command  of  Huitziton  they  were
always  victorious.  The  prevision  of  this  chieftain
was  so  great  that  he  caused  seed  to  be  planted  in
the  different  resting-places  on  their  way.  When-
they  had  not  enough  provisions,  he  asked  the
tribes  through  which  he  passed  for  them,  offering
in  exchange  some  products  of  his  people's  indus-
try ;  and,  if  they  refused,  he  fought  till  he  obtained
them.  He  died  at  a  very  old  age,  and  his  people
deified  him.  He  is  represented  as  seated  at  the
left  of  Mapoche.  the  lord  of  the  heavens.  Many
fabulous  stories  are  related  among  the  Mexicans
regarding  him.  After  his  deification  he  took  differ-
ent names.  Before  the  separation  of  the  Tlaxcal-
tecs  and  Mexicans  they  divided  the  bones  of  Huit-
ziton, and  the  Tlaxcalans  called  their  god  Camax-
tle.  to  distinguish  him  from  the  Mexican  god.

HI1  LETT,  Alta  M.,  lawyer,  b.  near  Rockford,
111.,  4  June,  1854;  d.  in  California,  27  March,  1877.
She  learned  telegraphy  when  only  ten  years  of  age,
and  for  some  time  was  a  successful  operator.  Sub-
sequently she  taught,  and  employed  her  leisure  in
the  study  of  law.  In  1872  she  passed  the  required
examination  and  applied  for  admission  to  the  bar,
but  was  rejected  on  account  of  her  sex.  She  then
bent  her  energies  toward  securing  the  passage  of  a
bill  through  the  state  legislature,  giving  all  women,
whether  married  or  single,  the  right  to  practise
law.  Succeeding  in  this,  she  went  to  Chicago,
where  she  spent  a  year  in  an  office,  after  which  she
was  again  examined,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  be-
gan the  practice  of  her  profession.

HULL,  Amos  (Jirard,  author,  b.  in  Paris,
Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  March,  1815.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1840,  and  after  teaching  in
Fidton,  N.  Y.,  in  1841,  became  superintendent  of
public  instruction  in  Volney.  N.  Y„  in  1843.  He
was  president  of  the  village  of  Fulton  in  1850,
and  was  for  many  years  surrogate  of  Oswego
county,  but  subsequently  removed  to  New  York
city.  "He  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
press  on  political  questions,  and  has  published
"Treatise  on  the  Duties  of  Town  and  County
Offices  "  (Albanv,  1855).  and  "  History  of  the  Early
Settlement  of  Oswego  Falls"  (1862).*

HULL,  Hope,  elergvman,  b.  in  Worcester
county,  Md.,  13  March,  i763 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  4
Oct.,  1818. His  early  education  was  neglected,  and


308


HULL


HULL


he  was  apprenticed  to  a  carpenter  in  Baltimore,
but  in  1785  he  entered  the  itinerant  ministry  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  was  appointed  to
Salisbury,  N.  C,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a  brief
period  spent  in  New  England,  his  life  was  given  to
the  introduction  of  Methodism  in  the  southern
states.  Mr.  Hull  was  one  of  the  most  eloquent
revivalists  of  his  day.  During  his  latter  years  he
established  a  high-school  in  Washington,  Ga.,  and
was  one  of  the  founders  and  a  strong  supporter  of
the  University  of  Georgia.  His  last  appointment
was  on  the  Savannah  circuit. — His  son,  Asbury,
legislator,  b.  in  Washington,  Ga.,  30  Jan.,  1797;
d.  in  Athens,  25  Jan.,  1866,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Georgia  in  1814,  for  more  than  forty
years  was  the  secretary  and  treasurer  of  its  board
of  trustees,  and  was  often  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature and  speaker  of  the  house.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Secession  convention  of  1861. — Another
son,  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Washington,  Ga.,  20
Oct.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  10  May,  1881,  was
graduated  at  the  State  university  in  1815,  studied
medicine,  and  rose  to  distinction  in  his  profession.
From  1830  till  his  resignation  in  1846  he  was  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  in  the  University  of  Georgia.
The  remainder  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  scientific
and  literary  studies.  —  Asbury's  son,  William
Hope,  lawyer,  b.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  2  Feb.,  1820 ;  d.
in  New  York  city,  10  Sept.,  1877,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1838,  studied  law,
and  was  elected  solicitor-general  of  the  western  ju-
dicial district.  He  held  many  offices  of  public
trust,  and  was  assistant  U.  S.  attorney-general  in
1857-60.  He  returned  to  Georgia  in  1861,  and
resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  Augusta.

HULL,  John,  goldsmith,  b.  in  Market  Hare-
borough,  Leicestershire,  England,  18  Dec,  1624;  d.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  28  Sept.,  1683.  His  father  emi-
grated to  Boston  in  1635.  John  was  appointed
mint-master  of  the  Massachusetts  colony  in  1652,
was  town-treasurer  in  1660-'l,  captain  of  artillery
in  1671,  deputy  to  the  general  court  from  1669  till
1673,  and  treasurer  of  the  colony  in  1675-80.  His
memoirs  and  diary  are  published  in  the  collection
of  the  "  American  Antiquarian  Society  "  (vol.  iii.).

HULL,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Derby,  Conn.,
24  June,  1753  ;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,  29  Nov.,  1825.
His  ancestor,  Richard  Hull,  supposed  to  be  a
brother  of  John  Hull,  of  Boston,  the  mint-
master,  was  made  a  freeman  of  Massachusetts  in
1634,  and  removed  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1639.
William  was  the  fifth  in  descent  from  Richard.
He  was  the  fourth  son  of  Joseph,  a  farmer,  was
graduated  at  Yale,  studied  law  at  Litchfield,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1775.  When  the  news
of  the  battle  of  Lexington  reached  Derby,  a  com-
pany of  soldiers  was  raised  in  that  town.  William
Hull  was  chosen  captain,  and  joined  the  army  of
Washington  at  Cambridge  with  his  company,
which  became  part  of  Col.  Webb's  Connecticut
regiment.  After  the  battle  of  Trenton,  Washing-
ton promoted  him  to  be  major  in  the  8th  Massa-
chusetts regiment.  He  was  lieutenant-colonel  in
1779,  then  inspector  of  the  army  under  Baron
Steuben,  and  commanded  the  escort  of  Washing-
ton when  he  bade  farewell  to  the  army.  He  was
in  the  battles  of  White  Plains,  Trenton,  Prince-
ton, Stillwater,  Saratoga,  Fort  Stanwix,  Monmouth,
and  Stony  Point,  and  commanded  the  expedition
against  Morrisania,  for  which  he  received  the
thanks  of  Washington  and  of  congress.  He  led  a
column  at  the  capture  of  Stony  Point.  Washing-
ton, in  his  letter  to  Gen.  Heath  (*  Massachusetts
Historical  Society  Collections,"  5th  series,  vol  iv.),
says :  "  Major  Hull  was  appointed  by  me,  at  the


intercession  of  several  officers  in  the  Massachusetts
state  line.  He  is  an  officer  of  great  merit,  and
whose  services  have  been  honorable  to  himself  and
profitable  to  his  country.  He  might  have  been
arranged  in  the  Connecticut  line,  but  many  of  the
Massachusetts  officers  discovered  great  uneasiness
at  the  idea  of  his  being  taken  from  them,  and  he
himself  generously  refused  the  offer.  I  mention
this  as  a  trait  of  his  character."  Col.  Hull's  ser-
vices throughout  the  war  received  the  approbation
of  his  superior  officers.  He  married  the  daughter
of  Abraham  Fuller,  a  distinguished  patriot,  who
lived  on  the  ancestral  farm  in  Newton,  which  is
now  the  residence  of  Gov.  William  Claflin.  On
this  farm  Gen.  Hull  spent  the  last  years  of  his  life.
He  was  major-general  of  the  3d  division  of  Massa-
chusetts militia,  and  a  state  senator.  He  was  ap
pointed  by  President  Jefferson  governor  of  Michi-
gan territory  in  1805,  and  held  that  office  till  1812,
when  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the
northwestern  army.  He  at  first  refused  the  com-
mission, and  Col.  Kingsbury  was  appointed  in  his
place,  but,  as  that  officer  fell  sick,  Hull  at  last  con-
sented to  take  the  command.  War  with  England
seemed  imminent,  but  had  not  been  declared,  and
the  troops  were  ordered  to  Detroit  to  defend  the
territory,  which  otherwise,  in  case  of  war,  would
be  laid  waste  by  the  Indians.  While  governor  of
Michigan,  Gen.  Hull  had  repeatedly  urged  upon
the  government  the  importance  of  building  a  fleet
on  Lake  Erie  as  the  only  means  of  maintaining
Detroit,  which  was  300  miles  from  any  magazines
of  provisions,  munitions  of  war,  or  re-enforcements.
Gen.  Hull  had  represented  to  the  government  that
in  time  of  war  with  Great  Britain  an  army  could
not  be  maintained  at  Detroit  without  a  naval
force  sufficient  to  keep  up  communication  by  the
lake,  and  that,  otherwise,  not  only  Detroit  but
Mackinaw  and  Fort  Dearborn  must  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  enemy.  He  also  advised  the  govern-
ment that  there  must  be  a  powerful  army  at
Niagara  to  co-operate  with  any  forces  that  should
invade  Canada  from  Detroit.  These  communica-
tions were  made  both  before  and  after  he  took
command  of  the  troops.  The  only  access  to  De-
troit was  by  small  sloops  on  Lake  Erie.  Gen.  Hull
was  ordered  to  march  his  troops  from  Urbanna,
Ohio,  through  the  wilderness,  and  in  doing  this
the  soldiers  were  obliged  to  open  a  military  road,
building  bridges  and  causeways  for  200  miles.
He  found  his  army  of  1,500  men  destitute  of
arms,  clothing,  powder,  and  blankets,  and  was
obliged  to  provide  them  with  these  necessaries  on
his  own  responsibility.  Everything  had  been  mis-
managed at  Washington,  and  the  country  was
plunged  into  war  without  adequate  preparation.
No  fleet  had  been  built  on  Lake  Erie,  and  even  the
notice  of  the  declaration  of  war,  instead  of  being
sent  by  a  special  messenger  to  Gen.  Hull,  was  com-
mitted to  the  post-office,  and  was  not  received  by
him  until  several  days  after  the  British  at  Maiden
had  heard  of  it  by  a  despatch  from  Washington,
and  had  in  consequence  captured  a  vessel  in  which
Hull  sent  his  stores  to  Detroit.  Gen.  Dearborn,
who  was  to  have  invaded  Canada  from  Niagara,
instead  of  doing  this,  made  an  armistice  with  the
British  commander,  in  which  Gen.  Hull  was  not
included,  and  was  thus  exposed  to  attack  by  all  the
British  troops  in  Canada.  This  event  took  place,
and  Gen.  Brock,  having  command  of  the  lake,  went
to  Detroit  with  all  the  troops  he  could  collect.
Meantime  Gen.  Hull's  position  had  become  very
precarious.  As  he  had  predicted,  Mackinaw  and
Fort  Dearborn  had  both  fallen,  and  the  Indians
of  the  northwest  were  concentrating  in  the  wilder-


HULL


HULL


309


ness  in  the  rear  of  Detroit.  Communications  by
the  road  he  had  opened  had  been  cut  off  by  the
Indians,  and  two  expeditions  sent  by  Gen.  Hull  to
reopen  them  had  failed.  Food  and  ammunition
were  nearly  gone,  the  army  was  cut  off  from  its
base,  and  Detroit  fell  as  a  matter  of  course.  Gen.
Harrison,  when  he  heard  of  the  fall  of  Mackinaw,
regarded  it  as  the  forerunner  of  the  capture  of  Fort
Dearborn  and  Detroit.  On  10  Aug.  he  wrote  to
the  secretary  of  war :  "  I  greatly  fear  that  the  cap-
ture of  Mackinaw  will  give  such  eclat  to  the  Brit-
ish and  Indians  that  the  northern  tribes  will  bear
down  in  swarms  on  Detroit,  oblige  Gen.  Hull  to
act  on  the  defence,  and  meet  and  perhaps  over-
power the  convovs  and  re-enforcements  which  may
be  sent  to  him."  That  Gen.  Hull  was  right  in
saying  that  whoever  commanded  Lake  Erie  could
hold  Detroit  was  proved  by  the  fact  that  Gen.
Harrison,  though  within  100  miles  of  Detroit,  was
unable  to  advance  for  a  year.  Perry's  victory  gave
the  command  of  Lake  Erie  to  the  Americans,  and
Detroit  dropped  at  once  into  our  hands.  Gen.  Hull
was  surrounded,  the  woods  behind  him  were  full
of  Indians,  and  before  him  was  the  English  army,
backed  up  by  the  resources  of  Canada  West,  which
contained  ample  re-enforcements  of  troops  and
supplies.  But  a  victim  was  necessary  to  appease
the  disappointed  hopes  of  the  nation,  taught  to
believe  that  Canada  was  to  fall  an  easy  prey.  The
anger  of  the  people  must  be  diverted  from  the
government,  which  had  gone  into  the  war  without
preparation.  At  this  juncture  the  man  that  was
needed  appeared  in  the  person  of  Col.  Lewis  Cass.
In  a  letter  written  10  Sept.,  1812,  he  threw  all  the
blame  upon  his  general,  saying  that,  "  if  Maiden
had  been  immediately  attacked,  it  would  have
fallen  an  easy  victory."  But  Col.  Cass,  in  a  coun-
cil of  war,  had  voted  against  such  an  attack,  in
company  with  a  majority  of  the  officers.  He  also
said  in  this  letter  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in
procuring  provisions  for  the  army.  But  a  month
before,  and  four  days  before  the  surrender,  he
wrote  to  the  governor  of  Ohio  that  the  commu-
nication must  be  kept  open,  and  that  supplies
must  come  from  that  state.  And  on  3  Aug.  he
wrote  that  "  both  men  and  provisions  are  wanted
for  the  very  existence  of  the  troops."  The  letter
of  Cass  above  referred  to  made  a  scape-goat  of
Gen.  Hull,  and  was  published  all  over  the  Union,
and  Col.  Cass  was  immediately  promoted  to  briga-
dier-general in  the  army  of  the  United  States,
and  was  also  appointed  governor  of  Michigan.
Gen.  Hull  was  tried  by  a  court-martial,  the  presi-
dent of  which  was  Gen.  Dearborn,  who,  instead
of  co-operating  with  Hull  in  the  invasion  of  Can-
ada, had  signed  the  armistice  that  allowed  the
British  troops  to.  be  sent  against  Detroit.  Gen.
Hull  was  found  guilty  of  cowardice,  sentenced  to
be  shot,  and  told  to  go  home  to  Xewton  and  wait
for  the  execution  of  the  sentence,  which,  of  course,
was  never  executed.  Public  opinion  has  long
since  reversed  this  sentence,  and  the  best  histori-
ans disapprove  of  it.  The  latest  of  these,  Benson
J.  Lossing,  calls  the  trial  disgraceful,  and  its  sen-
tence unjust,  and  says  the  court  was  evidently  con-
stituted in  order  to  offer  Hull  as  a  sacrifice  to  save
the  government  from  disgrace  and  contempt.  Gen.
Hull  passed  his  last  days  at  Newton,  Mass.,  on  his
wife's  farm.  Notwithstanding  the  undeserved
odium  that  had  fallen  on  him,  he  was  cheerful
and  contented,  satisfied  that  sooner  or  later  his
countrymen  woul3  see  the  truth  and  do  him  jus-
tice.— His  nephew,  Isaac,  eldest  son  of  Joseph
Hull,  b.  in  Derby,  Conn.,  9  March,  1773;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  Feb.,  1843.  Isaac's  father  hav-


<2^«^^  &lc£t>


ing  died,  he  was  adopted  by  his  uncle,  Gen.  Hull,
who  wished  to  educate  him  with  a  view  to  his  en-
tering Yale  college,  where  he  himself  was  graduated
in  1772,  but  the  boy's  unconquerable  passion  for
the  sea  made  him  an  unwilling  as  well  as  an  unsuc-
cessful student.  Following  the  bent  of  his  genius,
at  fourteen  he  chose  the  sea  for  his  field  of  action,
beginning,  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  that
time,  as  a  cab-
in -  boy  on  a
merchant  ship
belonging  to
one  of  his  un-
cle's acquaint-
ances. The  ves-
sel was  after-
ward wrecked
and  the  cap-
tain was  saved
by  the  young
sailor  of  six-
teen. Before
he  was  twenty-
one  years  of  age
he  was  com-
mander of  a
ship  that  sailed
to  the  West  In-
dies. He  was  in  this  position  at  the  first  establish-
ment of  the  American  navy,  and  so  great  was  the
reputation  which  he  had  already  acquired  as  a
skilful  seaman,  that  he  entered  the  service  as
4th  lieutenant,  his  commission  being  dated  9
March,  1798,  his  twenty-fifth  birthday.  Hull  saw
his  first  service  under  Com.  Samuel  Nicholson  in
the  "Constitution."  Two  years  later,  while  still
on  board  the  "  Constitution,"  then  the  flag-ship
of  Com.  Silas  Talbot,  the  latter  accepted  a  chal-
lenge from  the  captain  of  an  English  frigate  to
engage  in  a  day's  trial  of  speed.  Hull,  already
advanced  to  the  grade  of  1st  lieutenant,  sailed
"Old  Ironsides,"  and  the  admirable  manner  in
which  he  did  it  was  long  a  subject  of  eulogy.  All
hands  were  kept  on  deck  during  the  entire  day,
and  just  as  the  sun  disappeared  the  "  Constitution  "
fired  her  evening  gun,  the  signal  that  the  sailing-
match  was  ended.  In  the  race  the  English  frigate
was  beaten  several  miles,  and  her  boastful  captain
lost  his  cask  of  wine.  The  manner  in  which  "  Old
Ironsides"  was  handled  was  entirely  due  to  Hull,
whose  skill  in  sailing  a  ship  under  canvas  was  ever
remarkable.  In  this  particular  he  was  perhaps  the
most  efficient  officer  of  the  American  navy.  Far-
ragut  said  to  the  writer:  "Isaac  Hull  was  as  able
a  seaman  as  ever  sailed  a  ship."  During  the  same
cruise,  Hull  manned  from  the  crew  of  the  "  Con-
stitution "  a  small  vessel  called  the  "  Sally  " :  ran
into  Port  Plate,  Hayti,  at  noonday ;  boarded  and
captured  a  French  letter  of  marque  known  as  the
"  Sandwich,"  while  the  marines  landed  and  spiked
the  guns  of  the  battery  before  the  commanding
officer  could  prepare  for  defence.  Taken  alto-
gether, it  was  one  of  the  test-executed  enterprises
of  its  character  in  our  naval  annals.  On  18  May,
1804,  Lieut.  Hull  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  master
commanding,  and  assigned  to  the  brig  "  Argus,"
which  vessel  participated  in  several  actions  at
Tripoli  and  elsewhere  in  the  war  against  the  Bar-
bary  states,  the  American  squadron  being  com-
manded by  Com.  Edward  Preble.  Two  years  later
Hull  was  made  a  full  captain,  and  before  hostilities
began  between  the  United  States  and  England  he
was  in  command  of  the  "  Constitution,"  in  which  he
was  ordered  to  Europe  to  convey  Joel  Barlow,
the  newly  appointed  minister,  to  France,  and  to


310


HULL


HULL


carry  specie  for  the  payment  of  the  interest  on
the  debt  due  to  Holland.  Having  despatched  his
business  with  that  government,  Hull  proceeded  to
Portsmouth,  where  he  remained  several  days  that
he  might  communicate  with  the  American  charge
d'affaires,  then  accredited  to  the  court  of  St.  James.
There  having  been  some  difficulty  while  in  port
about  deserters,  and  two  English  ships  having
anchored  alongside,  the  "  Constitution  "  changed
her  position  for  another,  to  which  she  was  followed
by  one  of  the  frigates.  Capt.  Hull,  not  intending
to  be  caught  unprepared  like  Com.  Barron,  in  the
"  Chesapeake,"  ordered  the  ship  cleared  for  action.
The  lanterns  were  lighted  fore  and  aft,  and  the
men  went  to  quarters  by  beat  of  drum.  Cooper
remarks :  "  It  is  not  easy  to  portray  the  enthusiasm
that  existed  in  this  noble  ship,  every  officer  and
man  on  board  believing  that  the  affair  of  the
'  Chesapeake '  was  to  be  repeated  so  far,  at  least,
as  the  assault  was  concerned.  The  manner  in
which  the  crew  took  hold  of  the  gun-tackles  has
been  described  as  if  they  were  about  to  jerk  the
guns  through  the  ship's  sides.  An  officer  who  was
passing  through  the  batteries  observed  to  the  men
that  if  there  was  occasion  to  fight,  it  would  be  in
their  quarrel,  and  that  he  expected  good  service
from  them.  *  Let  the  quarter-deck  look  out  for
the  colors,'  was  the  answer,  '  and  we  will  look  out
for  the  guns.'  In  short,  it  was  not  possible  for  a
ship's  company  to  be  in  better  humor  to  defend
the  honor  of  the  flag  when  the  drum  beat  the
retreat  and  the  boatswain  piped  the  people  to  the
capstan-bars."  The  day  succeeding  the  night  on
which  the  ship  sailed  for  France,  several  men-of-
war  were  seen  in  chase.  The  "  Constitution  "  out-
sailed all  the  frigates  save  one.  After  leading  her
a  long  distance  ahead  of  the  others,  Capt.  Hull
hove  to,  beat  to  quarters,  and  waited  to  learn  the
Englishman's  business,  remarking  to  a  lieutenant :
"  If  that  fellow  wants  to  fight,  we  won't  disappoint
him."  The  frigate  came  close  to  the  "  Constitu-
tion," but  no  hostilities  were  offered,  and  the
American  ship  proceeded  on  her  way  to  Cherbourg.
Five  days  after  tardy  justice  was  rendered  to
American  honor  by  the  return  of  two  seamen  taken
by  the  "  Leopard  "  from  the  unfortunate  frigate
"  Chesapeake  "  in  1807,  war  with  Great  Britain  was
declared.  At  the  beginning  of  hostilities  we  had,
in  addition  to  seven  frigates,  only  fifteen  sloops-
of-war  and  smaller  vessels  lying  in  the  naval
dock-yards,  with  which  to  cope  with  England's
1,060  sail,  800  of  which  were  in  commission.
Against  such  overwhelming  odds  did  the  conflict
begin  that,  but  for  the  spirited  protest  of  Bainbridge
and  Stewart,  the  administration  would  have  kept
our  ships  in  port  to  prevent  their  capture.  On  her
return  from  Europe,  the  "  Constitution  "  went  into
the  Chesapeake,  was  cleaned  and  newly  coppered,
and,  shipping  a  new  crew,  proceeded  to  sea  under
orders  to  join  the  squadron  of  Com.  Rodgers  at
New  York.  "  You.  are  not,"  continued  his  order,
"  voluntarily  to  encounter  a  force  superior  to  your
own."  It  seems  incredible  that  an  American  sec-
retary of  the  navy  could  issue  such  cowardly  in-
structions, but  the  original  is  in  the  writer's  pos-
session. On  19  July,  when  five  days  out  and  under
.  easy  canvas,  Hull  came  in  sight  of  four  sail,  and
soon  after  a  fifth,  which  proved  to  be  an  English
fleet  under  Com.  Broke,  cruising  off  Sandy  Hook.
The  enemy  immediately  gave  chase,  and,  the  sea
being  smooth,  with  light  and  baffling  winds,  and
being  on  soundings,  Capt.  Hull  resorted  to  the
novel  expedient  of  kedging  by  means  of  umbrellas,
long  cables,  and  the  use  of  boats.  For  a  time  this
-marvellous  movement  of the  American  frigate


through  the  water  was  undiscovered  by  the  Eng-
lish, who  were  not  slow  to  imitate  the  expedient.
At  every  "  cat's-paw "  the  "Constitution"  strug-
gled for  the  weather  gage,  in  order  to  keep  her


pursuers  astern  and  to  the  leeward.  Sails  were
wet  down  fore  and  aft,  braces  kept  in  hand  to  whip
up  the  boats  without  delay,  some  of  the  water
pumped  out  to  lighten  her,  and,  in  short,  everything
that  the  ablest  seamanship  could  devise  was  done
to  save  the  frigate.  For  three  days  and  three
nights  the  chase  was  continued,  the  crew  of  the
"  Constitution "  exhibiting  extraordinary  endur-
ance and  spirit,  until  finally  a  heavy  squall  came
up,  and,  as  it  approached  our  ship,  her  sails  were
clewed  up  and  clewed  down  almost  instantaneously,
and  when  the  weight  of  the  wind  was  received  she
sheeted  home,  set  all  sail,  and  was  flying  before  the
breeze.  Within  half  an  hour  of  the  time  when  the
English  were  lost  to  sight  the  "  Constitution  "  was
in  chase  of  a  vessel,  which,  however,  proved  to  be
an  American.  The  English  themselves  expressed
admiration  for  the  manner  in  which  Hull  escaped
from  their  squadron.  The  praises  bestowed  for
saving  his  ship  induced  him,  soon  after  his  arrival
in  Boston,  to  publish  a  modest  and  magnanimous
card  in  which  he  gave  a  large  portion  of  the  credit
to  the  officers  and  crew.  His  letter  to  Paul  Ham-
ilton, secretary  of  the  navy,  was  especially  gen-
erous in  its  expressions.

Daily  expecting  orders  from  Washington,  which
never  came,  and  impatient  to  measure  strength
with  the  enemy,  Hull  decided  to  go  on  a  frigate-
hunting  cruise.  It  is  now  known  that  he  was  to
have  been  superseded  by  Bainbridge,  who  ranked
him,  and  that  his  instructions  closed  with  these
words,  "  Remain  in  Boston  until  further  orders."
Fortunately  this  letter  was  not  received  until  Hull
returned  from  his  successful  cruise.  The  "  Con-
stitution "  put  to  sea,  2  Aug.,  and  had  she  been
captured,  her  commander  would  possibly  have  been
shot  for  sailing  without  orders.  After  cruising  to
the  north  and  east  for  a  fortnight  without  making
any  important  capture,  the  "  Constitution  "  came
in  sight  of  a  strange  sail  on  Wednesday  afternoon,
19  Aug.,  and  immediately  gave  chase.  Before
five  o'clock  the  stranger  was  known  to  be  an  Eng-
lish frigate,  and  Hull,  with  colors  flying,  his  ship
cleared  for  action,  and  his  crew  at  the  guns,  all
double  shotted,  bore  down  on  the  enemy  with  the
determination  of  making  the  affair  short,  sharp,
and  decisive.  He  fired  but  three  bow  guns  in  ap-
proaching, while  the  enemy  kept  up  a  steady  dis-
charge of  broadsides.  It  was  now  six  o'clock,  the
ships  were  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  each
other,  several  of  the  "Constitution's"  crew  had
been  killed  or  wounded,  and  all  on  board  were  so
impatient  to  open  fire  that  only  their  perfect
discipline  could  restrain  them.  Lieut.  Morris  three
times  asked  permission  to  open  on  the  enemy,  but
each  time  was  answered,  "  Not  yet,  sir."  At  length
the  order  was  given,  and,  when  within  less  than
fifty  yards  of  the  "  Guerriere,"  the  "•  Constitution  "
fired  her  first  broadside,  following  in  quick  sue-


HULL


HUMFREY


311


cession  with  others  equally  well  directed  and  de-
structive to  the  enemy,  whose  mizzen-mast  soon
fell  over  the  starboard  quarter.  In  thirty  minutes
after  the  "  Constitution  "  fired  her  first  broadside
the  Englishman's  fore-  and  main-mast  went  by  the
board,  and  the  flag  that  had  been  flying  on  the
stump  of  the  mizzen-mast  soon  after  came  down.
The  prize  proved  to  be  the  very  ship  that  Hull  was
looking  for,  whose  commander  had  three  days
previously  made  the  following  entry  on  the  register
of  an  American  vessel  bound  for  New  York :  "  Com.
Dacres,  commander  of  his  Britannic  majesty's
frigate  '  Guerriere,'  of  forty-four  guns,  presents
his  compliments  to  Com.  Rodgers,  of  the  frigate
1  President,'  and  will  be  happy  to  meet  him,  or
any  other  frigate  of  equal  force  to  the  '  President,'
off  Sandy  Hook  for  the  purpose  of  having  a  few
minutes'  tete-a-tete."  The  American  ship,  which
was  so  slightly  injured  on  her  hull  that  she  then
won  the  designation  of  "  Old  Ironsides,"  lost  seven
killed  and  seven  wounded,  while  the  enemy  had
seventy-nine  killed  and  wounded,  and  the  "  Guer-
riere "  was  so  badly  injured  that  she  was  burned.
As  the  "Constitution  "  was  burdened  with  prisoners,
it  was  deemed  necessary  to  return  to  port.  On  her
arrival  in  Boston  the  ship  and  all  on  board  were
welcomed  with  the  wildest  enthusiasm,  and  the
whole  country  was  electrified  by  the  intelligence
that  an  English  frigate  had  been  destroyed  by  an
American.  A  grand  banquet  was  given  in  Fan-
euil  hall  to  Hull  and  his  officers ;  many  of  the
state  legislatures  voted  him  a  sword,  and  the  free-
dom of  several  cities  was  presented  each  in  a  gold
box.  New  York  ordered  a  full-length  portrait  by
Jarvis,  the  best  American  artist  at  that  time,  Stuart
only  excepted,  who  painted  during  the  following
year  the  picture  from  which  our  portrait  of  the
naval  hero  is  copied.  Congress  gave  Hull  a  gold
medal,  an  illustration  of  which  appears  on  page
310,  and  voted  the  sum  of  $50,000  to  be  distrib-
uted as  prize-money  among  the  officers  and  crew
of  the  "  Constitution."

Capt.  Hull,  having  within  a  single  month  per-
formed two  gallant  exploits,  gave  up  the  com-
mand of  the  "  Constitution  "  with  a  magnanimous
feeling  that  was  highly  creditable  to  him.  There
were,  unfortunately,  fewer  frigates  than  captains
in  our  navy,  and  he  wished  to  give  other  com-
manders an  equal  chance  to  win  renown. Hull


faithfully  served  his  country,  as  captain  and
commodore,  afloat  and  ashore,  thirty-seven  years.
He  was  for  a  long  period  a  member  of  the
naval  board,  was  at  the  head  of  the  Boston  and
Washington  navy-yards,  and  commanded  squad-
rons in  the  Pacific  and  Mediterranean.  His  last  sea
service  was  in  the  ship-of-the-line  "  Ohio  "  during
the  years  1839.  1840,  and  1841.  Soon  after  his  re-
turn from  the  command  of  the  European  squadron
the  commodore  purchased  a  commodious  residence
on  Spruce  street,  Philadelphia.  There  he  collected
all  his  scattered  household  articles  and  trophies,


there  he  hospitably  entertained  old  friends  and
new,  and  there  he  terminated  his  honorable  career,
his  last  words  being,  "I  strike  my  flag."  His  re-
mains rest  in  Laurel  Hill  cemetery,  Philadelphia,
under  a  beautiful  altar  tomb  of  Italian  marble,  a
copy  of  one  he  had  seen  in  Rome,  chastely  orna-
mented and  surmounted  by  an  American  eagle  in
the  attitude  of  defending  the  National  flag.  The
inscription  reads  :  "  In  affectionate  devotion  to  the
private  virtues  of  Isaac  Hull,  his  widow  has  erect-
ed this  monument."  A  movement  is  on  foot  to
erect  a  statue  of  Com.  Hull  in  the  city  of  Boston,
and  the  author  of  this  article  is  writing  a  memoir
of  the  hero  and  a  history  of  the  "  Constitution." —
Isaac's  nephew,  Joseph  Bartine,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Westchester,  N.  Y.,  26  April,  1802;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Jan.,  1890.  He  was  ap-
pointed midshipman  from  Connecticut  in  1813,
lieutenant  in  1835,  commander  in  1841,  captain
in  1855,  commodore  in  1862,  and  on  16  July  of
that  year  was  retired.  He  commanded  the  sloop
"Warren"  in  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1843-"7,
cut  out  the  Mexican  gun-brig  "  Malekadhel "  ofl\
Mazatlan,  and  was  in  command  of  the  northern
district  of  California  for  a  short  time  previous  to
the  close  of  the  Mexican  war.  In  1856-'9  he  com-
manded the  frigate  "  St.  Lawrence,"  of  the  Brazil
squadron,  Paraguay  expedition,  and  from  May  till
September,  1861,  the  "Savannah,"  of  the  coast
blockade.  From  1862  till  1864  he  superintended
the  building  of  gun-boats  at  St.  Louis,  commanded
at  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1866,  was  presi-
dent of  the  examining  board  at  Philadelphia  in
1867,  and  lighthouse-inspector  for  the  1st  district,
with  headquarters  at  Portland,  Me.,  in  1869.  His
residence  was  for  many  years  in  Philadelphia.

HUMBERT,  Jean  Joseph  Amable,  French
soldier,  b.  in  Rouvray,  Lorraine,  25  Nov.,  1755  ;  d.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  February,  1823.  He  was
a  merchant  at  the  time  of  the  French  revolution
of  1789,  when  he  left  his  business  to  enlist  in  the
army.  His  gallantry  on  the  field  caused  his  pro-
motion to  major-general  on  9  April,  1794.  and  lieu-
tenant-general in  1798.  when  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  French  army  that  was  sent  to  Ireland,
but  was  compelled  to  surrender  to  Lord  Cornwallis.
In  1802  Gen.  Humbert  commanded  a  division  of
the  army  that  was  sent  by  Napoleon  to  Santo  Do-
mingo under  Gen.  Leclerc,  and  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  Port  au  Prince.  He  was  subsequently  ex-
iled to  Brittany  for  his  republican  convictions,
and  afterward  went  to  the  United  States  to  es-
cape imprisonment.  He  settled  in  New  Orleans,
where  he  maintained  himself  by  teaching.  In
1814  the  revolutionists  sought  the  aid  of  Gen.
Humbert,  and  he  collected  in  New  Orleans  an
army  of  about  1,000  men  of  different  nationali-
ties, with  which  he  went  to  Mexico.  The  Indian
chief  Toledo  sent  him  some  of  his  warriors,  and
under  their  guidance  he  reached  El  Puente  del
Rev,  between  Jalapa  and  Vera  Cruz.  The  revolu-
tionists had  been  defeated  before  his  arrival,  and,
after  gaining  several  partial  advantages  over  the
Spanish  forces,  he  disbanded  his  army,  and  in  the
spring  of  1817  returned  to  New  Orleans,  where  he
taught  in  a  French  college  till  his  death.

HUMFREY,  John,  colonist,  b.  in  Dorchester,
England,  about  1600 :  d.  in  his  native  land  in  1661.
He  was  a  lawyer  of  reputation  and  wealth,  and
was  one  of  the  six  original  purchasers  of  Massa-
chusetts. 19  March,  1628.  He  was  treasurer  of  the
Plymouth  company,  and  influential  in  promoting
the  settlement  of  the  colony.  At  the  second  meet-
ing of  the  Massachusetts  company  in  England  he
was  chosen  deputy  governor,  and  came to New


312


HUMMING-BIRD


HUMPHREYS


England,  in  1634,  with  his  wife,  Lady  Susan,
daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Lincoln,  and  a  family  of
six  children,  and  settled  in  Swampscott.  He  was
an  assistant  from  1632  till  1641,  and  first  major-
general  of  the  colony  in  1641.  He  laid  out  the
bounds  of  the  town  of  Ipswich  with  Capt.  Na-
thaniel Turner  and  John  Cogswell  in  1636.  On
26  Oct.,  1641,  he  returned  to  England.

HUMMING-BIRD,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  Tennessee
in  1742 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  23  Dec,  1827.  He
was  friendly  with  the  settlers,  and  their  ally  in
many  difficulties  with  the  Indians.  In  the  cam-
paigns of  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  and  Gen.  Charles
Scott  in  1794  against  the  northwestern  tribes,  he
led  a  company  of  sixty  friendly  warriors,  and  also
distinguished  himself  in  the  war  against  the  Creeks
and  the  British.  His  commission  and  a  silver
medal  that  he  received  from  Gen.  Washington
were,  by  his  request,  buried  with  him.

HUMPHREY,  Elizabeth  B.,  artist,  b.  in  Hope-
dale,  Mass.,  about  1850.  She  was  a  pupil  at  the
Cooper  school  of  design,  of  Worthington  Whit-
tredge,  and  Dr.  William  Rimmer,  and  her  profes-
sional life  has  been  devoted  chiefly  to  designing
illustrations.  She  made  some  excellent  sketches
and  paintings  during  a  trip  to  California.  In  1882
Miss  Humphrey  was  awarded  two  prizes  in  the  com-
petitive exhibition  of  L.  Prang  and  Co.  Her  illus-
trations include  landscapes,  still-life,  and  figures.

HUMPHREY,  Heman,  clergyman,  b.  in  West
Simsbury,  Conn.,  26  March,  1779  ;  d.  in  Pittsfield,
Mass.,  3  April,  1861.  He  taught  to  enable  him  to
attend  college,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1805.
After  studying  theology  under  Timothy  Dwight,
he  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Fair-
field, Conn.,in  1807-'17,in  Pittsfield  in  1817-'23,and
president  of  Amherst  in  1823-'45.  Taking  charge
of  that  institution  in  its  infancy,  he  contributed
largely  to  its  growth  and  prosperity,  and  impressed
upon  it  much  of  his  own  character.  He  was  one
of  the  pioneers  of  the  temperance  reform  in  1810,
preached  six  sermons  on  intemperance,  and  in  1813
drew  up  a  report  to  the  Fairfield  association  of
ministers,  which  is  believed  to  be  the  first  temper-
ance tract  that  was  published  in  the  United  States.
Among  the  most  celebrated  of  his  tracts  on  this
subject  is  his  "  Parallel  between  Intemperance  and
the  Slave-Trade,"  which  was  also  a  formidable  in-
dictment of  slavery.  For  fifty  years  he  was  a  con-
stant contributor  to  periodicals  and  literary  jour-
nals. Middlebury  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1823.  He  published  "  Essays  on  the  Sabbath  "
(New  York,  1830) ;  "  Tour  in  France,  Great  Britain,
and  Belgium  "  (1838) ;  "  Domestic  Education  "  (Am-
herst, 1840) ;  "  Letters  to  a  Son  in  the  Ministry  "
(New  York,  1842);  "Life  and  Writings  of  Prof.
Nathan  W.  Fiske  "  (1850) ;  "  Life  and  Writings  of
Thomas  S.  Gallaudet "  (1857) ;  and  "  Sketches  and
History  of  Revivals"  (1859). — His  son,  Edward
Porter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  28  Jan.,
1809,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1828,  and  at
the  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1833.  He
was  tutor  in  Amherst  in  1832-'3,  ordained  to  the
ministry  in  1834,  and  for  the  next  two  years  was
pastor  in  Jefferson,  Ind.,  and  was  called  to  the  2d
Presbyterian  church  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  1836.
He  resigned  this  charge  in  1853  to  become  professor
of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the  Presbyterian  theo-
logical seminary  in  Danville,  Ky.,  and  remained
there  till  1866,  when  he  became  pastor  of  a  Presby-
terian church  in  Louisville.  Since  1879  he  has
been  pastor  emeritus.  In  1861  he  was  associate
editor  of  the  "  Danville  Review." — Another  son,
James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  9  Oct.,  1811 ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  17  June,  1866,  was  graduated


at  Amherst  in  1831,  studied  law,  and  practised  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  and  afterward  in  New  York  city,
lie  removed  to  Brooklyn  in  1848,  was  corporation
counsel  in  1850-'l,  and  in  1858  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Republican.  He  served  as  a  member  of
the  committee  on  foreign  affairs  and  the  select
committee  on  the  seceding  states.  He  was  de-
feated for  congress  in  1860  and  in  1862,  but  was
re-elected  in  1864,  and  was  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  expenditures  in  the  naval  department.

HUMPHREY,  Herman  Loin,  congressman,
b.  in  Candor,  Tioga  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  March,  1830.  He
was  educated  in  the  public  schools,  and  at  sixteen
became  a  merchant's  clerk  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y.  After
several  years  in  business  he  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1854,  and  the  next  year  re-
moved to  Hudson,  Wis.,  where  he  practised  his
profession,  and  soon  afterward  became  district  at-
torney for  Saint  Croix  county.  He  was  appointed
county  judge  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  1860,  elected  to
the  full  term  the  next  year,  was  state  senator  in
1862,  and  a  strong  advocate  of  the  administration
of  President  Lincoln.  He  was  judge  of  the  8th
judicial  district  of  Wisconsin  in  1866-'77,  and  re-
signed to  take  his  seat  in  congress  as  a  Republican,
serving  from  October,  1877,  till  1883.  In  1886  he
was  elected  to  the  legislature.

HUMPHREY,  James,  printer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1747;  d.  there,  10  Feb.,  1810.
After  receiving  a  liberal  education  he  studied
medicine,  but  afterward  learned  the  printing  busi-
ness with  William  Bradford,  and  in  January,  1775,
began  the  publication  of  the  "  Ledger,  or  the  Vir-
ginia, Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  and  New  Jersey
Weekly  Advertiser."  He  held  for  a  time  the  office
of  clerk  to  the  orphans'  court  of  Philadelphia,  and,
when  called  upon  to  take  up  arms  in  defence  of
the  colony,  declined  to  do  so,  pleading  the  obliga-
tion of  his  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  crown,  which
he  had  taken  to  qualify  himself  for  this  office.  He
came  to  be  regarded  a  Tory,  and  his  paper  was  de-
nounced. In  November,  1776,  its  publication  was
suspended  until  the  British  occupied  the  city,
when,  on  10  Oct.,  1777,  it  again  appeared,  this
time  with  the  royal  arms  at  its  head.  When  the
British  evacuated  the  city,  Humphrey  made  his
exit,  and,  after  remaining  in  New  York  for  a  short
time,  sailed  for  England,  and  thence  to  Nova
Scotia,  where  he  opened  a  printing-house  and  is-
sued the  "  Nova  Scotia  Packet."  This  enterprise
not  proving  a  success,  he  sold  the  paper,  and,  after
engaging  in  mercantile  business  until  1797,  estab-
lished a  publishing-house  in  Philadelphia.

HUMPHREYS,  David,  poet,  b.  in  Derby,
Conn.,  10  Julv,  1752;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  21
Feb.,  1818.  He  was  the  son  of  the  Rev.  Daniel
Humphreys,  a  Congregational  clergyman.  After
graduation  at  Yale  in  1771,  he  entered  the  army
under  Gen.  Samuel  H.  Parsons  at  the  beginning  of
the  Revolution  with  the  rank  of  captain.  He  was
attached  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Putnam  in  1778,  and
in  1780  was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Washington,
which  place  he  retained  until  the  close  of  hostili-
ties. At  the  siege  of  Yorktown  he  particularly
distinguished  himself,  and  was  voted  an  elegant
s^ord  by  congress  for  his  gallantry.  While  in  the
army  he  wrote,  with  Joel  Barlow  and  Timothy
Dwight,  stirring  lyrics  that  were  designed  to  stimu-
late and  encourage  the  ranks.  On  the  disbanding
of  the  troops,  Col.  Humphreys  accompanied  Wash-
ington to  Mount  Vernon,  and  remained  a  member
of  his  family  for  nearly  a  year.  It  was  owing  to
the  influence  of  this  patron  that  he  was  appointed
in  1784  secretary  of  legation  to  Benjamin  J  ranklin,
John  Adams,  and  Thomas  Jefferson,  who  were  sent


HUMPHREYS


HUMPHREYS


313


^^r^g^***— j0££+""~f-*


to  negotiate  treaties  of  commerce  and  amity  with
European  powers.  He  was  absent  on  this  mission
two  years,  residing  chiefly  in  Paris  and  London.
Returning  in  1786,  Humphreys  represented  his
town  in  the  legislature,  and  joined  with  the  "  Hart-
ford Wits"  in  producing  the  "Anarchiad"  and

other  satiric  verse.
An  edition  of  these
edited  by  Luther
G.  Riggs.  purport-
ing to  be  "  the
first  published  in
book  -  form,"  ap-
peared in  New  Ha-
ven in  1861.  He
was  again  invited
to  Mount  Vernon,
and  resided  there
until  the  forma-
tion of  the  Fed-
eral government,
when  he  accompa-
nied Washington
to  New  York,  and
remained  a  mem-
ber of  his  family
until  1790.  In
that  year  he  was  appointed  the  first  U.  S.  minis-
ter to  Portugal,  and  assumed  his  duties  in  1791.
He  revisited  this  country  in  1794,  at  which  time
he  was  given  the  general  oversight  of  Barbary
affairs,  returned  in  1795,  and  soon  afterward  mar-
ried Miss  Bulkly,  an  English  lady  of  fortune.  He
resided  in  all  seven  years  at  Lisbon,  and  was  then
transferred  to  the  court  at  Madrid  as  minister
plenipotentiary,  where  he  remained  until  he  was
succeeded  by  Charles  C.  Pinckney  in  1802.  At  the
beginning  of  the  war  of  1812,  Connecticut  appointed
him  to  the  chief  command  of  the  two  regiments
that  were  organized  under  the  name  of  the  "  Veteran
Volunteers,"  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  retired  to  private  life.
On  his  return  from  Spain  he  had  imported  100
merino  sheep,  and  for  some  time  he  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  woollens.  He  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Brown  in  1802,  and  from  Dart-
mouth in  1804,  and  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the
Royal  society  of  London.  Col.  Humphreys  wrote
much  in  verse,  beginning  while  in  college.  One  of
his  poems,  "  An  Address  to  the  Armies  of  the
United  States  "  (1782),  passed  through  several  edi-
tions in  this  country  and  in  England,  and  was
translated  into  French.  His  others  include  one  on
"  The  Happiness  of  America,"  "  The  Widow  of
Malabae,"  a  tragedy,  translated  from  the  French
of  La  Pierre,  and  "  Poem  on  Agriculture."  His
"Miscellaneous  Works"  (New  York,  1790  and
1804)  were  dedicated  to  the  Duke  de  la  Rochefou-
cauld-Liancourt,  who  had  been  the  poet's  friend
during  his  residence  in  France.

HUMPHREYS,  Edward  Rupert,  educator,  b.
in  England,  1  March,  1820.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Cambridge,  studied  medicine,
and  in  1844  was  appointed  to  the  directorship  of
education  in  Prince  Edward  island.  He  became
head  classical  master  of  the  Merchiston  Castle
academy,  near  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1848,  and
in  1849  was  elected  to  a  fellowship  in  the  Educa-
tional institute  of  Scotland.  In  1852  he  was  ap-
pointed head  master  of  the  ancient  grammar-school
of  Cheltenham,  where  he  remained  until  1859,  and
erected  new  buildings  at  his  own  expense.  In
1854  he  was  made  president  of  the  College  of  pre-
ceptors, London,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1859.
Subsequently  he  came  to  this  country,  settling  in


Boston,  Mass.,  where  he  has  been  assistant  editor
of  the  "  Boston  Post,"  and  principal  of  the  Boston
collegiate  school.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  King's  university  and  King's  college,  Aber-
deen, Scotland,  in  1850.  From  1861  till  1868  he
contributed  a  series  of  articles  to  Moore's  "  Masonic
Magazine,"  on  the  alleviation  of  war's  necessary
sufferings,  which  had  much  influence  among  Ma-
sonic soldiers.  In  addition  to  various  educational
works  and  text-books,  he  is  the  author  of  "Les-
sons on  the  Liturgy  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
Church  "  (Boston,  1860) ;  and  essays  on  the  "  Edu-
cation of  Military  Officers  "  (1862),  on  the  "  Higher
Education  of  Europe  and  America,"  and  "  Ameri-
ca, Past,  Present,  and  Prospective  "  (1870).

HUMPHREYS,  Hector,  clergyman,  b.  in  Can-
ton, Conn.,  8  June,  1797 ;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  25
June,  1857.  After  his  graduation  at  Yale  in  1818,
he  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
He  was  tutor  in  Trinity  college  from  1824  till  1826,
professor  of  ancient  languages  from  that  time  till
1830,  and  librarian  from  1828  till  1830.  From
1831  tfll  his  death  he  was  president  of  St.  John's
college,  Annapolis,  and  was  also  professor  of  his-
torv  and  philosophv.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Trinitv  in  1833.

HUMPHREYS,  Joshua,  ship-builder,  b.  in
Haverford,  Delaware  co.,  Pa.,  17  June,  1751 ;  d.  there
12  Jan.,  1838.  His  grandfather,  Daniel  Humphreys,
came  from  Wales  to  Pennsylvania,  and  settled  in
Haverford  in  1682,  buying  a  large  tract  of  land,
where  they  erected  Quaker  meeting-houses,  which
still  remain  in  possession  of  the  family.  Joshua
was  apprenticed  at  an  early  age  to  a  ship-carpenter
in  Philadelphia.  Before  the  completion  of  his  ap-
prenticeship his  instructor  died,  and  he  was  placed
in  charge  of  the  establishment.  Here  he  was  soon
regarded  as  the  first  naval  architect  in  the  coun-
try, and  after  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of
the  United  States,  when  it  became  necessary  to
organize  a  navy,  he  was  consulted  officially.  His
views,  which  were  communicated  to  Robert  Mor-
ris on  6  Jan.,  1793.  and  subsequently  to  Gen.  Henry
Knox,  the  secretary  of  war,  were  adopted.  He  was
the  first  naval  constructor  in  the  United  States,
and  has  been  called  the  father  of  the  American
navy.  His  main  idea  was  that  the  ships  should  be
heavier  in  tonnage  and  artillery  than  their  rates
would  seem  to  authorize.  They  were  capable  of
enduring  heavy  battering,  and  inflicting  severe
injuries  in  a  short  space  of  time.  Owing  to  their
heavy  armament  the  British  called  them  "  74's  in
disguise."  His  ships  were  "The  Constitution,"
••  The  Chesapeake,"  "  The  Congress,"  "  The  Con-
stellation," "The  President."  and  "The  United
States,"  which  last  was  built  under  his  immediate
direction  in  his  own  ship-yard. — His  brother,
Charles,  member  of  the  Continental  congress,  b.
in  Haverford,  Pa.,  in  1712;  d.  there.  11  March,
1786.  For  many  years  he  was  successfully  engaged
in  milling,  and  was  respected  for  his  integrity  of
character.  He  was  a  member  of  the  provincial  as-
sembly in  1764  and  1775.  and  of  the  general  con-
gress "in  1775-6 ;  but,  although  he  opposed  the
oppressive  measures  of  Great  Britain,  voted  against
the  Declaration  of  Independence.  His  home,
known  as  the  "  Mansion  House."  was  occupied  by
Lord  Cornwallis  on  his  return  to  Philadelphia
from  his  reconnoitre  to  Watson's  ford,  on  the
Schuykill.— Joshua's  son,  Clement,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  25  Jan..  1777;  d.  at  sea  in  1803,  was
made  the  bearer  of  dispatches  to  France  during
John  Adams's  administration.  Subsequently  he
engaged  in  the  East  India  trade,  and  was  lost  at
sea  between  Batavia  and Bombay,  for  the  ship


314


HUMPHREYS


HUMPHREYS


"India,"  of  which  he  was  supercargo,  was  not
heard  of  after  1  Aug.,  1803. — Another  son,  Sam-
uel, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Nov.,  1778;  d.  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  16  Aug.,  1846,  was  sent  to
Georgia  by  the  government  at  the  age  of  eighteen
to  make  contracts  for  supplying  live-oak  for  a
navy.  In  1815  he  was  appointed  chief  contractor
of  the  U.  S.  navy,  which  post  he  held  until  his
death.  In  1824  the  Emperor  Alexander  of  Russia
requested  him  to  construct  a  navy  for  Russia,  offer-
ing him  a  yearly  salary  of  $60,000.  This  was  re-
fused by  Mr.  Humphreys,  who  replied :  "  I  do  not
know  that  I  possess  the  merits  attributed  to  me,
but,  be  they  great  or  small,  I  owe  them  all  to  the
flag  of  my  country." — Samuel's  son,  Andrew  At-
kinson, soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Nov.,
1810 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  27  Dec,  1883.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1831,  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  and  served  at
the  academy,  on  garrison  duty,  in  special  work,

and  in  the  Florida
campaign  of  1835.
In  September,  1836,
he  resigned,  and
was  employed  as  a
civil  engineer  by
the  U.  S.  govern-
ment on  the  plans
of  Brandywine
Shoal  lighthouse
and  Crow  Shoal
breakwater,  under
Major  Hartman
Bache.  On  7  July,
1838,  he  was  reap-
pointed in  the  U.  S.
army,  with  the  rank
of  1st  lieutenant
in  the  corps  of  to-
pographical engi-
neers, and  served  in
charge  of  works  for  the  improvement  of  various
harbors,  and  in  "Washington  in  1842-'9  as  assistant
in  charge  of  the  coast-survey  office.  Meanwhile,
in  May,  1848,  he  was  promoted  captain,  and  sub-
sequently was  engaged  in  a  topographical  and
hydrographical  survey  of  the  delta  of  the  Missis-
sippi river,  with  a  view  of  determining  the  most
practicable  plans  for  securing  it  from  inundation
and  for  deepening  its  channel  at  the  mouth.  He
was  compelled  by  illness  to  relinquish  the  charge
of  this  work  in  1851.  and  went  to  Europe,  where
he  examined  the  river  deltas  of  the  continent,
studying  the  means  that  were  employed  abroad  for
protection  against  inundation.  On  his  return  in
1854  he  was  given  charge  of  the  office  duties  in
Washington  that  were  connected  with  the  explora-
tions and  surveys  for  railroads  from  the  Mississippi
to  the  Pacific.  In  1857  he  resumed  his  work  on
the  survey  of  the  Mississippi  delta,  and  published
in  conjunction  with  Lieut.  Henry  L.  Abbot  a  "  Re-
port on  the  Physics  and  Hydraulics  of  the  Missis-
sippi River  "  (Philadelphia,  1861).  He  was  made
major  in  August,  1861,  and  after  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  was  assigned  to  duty  on  Gen.  McClellan's
staff.  During  the  campaign  on  the  Virginia  pen-
insula he  was  chief  topographical  engineer  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  28  April,  1862.  In  Sep-
tember, 1862,  Gen.  Humphreys  was  given  command
of  a  division  of  new  troops  in  the  5th  corps  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  with  which  he  led  in  the
Maryland  campaign.  He  was  engaged  in  the  bat-
tle of  Fredericksburg  and  at  Chancellorsville,
where  he  was  posted  on  the  extreme  left  of  the


army,  and  meanwhile  he  received  the  brevet  of
colonel  and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
corps  of  engineers.  He  was  then  transferred  to  the
command  of  the  2d  division  in  the  3d  corps,  with
which  he  served  in  the  battle  of  Gettysburg  under
Gen.  Daniel  E.  Sickles,  where  he  was  promoted
major-general  in  the  volunteer  army.  On  8  July,
1863,  he  became  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Meade,  and
he  continued  to  fill  that  place  till  November,  1864.
He  was  then  given  command  of  the  2d  corps,
which  was  engaged  tinder  his  direction  at  the  siege
of  Petersburg,  the  actions  at  Hatcher's  Run,  and
the  subsequent  operations,  ending  with  Lee's  sur-
render. Gen.  Humphreys  received  the  brevet  of
major-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  for  services  at
Sailor's  Creek,  and,  after  the  march  to  Washington,
was  placed  in  command  of  the  district  of  Pennsyl-
vania. From  December,  1865,  till  August,  1866,
he  was  in  charge  of  the  Mississippi  levees,  where
he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service.  He
was  then  made  brigadier-general  and  given  com-
mand of  the  corps  of  engineers,  the  highest  scien-
tific appointment  in  the  U.  S.  army,  with  charge
of  the  engineer  bureau  in  Washington.  This  office
he  held  until  30  June,  1879,  when  he  was  retired
at  his  own  request,  serving  during  three  years  on
many  commissions,  including  that  to  examine  into
canal  routes  across  the  isthmus  connecting  North
and  South  America,  and  also  on  the  lighthouse
board.  Gen.  Humphreys  was  elected  a  member  of
the  American  philosophical  society  in  1857,  a
member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences  in  1863,  and  was  one  of  the  incorporating
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences  in
the  last-named  year.  He  also  held  honorary  mem-
berships in  foreign  scientific  societies,  and  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1868.  His
literary  labors  included  several  reports  to  the  gov-
ernment concerning  the  engineering  work  on  the
Mississippi  and  on  railroad  routes  across  the
continent,  and  he  contributed  biographical  material
concerning  Joshua  Humphreys  to  Jas.  Grant  Wil-
son's "  History  of  the  Frigate  Constitution."  He
also  published  "  The  Virginia  Campaigns  of  1864
and  1865  "  (New  York,  1882),  and  "  From  Gettys-
burg to  the  Rapidan  "  (1882).

HUMPHREYS,  Milton  Wylie,  educator,  b.
in  Greenbrier,  W.  Va.,  15  Sept.,  1844.  He  entered
Washington  college,  Va.  (now  Washington  and
Lee  university),  but  left  at  the  age  of  seventeen  to
enlist  in  the  Confederate  army.  He  was  a  gunner
in  Bryan's  battery,  and  was  noted  for  his  skill  as  a
marksman,  making  a  practical  study  of  the  prob-
lem of  a  projectile  moving  in  a  resisting  medium,
and  having  his  mathematical  books  thrice  thrown
out  of  the  limber-box  into  the  rain  by  his  superior
officers.  After  the  war  he  re-entered  Washington
college,  was  made  tutor  of  Latin,  assistant  profes-
sor of  Greek  and  Latin,  and  adjunct  professor  of
ancient  languages,  and  received  the  degrees  of
M.  A.  in  1869  from  Washington  and  Lee  univer-
sity, and  Ph.  D.  in  1874  from  Leipsic  university.
He  was  called  to  the  chair  of  Greek  in  Vanderbilt
university  at  its  opening  in  1875,  and  to  that  of
ancient  languages  in  the  University  of  Texas  at  its
opening  in  1883.  Vanderbilt  university  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1883.  He  has  published
numerous  papers  in  the  "  Transactions  of  the
American  Philological  Association,"  of  which  he
was  president  in  1882,  and  editions  of  the  "  Clouds  "
of  Aristophanes,  the  "  Antigone  "  and  "  GMipus
Tyrannus "  of  Sophocles,  and  the  second  book  of
Thucydides.  He  is  editor  for  the  United  States
and  Canada  of  the  "  Revue  des  Revues,"  and  cor-
respondent of  the  "  Philologische  Wochenschrift."


HUMPHREYS


HUNT


315


HUMPHREYS,  Thomas  Basil,  Canadian  poli-
tician, b.  in  Liverpool,  England,  in  1840.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  city,  emigrated  to  British
Columbia,  and  sat  in  its  legislature  before  the
union  with  Canada.  He  was  appointed  a  member
of  the  executive  council  and  minister  of  finance
and  agriculture  in  February,  1876,  but  resigned  in
July  of  that  year,  and,  on  the  resignation  of  the
Elliott  administration  in  1878,  he  was  appointed
provincial  secretary.  He  represented  Lillooetrin
the  provincial  parliament  from  1871  till  1875,  when
he  was  elected  for  Victoria.

HUMPTON,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Yorkshire,
England,  about  1733 ;  d.  in  Chester  county,  Pa.,
21  Dec,  1804.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  British
army,  and  was  in  the  attack  on  St.  Malo.  While
stationed  in  the  West  Indies,  he  resigned  his  com-
mission, came  to  Pennsylvania,  and  settled  on  one
of  the  upper  branches  of  the  Susquehanna.  He
was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  "flying
camp,  16  July,  1776,  and  was  afterward  trans-
ferred to  the  colonelcy  of  the  11th  Pennsylvania
regiment,  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Brandywine,
and  at  the  close  of  the  war  was  colonel  of  the  2d
regiment.  After  peace  was  declared  he  settled  on
a  farm,  and  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of  mi-
litia, which  post  he  held  till  his  death.

HUN,  Edward  Reynolds,  phvsician,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  17  April,  1842 ;  d.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,
14  March,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1863,  studied  in  Albany  medical  college,  re-
ceived his  diploma  from  the  medical  department
of  Columbia  in  1866.  Subsequently  he  studied  in
Paris  and  London,  and  settled  in  practice  in  Al-
bany. Dr.  Hun  was  a  member  of  numerous  medi-
cal societies,  physician  to  several  hospitals,  and
special  pathologist  to  the  New  York  state  lunatic
asylum  at  Utica.  He  translated  C.  Bouchard's
"Secondary  Degenerations  of  the  Spinal  Cord"
(Utica,  1869),  and  contributed  numerous  articles  to
medical  journals,  which  include  "Trichina  Spi-
ralis "  (1869) ;  "  Pulse  of  the  Insane  "  (1870) ;  and
"  Haematoma  Auris  "  (1870).

HUNGERFORD,  John  Pratt,  soldier,  b.  in
Leeds,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  in  1760 ;  d.  in  Twi-
ford,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  21  Dec,  1833.  He
was  an  officer  in  the  Revolution,  and  served  for
several  sessions  in  the  Virginia  house  of  delegates.
In  1811  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
but  served  only  a  month,  his  election  being  success-
fully contested  by  John  Taliaferro.  Hungerford
was  elected  to  the  next  congress,  and  served  from

1813  till  1817.  He  was  in  the  war  of  1812-'14,  be-
came brigadier-general  of  militia  on  the  Potomac,
and  was  at  one  time  encamped  with  his  forces  on
Arlington  heights.  He  also  commanded  in  sup-
port of  Com.  David  Porter's  artillery  in  September,

1814  at  White  House,  on  Pamunky  river,  Va.
HUNGERFORD,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  East

Haddam,  Conn.,  22  Nov.,  1786;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  15  Jan.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1809.  and  studied  law  with  Roger  and  Matthew
Griswold  in  Lyme.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  New  London  in  1812,  and  practised  in  Had-
lyme  till  1819,  when  he  removed  to  Hartford,  at-
taining high  rank  in  his  profession.  He  repre-
sented East  Haddam  in  the  legislature,  after  his
removal  to  Hartford  was  several  times  a  delegate
from  that  city,  and  was  a  member  of  the  con-
stitutional convention  of  Connecticut  in  1818.  He
was  a  Federalist,  a  Whig,  and  in  later  years  a  Re-
publican. Mr.  Hungerford  withdrew  from  general
practice  in  1860,  but  continued  the  management  of
his  large  property  until  a  few  months  before  his
death. Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1856.

i


HUNNEUS,  George,  Chilian  statesman,  b.  in
Santiago,  30  Aug.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  the
university  of  his  native  city  in  1855,  and  in  1856
was  appointed  professor  of  jurisprudence  and  po-
litical science.  In  1858  he  was  elected  to  congress
for  the  province  of  Cauquenes,  and  was  known  as
one  of  the  most  elegant  orators  in  defence  of  lib-
eral principles.  Next  year  he  was  elected  president
of  the  lower  house,  and  became  prominent  as  a
leader  of  the  opposition  against  the  conservative
'government,  for  which  reason  he  was  banished  by
President  Montt.  He  came  to  the  United  States,
together  with  his  companion  in  exile,  Vicuna  Mac-
kenna,  and  studied  the  institutions  of  the  republic.
At  the  close  of  Montt's  presidential  term,  in  1861,
Hunneus  returned  to  Chili,  was  elected  to  congress,
and  became  speaker.  The  new  president,  Jose
Joaquin  Perez,  desiring  to  form  an  independent
ministry  from  moderate  members  of  both  political
parties,  called  Hunneus  as  secretary  of  public  in-
struction and  justice,  and  as  such  he  introduced
great  improvements  in  both  branches,  and  greatly
augmented  the  number  of  public  schools.  In  1865
he  was  elected  to  the  senate,  and  contributed  to
the  termination  of  the  war  between  Spain  and  the
Pacific  republics.  In  1870  he  was  secretary  of  the
interior,  and  was  specially  commissioned*  by  the
government  to  sign  a  treaty  of  friendship  and
commerce  with  the  Austro-Hungarian  envoy,  Rear-
Admiral  Baron  A.  de  Petz.  In  1872  he  was  presi-
dent of  the  senate,  and  in  1873  was  given  by  Presi-
dent Errazuriz  the  portfolio  of  the  treasury,  and
in  1874  he  became  secretary  of  foreign  affairs,  at
the  same  time  occupying  professorships  in  the  uni-
versity. Since  the  resignation  of  President  Erra-
zuriz in  1876,  Hunneus  has  continued  to  take  an
active  part  in  politics  as  senator,  and  during  the
war  against  Peru  and  Bolivia  he  was  a  member  of
the  government  council  for  the  direction  of  the
war.  He  was  also  appointed  rector  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Santiago  in  the  place  of  the  famous
scientist  Domeyko.  Hunneus,  besides  numerous
educational  works  and  political  pamphlets,  has
written  "Historia  politica  de  Chile"  (Santiago,
1862);  "La  admin istracion  Montt"  (1863);  "His-
toria de  la  guerra  con  Espana"  (1866);  and  "His-
toria de  la  guerra  del  Pacifico  "  (1883).

HUNT,  Benjamin  Faneuil,  lawyer,  b.  in
Watertown,  Mass.,  20  Feb.,  1792;  d.  in  New  York
city,  5  Dec,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1810,  removed  to  South  Carolina  on  account  of
the  delicacy  of  his  health,  studied  law  in  Charles-
ton, and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1813.  In  1818
he  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  representatives,
and  was  repeatedly  re-elected  until  the  nullification
crisis,  when  he  adhered  to  the  principles  of  the  un-
popular minority,  and,  while  many  abandoned  the
cause  from  interested  motives,  he  remained  one  of
the  main  props  of  the  Union  party  in  South  Caro-
lina in  1830-4.  His  name  is  connected  with  the
history  of  the  nullification  period  by  the  case  of
the  state  against  Hunt,  in  which  the  question  was
decided  in  May,  1834,  that  the  new  oath  of  al-
legiance, called  the  "  test-oath,"  that  was  required
by  the  act  of  1833,  was  unconstitutional.  After
the  animosities  springing  from  the  political  con-
flict had  passed  away,  Col.  Hunt,  as  he  was  called
from  his  rank  in  the  militia,  was  again  sent  to  the
legislature,  and  was  an  active  member  of  the  house
for  many  years.  He  had  an  extensive  practice  at
the  bar,  arid  was  noted  for  his  eloquence,  and  for
the  ingenuity  and  pertinacity  with  which  he  con-
tested the  eases  that  were  confided  to  him.

HUNT,  Charles  Sedgwick,  journalist,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  7  April,  1842 ; d.  in  New  York


316


HUNT


HUNT


city,  15  Oct.,  1876.  He  entered  the  naval  academy
at  Annapolis  in  1855,  but  left  in  1857,  and  became
a  student  at  Phillips  Andover  academy.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  navy,
and  became  acting  master  on  the  war-sloop  "Ju-
niata," but  resigned  his  commission  toward  the
close  of  the  war,  and  entered  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1868.  lie  then  became  a  report-
er on  the  New  York  "  Tribune."  For  a  time  he
was  financial  editor  of  the  New  York  •'  Standard,"
and  from  1871  to  1873  was  Albany  correspondent
of  the  "Tribune,"  and  was  instrumental  in  ex-
posing political  corruption.  In  1873  he  became  an
editorial  writer  on  the  "  Tribune,"  writing  chiefly
upon  topics  of  finance  and  political  economy.  He
was  also  associated  with  John  F.  Cleveland  in  the
preparation  of  the  "  Tribune  Almanac."  Early  in
1876  he  joined  the  editorial  staff  of  the  New  York
"  Times,"  where  he  continued  until  his  death.

HUNT,  Ezra  Mundy,  physician,  b.  in  Middlesex
county,  N.  J.,  4  Jan.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1849,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons.  New  York  city,  in  1852.  He  began
practice  at  Metuchen,  lectured  on  materia  medica
in  the  Vermont  medical  college  in  1854,  and  was
elected  professor  of  chemistry  there  in  1855,  but
declined.  He  joined  the  volunteer  army  as  regi-
mental surgeon  in  1862,  and  in  1863  was  placed  in
charge  of  a  hospital  in  Baltimore,  Md.  He  has
been  president  of  the  American  public  health  asso-
ciation, and  has  contributed  papers  to  eight  vol-
umes of  "  Public  Health."  Since  1876  he  has  been
secretary  of  the  New  Jersey  board  of  health,  pre-
paring all  its  reports,  and  since  1881  has  conducted
the  sanitary  department  in  the  New  York  "  Inde-
pendent." He  was  a  delegate  to  the  International
medical  congresses  at  London  (1881)  and  Copen-
hagen (1884).  His  residence  is  in  Trenton,  N.  J.
He  is  instructor  in  hygiene  in  the  State  normal
school.  In  1883  he  received  the  degree  of  Sc.  D.
from  Princeton.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Patients'
and  Physicians'  Aid  "  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  Physi-
cians' Counsels  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;  "  Alcohol  as
a  Food  and  Medicine"  (New  York,  1877);  and
"  Principles  of  Hygiene,  together  with  the  Essen-
tials of  Anatomy  and  Physiology"  (New  York,
1887) ;  also  of  works  on  religious  subjects,  especially
"Grace  Culture"  (Philadelphia,  1865)  and  "Bible
Notes  for  Daily  Readers  "  (New  York,  1870).

HUNT,  Freeman,  publisher,  b.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,
21  March,  1804 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  2  March,
1858.  He  entered  the  office  of  .the  Boston  "  Even-
ing Gazette  "  at  the  age  of  twelve,  learned  the  trade
ofprinting,  and  while  connected  with  the  Boston
"  Traveller  "  obtained  promotion  by  sending  to  the
editor  articles  evincing  journalistic  talent.  Soon
after  his  apprenticeship  was  over  he  established
"  The  Ladies'  Magazine,"  with  Sarah  J.  Hale  as
editor,  which  was  very  successful.  He  sold  this,
and  renewed  the  publication  of  the  "  Penny  Maga-
zine," which  proved  profitable,  but  which  he  aban-
doned to  become  managing  director  of  the  Bewick
company,  an  association  of  authors,  artists,  print-
ers, and  bookbinders.  While  connected  with  this
society,  he  founded  and  became  editor  of  the
"  American  Magazine  of  Useful  and  Entertaining
Knowledge."  He  also  published  in  Boston  the
"Juvenile  Miscellany."  In  1831  he  removed  to
New  York  and  established  "The  Traveller,"  a
weekly  paper.  In  1837  he  projected  "  The  Mer-
chants' Magazine,"  the  first  number  of  which  was
issued  in  July,  1839.  In  1845  he  published  the
first  volume  of  the  '•  Library  of  Commerce."
"  Hunt's  Merchants'  Magazine  "  was  conducted  by
its  founder  to  the  end  of  the  thirty-eighth  volume,


and  after  his  death  was  continued  as  an  independ-
ent publication  till  1870,  sixty-three  volumes  hav-
ing been  issued,  when  it  was  converted  into  a
weekly,  and  merged  in  the  "  Commercial  and  Fi-
nancial Chronicle."  The  statistical  and  other  in-
formation collected  in  this  magazine  was  valuable,
trustworthy,  and  useful,  not  only  to  merchants,
but  to  all  persons  concerned  in  practical  affairs.
Mr.  Hunt's  publications  in  book-form  include  "  An-
ecdotes and  Sketches  of  Female  Character  "  (Bos-
ton, 1830) ;  "  American  Anecdotes,  Original  and
Selected,  by  an  American  "  (2  vols.,  1830) ;  "  Com-
prehensive Atlas  "  (New  York,  1834) ;  "  Letters
about  the  Hudson  River  and  its  Vicinity,"  which
had  appeared  in  "  The  Traveller  "  (1836 ;  3d  ed.,
enlarged,  1837);  "Lives  of  American  Merchants"
(2  vols.,  1856-'7) ;  and  "  Wealth  and  Worth,  a  Col-
lection of  Morals,  Maxims,  and  Miscellanies  for
Merchants"  (New  York,  1858).

HUNT,  Harriot  Kezia,  physician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  in  1805 ;  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1875.  She
was  a  teacher  in  1827,  studied  medicine  under  Dr.
Valentine  Mott  in  1833,  and  opened  an  office  in
1835,  being  probably  the  earliest  female  practi-
tioner in  the  United  States.  In  1843  she  founded  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  a  ladies'  physiological  society,
which  had  fifty  members.  She  applied  for  admis-
sion to  the  Harvard  medical  lectures  in  1847,  but
was  refused.  In  1853  the  Woman's  medical  college
of  Philadelphia  conferred  on  her  the  degree  of
M.  D.  She  was  a  noted  lecturer  on  woman  suffrage,
sanitary  reform,  and  other  subjects.  In  paying
taxes  on  her  real  estate  she  filed  annually,  for
twenty-five  years,  a  protest  against  taxation  with-
out representation.  She  published  "  Glances  and
Glimpses,  or  Fifty  Years'  Social,  including  Twenty
Years'  Professional  Life  "  (Boston,  1856).

HUNT,  Henry  Jackson,  soldier,  b.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  14  Sept.,  i819 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  11
Feb.,  1889.  His  grandfather,  Thomas,  at  the
time  of  his  death  was
colonel  of  the  1st  in-
fantry; and  his  fa-
ther, Samuel  W.,  lieu-
tenant in  the  3d  in-
fantry, died  in  Sep-
tember, 1829.  Henry
accompanied  his  fa-
ther on  the  expedi-
tion that  established
Fort  Leavenworth  in
1827,  and,  after  at-
tending school  in  Mis-
souri, entered  the  U.
S.  military  academy,
where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1839.  He
served  in  the  2d  artil-
lery on  the  frontier
during  the  Canada  border  disturbances  of  that  year,
in  garrisons  at  Fort  Adams,  R.  I.,  and  Fort  Colum-
bus and  Fort  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  and  on  recruiting
service  till  18  June,  1846,  when  he  was  promoted  to
1st  lieutenant.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  was
brevetted  captain  for  gallantry  at  Contreras  and
Churubusco,  and  major  at  Chapultepec,  and  he  was
at  Vera  Cruz.  Cerro  Gordo,  San  Antonio,  Molino
del  Rey,  where  he  was  twice  wounded,  and  at  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  was  then  on
frontier  duty  till  the  civil  war,  with  the  exception
of  service  in  1856-'7  and  1858-'60  on  a  board  to  re-
vise the  system  of  light-artillery  tactics.  He  had
become  captain,  28  Sept.,  1852,  was  promoted  to
major,  14  May,  1861,  and  commanded  the  artillery
on  the  extreme  left  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run. He


//Zwslfy  J JJuaJ^


HUNT


HUNT


317


was  chief  of  artillery  in  the  defences  of  Washing-
ton from  July  to  September,  1861,  and  on  28  Sept.
became  aide  to  Gen.  JVIcClellan  with  the  rank  of
colonel.  In  l861-'2  he  was  president  of  a  board  to
test  rifled  field-guns  and  projectiles,  and  organized
the  artillery  reserve  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
commanding  it  in  the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862.
In  September,  1862,  he  was  made  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  and  became  chief  of  artillery  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  holding  the  office  till  the  close
of  the  war,  and  taking  an  active  part  in  all  the  bat-
tles that  were  fought  by  that  army  in  1862-'5.  He
was  brevetted  colonel,  3  July,  1863,  for  his  services
at  Gettysburg,  major-general  of  volunteers,  6  July,
1864,  for  "  faithful  and  highly  meritorious  services  "
in  the  campaign  from  the  Rapidan  to  Petersburg,
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  for  his  ser-
vices in  the  campaign  ending  with  Lee's  surrender,
and  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  for
services  during  the  war.  He  was  president  of  the
permanent  artillery  board  in  1866,  and  then  com-
manded various  forts,  being  promoted  to  colonel  of
the  5th  artillery,  4  April,  1869.  He  was  retired  from
active  service,  14  Sept.,  1883,  and  appointed  gov-
ernor of  the  Soldiers'  home,  Washington,  D.  C.
Gen.  Hunt  published  "Instruction  for  Field  Ar-
tillery" (Philadelphia,  1860),  and  was  the  author
of  various  papers  on  artillery,  projectiles,  and  army
organization.  In  1886  he  contributed  to  the  "  Cen-
tury "  three  articles  on  the  battle  of  Gettysburg.
— His  brother,  Lewis  Cass,  soldier,  b.  in  Fort
Howard,  Green  Bay,  Wis.,  23  Feb..  1824;  d.  in
Fort  Union,  New  Mexico,  6  Sept.,  1886,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1847,  and
assigned  to  the  infantry.  He  became  captain,  23
May,  1855,  and  served  on  the  Pacific  coast  till  the
civil  war.  He  was  stationed  in  Washington  terri-
tory in  1859,  when  Gen.  Harney  occupied  San  Juan
island  in  Puget  sound,  which  was  then  claimed  by
Great  Britain,  and,  when  a  joint  occupation  of  the
island  by  British  and  U.  S.  forces  was  arranged
by  Gen.  Scott,  was  chosen  to  command  the  Ameri-
can detachment.  After  serving  in  the  first  part  of
the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862,  he  became  on  21
May  of  that  year  colonel  of  the  92d  New  York
regiment,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Fair  Oaks.
He  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  29
Nov.,  1862,  and  in  the  winter  of  1862-'3  served  in
North  Carolina,  receiving  the  brevet  of  colonel  for
gallantry  at  Kinston.  He  was  made  major  in  the
14th  infantry,  8  June.  1863,  had  charge  of  the  draft
rendezvous  at  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1863-'4,  and,
after  special  duty  in  Missouri  and  Kansas,  com-
manded the  defences  of  New  York  harbor  in
1864-'6.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in
the  regular  army,  13  March,  1865,  for  his  services
in  the  war,  and  afterward  commanded  various
posts,  becoming  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  20th  in-
fantry, 29  March,  1868.  He  was  transferred  to  the
4th  infantry  on  25  Feb.,  1881,  and  promoted  to
colonel  of  the  14th  infantry  on  19  May.

HUNT,  Isaac,  lawver,  b.  in  Barbadoes,  W.  I.,  in
1751 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1809.  He  was  the
son  of  the  Rev.  Isaac  Hunt,  rector  of  St.  Michael's,
Bridgetown,  Barbadoes,  and  the  father  of  Leigh
Hunt,  the  poet.  He  was  sent  to  Philadelphia
to  be  educated,  and  in  1763  was  graduated  at  the
college  in  that  city  (now  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania). He  read  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1765,  and  engaged  in  practice.  In  1765  he  applied
to  the  college  for  his  degree  as  master  of  arts,
which  was  refused  him  by  the  trustees  on  tech-
nical grounds.  He  renewed  his  application  the  next
year,  but  was  refused  on  the  ground  of  his  being  the
"author  and  publisher  of  several scurrilous  and


scandalous  pieces,"  among  which  were  "  A  Letter
from  a  Gentleman  in  Transylvania  to  his  Friend  in
America"  (1764),  "A  Humble  Attempt  at  Scur-
rility," and  "The  Substance  of  an  Exercise  had
this  Morning  in  Scurrility  Hall  "  (1765).  All  of
these  had  been  published  anonymously.  The
trustees  finally,  in  1771,  conferred  the  degree.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  became  an  ac-
tive loyalist,  and  was  at  one  time  mobbed  for  point-
ing out  to  the  owner  of  a  book-store  a  volume  of
reports  of  trials  for  high  treason  as  a  proper  book
for  John  Adams  to  read.  He  also  wrote  pamphlets
in  support  of  the  crown,  which  led  to  his  arrest
and  imprisonment,  but  he  bribed  the  sentinel  of
the  prison,  and  made  his  escape  to  Barbadoes  and
thence  to  England.  He  was  soon  afterward  or-
dained to  the  ministry  by  Dr.  Lowth,  then  bishop
of  London,  and  preached  for  a  time  in  Bentinck
chapel,  Paddington.  The  Duke  of  Chandos  heard
him  at  Southgate,  and  was  so  pleased  with  his
preaching  that  he  invited  him  to  become  tutor  to
his  nephew,  Mr.  Leigh,  which  the  preacher  did,
and  remained  in  the  duke's  family  for  several  years.
During  this  time  Col.  John  Trumbull,  son  of  Gov.
Trumbull,  of  Connecticut,  went  to  London  to  pur-
sue his  studies  in  art  under  Benjamin  West.  He
was  suspected  by  the  government  to  be  a  spy.  and
was  arrested  and  thrown  into  prison.  Hunt,  in
conjunction  with  West,  was  chiefly  instrumental
in  securing  his  release.  Some  years  before  Hunt's
death  he  became  a  LTnitarian.  Besides  the  publi-
cations named,  Hunt  was  the  author  of  "  The  Po-
litical Family,  or  a  Discourse  pointing  out  the
Reciprocal  Advantages  which  flow  from  an  Un-
interrupted Union  between  Great  Britain  and  her
American  Colonies"  (Philadelphia,  1775);  and
"  Right  of  Englishmen,  an  Antidote  to  the  Poison
of  Thomas  Paine "  (London.  1791).  See  the
"  Autobiography  of  Leigh  Hunt "  (London,  1870) ;
and  also  the  "  Autobiography  of  John  Trumbull  "
(New  York  and  London.  1841).

HUNT,  Jedediah,  poet,  b.  in  Candor.  Tioga  co.,
N.  Y.,  28  Dec,  1815.  His  father,  Jedediah,  was  a
captain  of  New  York  volunteers  at  the  battle  of
Lundy's  Lane.  The  son  emigrated  to  Ohio  about
1840,  and  became  a  merchant  in  Chilo,  Clermont
co.  He  contributed  lyric  poems  and  prose  arti-
cles to  "  Graham's  Magazine,"  to  the  New  York
"  Home  Journal,"  and  to  the  "  Genius  of  the  West  "
and  other  western  journals,  and  published  "  The
Cottage  Maid,  a  Tale  in  Rhyme  "  (Cincinnati.  1847).

HUNT,  John  Wesley,  "physician,  b.  in  Grove-
land.  Livingston  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  Oct.,  1834.  He  was
educated  at  the  Wesleyan  seminary,  Lima,  N.  Y..
and  graduated  at  the  University  medical  college.
New  York  city,  in  1859.  He  served  on  the  house
surgical  staff  in  Bellevue  hospital,  New  York  city,
and  began  practice  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.  In  May,
1861,  he  was  commissioned  as  surgeon  of  a  New
York  regiment,  and  served  at  Fortress  Monroe,
where  he  was  remarkably  successful  in  treating  the
disease  that  became  known  as  Chickahominy  fever.
In  May,  1862,  he  was  made  brigade-surgeon  of  vol-
unteers, and  placed  in  charge  of  the  Mill  Creek
hospital,  near  Fortress  Monroe.  There  he  demon-
strated the  practicability  of  thoroughly  ventilating
a  large  building  crowded  with  wounded  men.  In
August,  1862,  he  was  attacked  with  fever,  and  re-
turned to  the  north.  He  resigned  from  the  army,
and  after  months  of  illness  resumed  his  practice.
He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Jersey  City
charity  hospital,  and  first  president  of  its  medical
board.  He  has  read  papers  before  the  Hudson
County  medical  society,  and  contributed  to  the
"  Transactions  "  of  the  New  Jersey  medical  society.


318


HUNT


HUNT,  Robert  Woolston,  metallurgist,  b.  in
Fallsington,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  9  Dec,  1838.  He  re-
ceived his  early  education  in  Covington.  Ky.,  and
then  studied  analytical  chemistry  with  James  C.
Booth  and  Thomas  II.  Garrett  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  commandant  of  Camp
Curtin,  Harrisburg,  with  the  rank  of  captain.
Meanwhile  he  had  become  associated  with  the  Cam-
bria iron  company  as  chemist,  and  in  July,  1860,
established  the  first  analytical  laboratory  connected
with  any  iron  or  steel  works  in  the  United  States.
Subsequently  he  assisted  George  Fritz  in  construct-
ing the  Bessemer  steel  works  of  the  Cambria  com-
pany, and  after  1868  was  superintendent  of  that
department,  also  having  charge  during  1865-'6  of
the  experimental  steel  works  in  Wyandotte,  Mich.
He  was  called  to  the  charge  of  the  Bessemer  steel
works  of  John  A.  Griswold  and  Co.,  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,
in  1873 ;  was  made  general  superintendent  of  the
Albany  and  Rensselaer  iron  and  steel  company  in
1875 ;  and  in  1885  of  its  successor,  the  Troy  steel
and  iron  company.  The  works  of  the  various  Troy
companies  with  which  he  has  been  connected  have
been  rebuilt  and  extended  under  his  supervision.
Mr.  Hunt  has  obtained  patents  for  improvements
in  bottom  casting  of  steel  ingots,  for  making  spe-
cial soft  Bessemer  steel,  for  a  recarburizer  for  Bes-
semer steel,  also  a  series  relating  to  automatic
tables  for  rolling-mills,  and  one  for  a  feeding-in
device  for  the  same  kind  of  mills.  In  1886  he  was
elected  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  Rensselaer  poly-
technic institute.  Mr.  Hunt  is  a  member  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers,  and  of  the
American  society  of  mechanical  engineers,  and  was
president  of  the  American  institute  of  mining  en-
gineers in  1883-'4.  His  contributions  to  literature
have  consisted  of  technical  papers  in  the  transac-
tions of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.

HUNT,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Attleboro,
Mass.,  18  March,  1810  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23  July,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1832,  taught
at  Southampton,  Mass.,  and  Southampton,  L.  I.,
and  studied  theology  in  the  seminaries  at  Andover
and  Princeton,  and  with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Jacob  Ide,
of  West  Medway,  Mass.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Con-
gregational church  in  Natick,  Mass.,  from  1839  till
1850,  and  of  the  church  in  Franklin,  Mass.,  from
1850  till  1864.  In  the  latter  year  he  became  super-
intendent of  education  for  the  American  mission-
ary association,  and  labored  to  establish  schools
among  the  freedmen.  In  1868  he  exchanged  this
office  for  that  of  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  senate  commit-
tee on  military  affairs,  and  in  1873-'5  acted  as  pri-
vate secretary  to  Vice-President  Henry  Wilson.
He  assisted  Mr.  Wilson  in  writing  the  "  Rise  and
Fall  of  the  Slave  Power  in  America,"  and  com-
pleted the  work  after  the  latter's  death.  He  also
prepared  and  arranged  for  publication  Mr.  Wilson's
papers.  His  published  works  are  "  Letters  to  the
Avowed  Friends  of  Missions,"  "  Political  Duties  of
Christians,"  and  "  Puritan  Hymn  and  Tune  Book."
He  left  unfinished  "  Religion  in  Politics."

HUNT,  Theodore  Whitefleld,  author,  b.  in
Metuchen,  N.  J.,  19  Feb.,  1844.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1865,  and  after  teaching  and  study-
ing in  the  Union  seminary  of  New  York  city,  en-
tered Princeton  theological  seminary,  where  he
spent  one  year,  and  was  graduated  in  1869.  In
1868-'71  he  was  tutor  in  Princeton,  and,  after  spend-
ing two  years  in  the  University  of  Berlin,  became
professor  of  rhetoric  and  English  literature.  In
1880  Lafayette  college  conferred  on  him  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  Prof.  Hunt  has  contributed  to  reviews
and  periodicals,  and  has  published  "  Caedmon's
Exodus  and  Daniel  "  (Boston,  1883) ;  "  Principles


HUNT

of  Written Discourse"  (New  York, 1884); and
"  English  Prose  and  Prose  Writers  "  (1887).

HUNT,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  18  May,  1808;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  30
March,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1829,  began  to  practise  in
Charleston,  and  in  1832-'6  won  distinction  by  his
successful  treatment  of  cholera.  He  then  removed
to  New  Orleans,  where  he  was  a  founder  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Louisiana,  and  its  first  professor  of  anat-
omy. Dr.  Hunt  was  house-surgeon  to  the  Charity
hospital,  president  of  the  Physico-medical  society
of  New  Orleans,  and  in  1866  of  the  University  of
Louisiana.  He  was  a  contributor  to  the  medical
journals,  and  wrote  on  yellow  fever,  in  the  treat-
ment of  which  he  was  especially  successful.

HUNT,  Thomas  Poage,  clergyman,  b.  in  Char-
lotte county,  Va.,  in  1794 ;  d.  in  Wyoming  valley,
Pa.,  5  Dec,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Hamp-
den Sidney  college  in  1813,  studied  theology,  and
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1824.  After  officiating  in
several  churches  in  Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  he
became  a  temperance  lecturer,  and  attained  a  wide
reputation.  He  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1836,
and  in  1839  to  Wyoming  valley,  where  he  afterward
resided.  He  was  agent  for  Lafayette  college  in
1840-'5.  He  published  "  History  of  Jesse  Johnson
and  his  Times,"  "  It  will  not  Injure  me,"  "  Death
by  Measure,"  "Wedding- Days  of  Former  Times,"
and  "  Liquor-Selling,  a  History  of  Fraud."

HUNT,  Thomas  Sterry,  scientist,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  5  Sept.,  1826.  He  received  his  early
education  in  his  native  town,  and  there  began  the
study  of  medicine,  but  soon  abandoned  it  for  that
of  chemistry,  which  he  followed  in  New  Haven
under  the  younger  Silliman.  Meanwhile  he  also
acted  as  assistant  in
chemistry  to  the  elder
Silliman  in  the  Yale
laboratory,  and,  after
spending  two  years  in
New  Haven,  he  was
offered  the  appoint-
ment of  chemical  as-
sistant in  the  newly
established  school  of
agricultural  chemis-
try in  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  which  he
declined  in  order  to
accept  that  of  chem-
ist and  mineralogist
to  the  geological  sur-
vey of  Canada,  under
Sir  William  E.  Logan.
He  continued  in  this
office  until  1872,  and
also  held  the  chair  of  chemistrv  in  Laval  univer-
sity, delivering  his  lectures  in  French,  from  1856
till  1862,  and  a  similar  professorship  from  1862
till  1868  at  McGill  university.  In  1872  he  became
professor  of  geology  in  the  Massachusetts  insti-
tute of  technology,  succeeding  William  B.  Rogers,
holding  that  chair  until  1878,  and  since  that  time
has  held  no  official  appointment.  Early  in  his  ca-
reer he  became  known  by  a  series  of  papers  on
theoretical  chemistry,  which  appeared  in  Silliman's
"  American  Journal  of  Science "  from  1848  till
1851.  Hunt  developed  a  system  of  organic  chem-
istry that  was  essentially  his  own,  in  which  all
chemical  compounds  were  shown  to  be  formed  on
simple  types  represented  by  one  or  more  molecules
of  water  or  hydrogen.  An  account  of  the  de-
velopment of  this  subject  will  be  found  in  his  pa-
per read  at  the  centennial  of  chemistry  that  was


^.^ukuWL


HUNT


HUNT


319


held  in  Northumberland,  Pa.,  August,  1874,  en-
titled "  A  Century's  Progress  in  Chemical  Theory."
His  researches  on  the  equivalent  volumes  of  liquids
and  solids  were  a  remarkable  anticipation  of  those
of  Dumas,  while  in  his  inquiries  into  the  polymerism
of  mineral  species  he  has  opened  a  new  field  for
mineralogy,  as  set  forth  in  his  paper  on  the  "  Ob-
jects and  Method  of  Mineralogy  ;  but  these  philo-
sophical studies  have  been  only  incidental  to  his
labors  in  chemical  mineralogy  and  chemical  ge-
ology. Hunt's  researches  into  the  chemical  and
mineral  composition  of  rocks  have  probably  been
more  extended  than  those  of  any  other  contempo-
rary scientist.  The  names  Laurentian  and  Huro-
nian,  applied  to  the  earliest  known  rocks  on  this
continent,  were  given  by  him  to  the  two  subdivis-
ions of  the  Eozoic  period.  From  his  long  series  of
investigations  of  the  lime  and  magnesia  salts  he
was  enabled  to  explain  for  the  first  time  the  true
relations  of  gypsums  and  dolomites,  and  to  ex-
plain their  origin  by  direct  deposition.  His  views
on  this  subject  have  found  a  wide  recognition
among  geologists.  The  phenomena  of  volcanoes
and  igneous  rocks  have  been  discussed  by  him  from
a  new  point  of  view,  and  he  has  revived  and  en-
forced the  almost  forgotten  hypothesis  that  the
source  of  these  is  to  be  found  in  chemical  reactions.
He  has  also  sought  to  harmonize  the  facts  of  dy-
namical geology  with  the  theory  of  a  solid  globe.
His  views  on  these  questions  will  be  found  in  an
essay  on  "The  Chemistry  of  the  Earth"  in  the  re-

Eort  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  for  1869,  while
is  conclusions  on  many  points  of  geology  are  em-
bodied in  his  address  delivered  as  retiring  presi-
dent before  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science  at  Indianapolis  in  1871. He
was  the  first  to  make  known  the  deposits  of  phos-
phates of  lime  in  Canada,  and  to  call  attention  to
its  commercial  value  as  a  fertilizer. The  chemical
and  geological  relations  of  petroleum  have  been
carefully  investigated  by  him.  and  he  has  studied
in  detail  the  salt  deposits  of  Ontario. During  the
later  years  of  his  connection  with  the  geological
survey  of  Canada,  its  administrative  details  were
under  his  charge. During  1875-'6  he  was  con-
nected with  the  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1859  he  invented  a  permanent  green  ink,  which
has  been  very  extensively  used,  and  gave  the  name
of  "greenback"  currency  to  the  bills  which  were
printed  with  it. He  is  a  popular  speaker  on  scien-  I
tine  subjects, and has  delivered  two  courses  of
lectures  before  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston. He  i
served  on  juries  at  the  world's  fair  in  Paris  in  1855
and  in  1867,  being  made  an  officer  of  the  legion  j
of  honor  on  the  latter  occasion,  and  was  also  one  of  |
the  judges  at  the  world's  fair  in  Philadelphia  in
1876. The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given  to  him  bv
McGill  in  1857,  that  of  Sc.  D.  by  Laval  in  1858.  '
and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Cambridge, England,  in
1881. He  is  a  member  of  many  societies,  and.  be-
sides having  held  the  presidency  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1871.
has  filled  a  like  office  in  the  American  institute  of  j
mining  engineers  in  1877,  in  the  American  chemi-  i
•cal  society  in  1880,  and  in  the  Royal  society  of
Canada  in  1884. In  1876  he  organized,  in  concert
with  American  and  European  geologists,  the  Inter-  j
national  geological  congress,  and  was  made  secre-
tary at  its  first  meeting,  held  in  Paris  in  1878,  and  I
vice-president  at  the  meeting  held  in  Bologna.  Italy,
in  1881. He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences  in  1873,  and  in  1859  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  society  of  London. His  bibliography
includes  upward  of  200  titles  of  separate  papers
that  have  appeared  in  reports  of  the  geological


survey  of  Canada,  the  transactions  of  learned  so-
cieties, and  scientific  periodicals.  He  has  published
in  book-form  "Chemical  and  Geological  Essays"
(Boston,  1874);  "Azoic  Rocks"  (Philadelphia,
1878) ;  "  Mineral  Physiologv  and  Phvsiography  "
(Boston,  1886);  "A  New  Basis  for  Chemistry"
(1887) ;  and  has  in  preparation  (1887)  "  Mineralogy
according  to  a  Natural  System."

HUNT,  Timothy  Atwater,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1805 ;  d.  there,  21  Jan.,  1884.
He  was  educated  at  Yale,  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman in  1825,  became  lieutenant  in  1836,  com-
mander in  1855,  captain  in  1862,  commodore  in
1863,  and  was  retired  in  1877.  He  commanded
the  -supply  ship  "  Electra  "  in  the  Mexican  war,  the
"  Narragansett "  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,
in  1861,  and  was  then  attached  to  the  Pacific
squadron.  He  was  ordered  home  in  1863,  and
was  inspector  of  ordnance  till  1867,  when  he  was
assigned  to  special  duty  at  New  London,  Conn.
From  1870  till  his  retirement  he  was  on  the  re-
served list,  residing  in  New  Haven.  Conn.

HUNT,  Ward,  jurist,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  14
June,  1810;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  24  March,
1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1828,  studied
law  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  practised  his  profes-
sion for  many  years  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was
mayor  in  1844.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York
legislature  in  1839,  but  took  little  interest  in  poli-
tics, and  devoted  himself  to  jurisprudence.  In
1865  he  was  elected  to  the  New  York  court  of  ap-
peals, and  in  1872  he  was  appointed  associate  jus-
tice of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  For  the  next  few
years  he  was  allotted  to  the  second  circuit,  includ-
ing New  York,  Connecticut,  and  Vermont.  The
failure  of  his  health  induced  congress  in  1882  to
grant  his  retirement  on  a  pension.  Union  and
Rutgers  colleges  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.

HUNT,  Washington,  governor  of  New  York,
b.  in  Windham,  N.  Y.,  5  Aug.,  1811;  d.  in  New
York  city,  2  Feb.,  1867.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  began  to  study  law  at  the  age  of
eighteen,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1834  at
Lockport,  N.  Y.,  where  he  began  practice.  In  1836
he  was  appointed  first  judge  of  Niagara  county.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig  in  1842,  and
twice  re-elected,  serving  from  4  Dec,  1843,  to  3
March,  1849.  In  1849  he  was  elected  comptroller
of  the  state,  and  in  1850  was  chosen  governor,
defeating  Horatio  Seymour,  the  Democratic  candi-
date. In  1852  he  was  again  a  candidate  for  the
governorship,  but  was  beaten  by  Seymour.  He
then  retired  to  his  farm  near  Lockport.  In  1856
he  was  temporary  chairman  of  the  Whig  national
convention,  which  was  the  last  one  ever  held.
After  the  dissolution  of  the  party  he  became  a
Democrat,  and  in  1860  was  tendered  the  Demo-
cratic nomination  for  vice-president  of  the  United
States,  but  declined.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Chicago  convention  in  1864,  and  to  the  National
union  convention  of  1866.  Mr.  Hunt  was  promi-
nent in  the  counsels  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and  a  frequent  delegate  to  its  conven-
tions.-'-His  brother,  Edward  Bissell,  military
engineer,  b.  in  Livingston  county,  N.  Y.,  15  June,
1822 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  2  Oct.",  1863.  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,  entered
the  corps  of  engineers,  was  commissioned  as  2d
lieutenant  in  December,  1845.  and  was  employed  as
assistant  professor  of  civil  and  military  engineering
at  West  Point  in  1846-'9,  afterward  in  the  coast
survey,  and  in  the  construction  of  fortifications
and  lighthouses.  He  became  a  captain  on  1  July,
1859,  while  engaged  in  the  construction  of  defensive
works  at  Key  West,  and  was  instrumental  in  pre-


320


HUNT


HUNT


venting  the  forts  of  southern  Florida  from  falling
into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war.  In  1862  he  served  as  chief
engineer  of  the  department  of  the  Shenandoah.
He  was  subsequently  employed  in  erecting  fortifi-
cations on  Long  Island  sound,  and  in  April,  1862,
was  detailed  to  perfect  and  construct  a  battery  for
firing  under  water,  which  was  invented  by  him,  and
which  he  called  the  "sea  miner."  He  was  pro-
moted major  on  3  March,  1863.  While  making
experiments  with  his  submarine  battery,  he  was
suffocated  by  the  escaping  gases,  and  killed  by
falling:  into  the  hold  of  the  vessel.  He  married  a
daughter  of  Prof.  Nathan  W.  Fiske.  (See  Jackson,
Helen  Maria  Fiske.)  He  contributed  papers  to
the  "Transactions"  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  to  several
literary  and  scientific  periodicals.

HUNT,  William,  surgeon,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  26  Sept.,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  studied  medicine,  and
graduated  in  1849.  He  has  since  devoted  him-
self largely  to  surgery,  in  the  practice  of  which
he  has  attained  eminence.  He  has  been  demon-
strator of  anatomy  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  surgeon  of  the  Episcopal  and  Wills
hospitals,  and  is  now  (1887)  surgeon  of  the  Ortho-
pedic and  Pennsylvania  hospitals.  He  is  a  fellow
of  the  College  of  physicians  and  a  member  of  nu-
merous other  medical  organizations.  Dr.  Hunt  is
joint  author  of  "  Surgery  in  the  Pennsylvania  Hos-
pital, being  an  Epitome  of  the  Hospital  since
1756  "  (Philadelphia,  1880).

HUNT,  William  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  in  1824 ;  d.  in  St.  Petersburg,  Russia,
27  Feb.,  1884.  He  was  educated  at  Yale,  but  not
graduated,  removed  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  was

admitted  to  the  bar,
and  for  several
years  was  professor
of  commercial  law
and  the  law  of  evi-
dence in  the  law-
school  of  that  city.
He  took  little  part
in  politics,  but  was
a  consistent  Union-
ist throughout  the
civil  war.  In  March,
1876,  he  was  ap-
pointed attorney-
general  of  the  state,
and  in  the  same
year  was  the  Repub-
lican candidate  for
this  office.  Both  parties  claimed  the  victory  in  the
election,  but  the  Democratic  state  government  was
recognized  by  President  Hayes.  In  1878  he  was
appointed  judge  of  the  court  of  claims,  and  in
1881  he  became  secretary  of  the  navy.  Previous
to  his  nomination  to  this  office,  the  bar  of  Louisi-
ana, without  respect  to  party,  had  unanimously
recommended  Mr.  Hunt  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  retirement  of  Justice  Strong  from  the  su-
preme court  of  the  United  States.  The  reorgani-
zation of  the  cabinet  on  the  death  of  President
Garfield  retired  him  from  his  office,  and  in  1882
he  was  appointed  minister  to  Russia. — His  elder
brother,  Randall,  was  among  the  most  eminent
lawyers  at  the  Louisiana  bar,  ranking  with  Chris-
tian Roselius  and  Judah  P.  Benjamin.

HUNT,  William  Morris,  artist,  b.  in  Brattle-
boro,  Vt.,  31  March,  1824 ;  d.  in  Appledore,  Isles
of  Shoals,  N.  H.,  8  Sept.,  1879.  He  entered  Har-
vard in 1840,  but  left on  account  of  impaired


/>v i*sijL**-^f*-im*v6^


health  and  went  to  Europe.  His  first  aspirations
for  art  were  in  the  direction  of  sculpture,  and  he
entered  the  Royal  academy  at  Dusseldorf  in  1846,
with  that  purpose  in  view.  But  after  a  few
months  this  taste  gave  place  to  a  preference  for
painting,  and  he  became  a  pupil  of  Couture  at
Paris,  subsequently  coming  under  the  influence  of
Millet  and  Barbizan,  whose  broad  method  of  ren-
dering humanity  and  nature  was  henceforth  sug-
gested in  the  style  of  Hunt.  In  1855  he  returned
to  the  United  States  and  had  a  studio  in  Newport,
but  soon  settled  permanently  in  Boston,  where  he
taught  art  with  great  success.  He  exercised  much
influence  in  shaping  the  future  of  American  art,
partly  by  leading  his  students  to  the  study  of  the
new  art  methods  that  were  practised  at  Paris,  and
partly  by  aiding  in  the  introduction  here  of  a  more
clear  perception  of  the  principles  of  art.  Among
his  important  works  are  portraits  of  Chief-Justice
Shaw,  painted  for  the  Essex  bar,  Judge  Horace
Gray,  Mrs.  Charles  Francis  Adams,  William  M.
Evarts.  James  Freeman  Clarke,  and  Charles  Sum-
ner. His  compositions,  generally  single  figures
broadly  and  forcibly  rendered,  include  the  "  Prodi-
gal Son,"  "  Priscilla,"  "  The  Drummer  Boy  "  (1861) ;
"  Fortune  Teller,"  "  Marguerite,"  and  "  The
Bathers,"  which  is  one  of  his  best  known  works.
Chief  among  his  landscapes  are  "  Gloucester  Har-
bor "  and  "  Plowing,"  combining  landscape  and
figure.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  Mr.  Hunt  exe-
cuted two  ambitious  allegorical  mural  paintings
for  the  state  capitol  at  Albany,  entitled  "The
Flight  of  Night"  and  "The  Discoverer."  His
"  Talks  on  Art "  were  taken  down  and  published
by  one  of  his  pupils,  Miss  Helen  M.  Knowlton  (2
vols.,  Boston,  1875). — His  brother,  Richard  Mor-
ris, architect,  b.  in  Brattleboro,  Vt.,  31  Oct.,  1828,
after  studying
architecture  in
this  country,  en-
tered the  Ecole
des  beaux  arts
in  Paris, and  was
for  some  time  a
pupil  of  Hector
Lefuel,whomhe
assisted  in  erect-
ing the  build-
ings connect-
ing the  Tuileries
and  the  Louvre.
After  visiting
Greece,  Asia  Mi-
nor, Egypt,  and
the  art  centres  of
thecontinent.he
returned  to  the
United  States  in
1855,  and  was
engaged  on  the
extension  of  the
capitol  at  Wash-
ington. Among
the  structures
designed  by  him
are  the  Lenox  li-
brary, the  Pres-
byterian hospi-
tal, the  Tribune
building,  the
William  K.Van-
derbilt house,

and  the  Central  park  entrances  in  New  York ;  the
theological  library  and  Marquand  chapel  at  Prince-
ton ;  the  divinity  colleges  and  the  Scroll  and  key


;


HUNTER


HUNTER


321


society  building  at  Yale :  the  Vanderbilt  mausoleum
on  Staten  island ;  the  Yorktown  monument,  Vir-
ginia ;  and  the  pedestal  of  the  statue  of  Liberty  on
Bedlow's  island,  New  York  harbor.  He  is  a  member
of  various  associations  of  architects,  and  was  made
a  chevalier  of  the  Legion  of  honor  in  1884.  The
illustration  on  page  320  represents  the  Yorktown
monument  erected  by  the  U.  S.  government  in  1881.
HUNTER,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1752 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  24  Feb.,  1823.
He  was  the  son  of  a  British  officer,  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  first  presbytery  of  Philadelphia  in
1773,  and  immediately  afterward  made  a  mission-
ary tour  through  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania.  He
was  appointed  a  brigade  chaplain  in  1775,  and
served  throughout  the  Revolution,  receiving  the
public  thanks  of  Gen.  Washington  for  valuable
aid  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth. In  1794  he  was

Crincipal  of  a  school  near  Trenton,  N.  J.  In  1804
e  was  elected  professor  of  mathematics  and  as-
tronomy in  Princeton,  but  resigned  in  1808.  to
take  charge  of  the  Bordentown  academy,  and  in
1810  became  a  chaplain  in  the  navy.  He  married
a  daughter  of  Richard  Stockton,  the  signer. — His
son,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  21
July,  1802;  d.  there,  2  Feb.,  1886.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1822,  ap-
pointed 2d  lieutenant  in  the  5th  infantry,  promoted
1st  lieutenant  in  1828,  and  became  a  captain  in  the
1st  dragoons  in  1833.  He  was  assigned  to  frontier
duty,  and  twice  crossed  the  plains  to  the  Rocky
mountains.  He  resigned  his  commission  in  1836,
and  engaged  in  business  in  Chicago.  He  re-entered
the  military  service  as  a  paymaster,  with  the  rank
of  major,  in  March.  1842,  was  chief  paymaster  of
Gen.  John  E.  Wool's  command  in  the  Mexican
war,  and  was  afterward  stationed  successively  at
New  Orleans,  Washington,  Detroit,  St.  Louis,  and
on  the  frontier.  He  accompanied  President-elect
Lincoln  when  he  set  out  from  Springfield  for
Washington  in  February,  1861,  but  at  Buffalo
was  disabled  by  the  pressure  of  the  crowd,  his
collar-bone  being  dislocated.  On  14  May  he  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  6th  U.  S.  cavalry,  and
three  days  later  was  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers.  He  commanded  the  main  col-
umn of  McDowell's  army  in  the  Manassas  cam-
paign, and  was  severely  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  21
July,  1861.  He  was  made  a  major-general  of  vol-
unteers, 13  Aug.,  1861,  served  under  Gen.  Fremont
in  Missouri,  and  on  2  Nov.  succeeded  him  in  the
command  of  the  western  department.  From  20
Nov.,  1861,  till  11  March,  1862,  he  commanded  the
Department  of  Kansas.  Under  date  of  19  Feb.,
1862,  Gen.  Halleck  wrote  to  him :  "  To  you,  more
than  any  other  man  out  of  this  department,  are
we  indebted  for  our  success  at  Fort  Donelson.  In
my  strait  for  troops  to  reenforce  Gen.  Grant,  I  ap-
plied to  you.  You  responded  nobly,  placing  your
forces  at  my  disposition.  This  enabled  us  to  win
the  victory."  In  March,  1862,  Gen.  Hunter  was
transferred  to  the  Department  of  the  South,  with
headquarters  at  Port  Royal,  S.  C.  On  12  April  he
issued  a  general  order  in  which  he  said :  "  All  per-
sons of  color  lately  held  to  involuntary  service  by
enemies  of  the  United  States,  in  Fort  Pulaski  and
on  Cockspur  island,  Ga.,  are  hereby  confiscated  and
declared  free  in  conformity  with  law,  and  shall
hereafter  receive  the  fruits  of  their  own  labor."
On  9  May,  in  general  orders  declaring  Georgia,
Florida,  and  South  Carolina  (his  department)  un-
der martial  law,  he  added,  "  Slavery  and  martial
law,  in  a  free  country',  are  altogether  incompatible.
The  persons  in  these  three  states,  heretofore  held
as  slaves,  are  therefore  declared  forever  free." Ten

VOL. III. — 21


cQ^£,


days  later  this  order  was  annulled  by  the  president.
(See  Lincoln,  Abraham.)  In  May  Gen.  Hunter
organized  an  expedition  against  Charleston,  in
which  over  3,000
men  were  landed  on
James  island,  but  it
was  unsuccessful.
Later  he  raised  and
organized  the  1st
South  Carolina  vol-
unteers, the  first
regiment  of  black
troops  in  the  Na-
tional service.
Thereupon  a  Ken-
tucky representa-
tive introduced  in-
to congress  a  reso-
lution calling  for
information  on  the
subject.  This  be-
ing referred  to  Gen.
Hunter  by  the  secretary  of  war,  the  general  answered:
"  No  regiment  of  fugitive  slaves  has  been  or  is  be-
ing organized  in  this  department.  There  is,  how-
ever, a  fine  regiment  of  persons  whose  late  masters
are  fugitive  rebels — men  who  everywhere  fly  before
the  appearance  of  the  National  flag,  leaving  their
servants  behind  them  to  shift,  as  best  they  can,  for
themselves."  In  August  Jefferson  Davis  issued  a
proclamation  to  the  effect  that,  if  Gen.  Hunter  or
any  other  U.  S.  officer  who  had  been  drilling  and
instructing  slaves  as  soldiers  should  be  captured,
he  should  not  be  treated  as  a  prisoner  of  war.  but
held  in  close  confinement  for  execution  as  a  felon.
In  September  Gen.  Hunter  was  ordered  to  Wash-
ington and  made  president  of  a  court  of  inquiry,
to  investigate  the  causes  of  the  surrender  of  Har-
per's Ferry,  and  other  matters.  In  May,  1864.  he
was  placed  in  command  of  the  Department  of  West
Virginia.  He  defeated  a  Confederate  force  at
Piedmont  on  5  June,  and  attacked  Lynchburg  un-
successfully on  the  18th.  From  8  Aug.,  1864.  till
1  Feb.,  1865,  he  was  on  leave  of  absence,  after
which  he  served  on  courts-martial,  being  president
of  the  commission  that  tried  the  persons  who  con-
spired for  the  assassination  of  President  Lincoln.
He  was  brevetted  major-general  U.  S.  army,  13
March,  1865,  and  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer
service  in  January,  1866,  after  which  he  was  presi-
dent of  a  special-claims  commission  and  of  a  board
for  the  examination  of  cavalry  officers.  He  was
retired  from  active  service,  by  reason  of  his  age,  31
July,  1866,  and  thereafter  resided  in  Washington.
Gen.  Hunter  married  a  daughter  of  John  Kinzie,
who  was  the  first  permanent  citizen  of  Chicago.
Mrs.  Hunter  survived  her  husband. — Another  son,
Lewis  Boudinot,  surgeon,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
9  Oct.,  1804;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24  June,  1887,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1824,  and  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1828.  He  then  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as
a  surgeon,  and  was  on  the  "  Princeton"  when  the
secretary  of  state  and  the  secretary  of  the  navy
were  killed  by  the  bursting  of  a  gun  in  1843.
He  served  during  the  Mexican  war  on  the  "  Sara-
toga." and  during  the  civil  war  as  fleet-surgeon  of
the  North  Atlantic  squadron  under  Admiral  Por-
ter. On  3  March,  1871,  he  was  made  medical  direc-
tor, with  the  rank  of  commodore,  and  retired.

HUNTER,  John,  senator,  b.  in  South  Carolina
about  1760.  He  received  an  academic  education,
engaged  in  agriculture,  and  in  1792  was  elected  to
congress,  serving  till  1795.  He  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  South  Carolina  in  1796,  in  place  of


322


HUNTER


HUNTER


Pierce  Butler,  who  had  resigned,  and  served  from
February,  1797,  till  1798,  when  he  resigned.

HUNTER,  John  Dunn,  adventurer,  b.  in  a  set-
tlement west  of  the  Mississippi  about  1798  ;  d.  near
Nacogdoches,  Tex.,  early  in  1827.  According  to
his  own  narrative  he  was  made  captive  by  the
Kickapoo  Indians  when  an  infant,  and  adopted  into
the  family  of  one  of  the  principal  warriors.  He
afterward  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  party  of  Kansas
Indians,  and  was  finally  received  among  the  Osages,
where  he  was  adopted  for  the  third  time.  He  was
dangerously  wounded  in  an  engagement  with  the
Cams,  and  before  he  had  recovered  was  taken  by  the
Osages  across  the  Rocky  mountains  into  the  valley
of  Columbia  river,  and  up  to  its  mouth.  After  travel-
ling southward  toward  the  affluents  of  the  Rio  del
Norte,  and  receiving  from  the  Indians  the  name
of  the  "  Hunter,"  on  account  of  his  skill  in  the
chase,  he  went  with  them  toward  the  affluents  of
the  Mississippi,  meeting  traders  often  by  the  way.
The  treacherous  conduct  of  his  companions  toward
the  latter  disgusted  Hunter,  and,  after  several  ex-
citing incidents  and  some  internal  struggles,  he  de-
termined in  1817  to  cast  his  lot  with  the  whites.
He  managed  to  reach  New  Orleans,  and,  after  real-
izing a  considerable  sum  by  the  sale  of  the  furs  that
he  possessed,  he  attended  the  schools  of  the  city
and  learned  the  English  language.  Here  he  as-
sumed the  name  that  the  Indians  had  given  him.
He  was  in  Kentucky  in  1821,  pursuing  his  studies,
and  afterward,  by  the  advice  and  help  of  friends,
visited  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  New  York,  and
other  cities.  He  was  pressed  on  all  sides  to  pub-
lish a  narrative  of  his  life  among  the  Indians,  and
was  assisted  by  Edward  Clarke  in  the  composition
of  his  work,  which  appeared  in  1823,  and  was  re-
ceived with  much  favor.  Its  success,  however,  was
checked  soon  afterward.  Duponceau,  a  French-
man living  in  Philadelphia,  who  had  long  been  en-
gaged in  researches  on  the  idioms  of  the  American
Indians,  met  Hunter,  and,  after  several  conversa-
tions with  him,  became  convinced  that  he  was  an
"  impostor,  and  entirely  ignorant  of  the  language
he  claimed  to  know."  He  told  Hunter  so,  and
published  his  opinion.  The  statement  of  Dupon-
ceau first  met  with  little  belief,  but  it  was  sup-
ported by  some  of  those  who  had  formed  part  of
the  expedition  to  the  Rocky  mountains  of  Maj.
Stephen  H.  Long  in  1819-20.  Hunter  now  em-
barked for  England,  where  he  met  with  a  flattering
reception.  The  Royal  society  believed  him  a  man
that  had  been  specially  raised  by  Providence  to
carry  the  benefits  of  intellectual  training  to  the
Indians,  and  he  pointed  out  the  means  of  arriving
at  this  end  in  the  preface  to  the  English  reprint  of
his  book.  After  receiving  many  valuable  gifts,
and  being  presented  to  the  royal  family,  he  returned
to  the  United  States,  where  he  met  with  a  renewal
of  the  charges  against  him.  In  the  "  North  Ameri-
can Review "  he  was  denounced  in  an  article  by
Gen.  Cass  as  "  one  of  the  boldest  impostors  that
had  appeared  in  the  literary  world  since  the  days
of  Psalmanazar,"  and  at  the  same  time  the  author
of  the  article  accumulated  a  mass  of  irresistible
proofs  against  him.  Hunter  made  no  attempt  to
refute  these  charges.  He  went  to  Mexico  and  en-
deavored to  obtain  from  the  government  of  that
country  the  grant  of  an  immense  territory  on
which  he  proposed  to  settle  a  colony  of  Indians.
He  assured  the  Mexicans  that  he  would  thus  form
a  rampart  on  their  frontiers  that  would  be  capable
of  resisting  every  encroachment  on  the  part  of  the
United  States.  His  proposal  was  rejected,  and  he
went  to  Texas,  where  he  became  one  of  the  chiefs
of  the  party  that  was  trying  to  secure  its  independ-


ence. After  an  unsuccessful  attempt  at  a  revolu-
tion, he  was  killed  by  an  Indian  whom  he  had  per-
suaded to  join  in  ir.  Hunter's  work  is  entitled
"Manners  and  Customs  of  Several  Indian  Tribes
located  West  of  the  Mississippi"  (Philadelphia,
1823 ;  reprinted  in  London  the  same  year,  under
the  title  "  Memoirs  of  a  Captivity  among  the  In-
dians of  North  America,  from  Childhood  to  the  Age
of  Nineteen  ").  It  was  translated  into  German  by
Wilhelm  A.  Lindau  (Dresden,  1824),  and  also  into
Swedish  (Mariefred,  1826).

HUNTER,  John  Howard,  Canadian  educator,
b.  in  Bandon,  Ireland,  22  Dec,  1839.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Queen's  university,  Ireland,  and  at  Toronto
university,  Canada,  where  he  received  the  degree  of
M.  A.  in  1861.  He  was  appointed  rector  of  St.
Catherine's  collegiate  institute  in  1871,  principal
of  the  Ontario  institute  for  the  blind  in  1874,  and
inspector  of  insurance  for  Ontario  in  1881.  He
has  written  much  for  magazines,  and  is  the  author
of  "Upper  Canada  College  Question"  (Toronto,
1868),  and  "  Manual  of  Insurance  Law  "  (1881).

HUNTER,  John  Ward,  congressman,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  15  Oct.,  1807.  He  was  educated
in  the  common  schools  of  Brooklyn,  engaged  in
business,  and  in  1836-'65  was  assistant  auditor
in  the  custom-house.  In  1866  he  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican,  to  fill  out  the  unexpired
term  of  James  Humphrey,  deceased,  serving  from
December,  1866,  till  March,  1867.  He  was  mayor
of  Brooklyn  in  1875-'6,  but  since  that  time  has
occupied  no  official  position.

HUNTER,  Joseph,  British  author,  b.  in  Shef-
field, England,  6  Feb.,  1783 :  d.  in  London,  9  May,
1861.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at
Bath  from  1809  till  1833,  and  from  the  latter  date
till  his  death  was  assistant  keeper  of  the  public
records  in  London.  His  "  Founders  of  New  Plym-
outh," published  first  as  a  pamphlet,  and  after-
ward in  the  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Collections,"
was  subsequently  enlarged  (London,  1854).  He
was  also  instrumental  in  procuring  for  the  Histori-
cal society  a  transcript  of  the  "  History  of  the
Plymouth  Plantation,  by  Gov.  Bradford,  from  the
original  in  the  Fulham  library.  He  was  the
author  of  other  works,  among  them  illustrations  of
the  texts  of  Shakespeare's  plavs.

HUNTER,  Sir  Martin,  British  soldier,  b.  in
1757 ;  d.  at  Ontario  Hill,  Canada,  9  Dec,  1846.  He
entered  the  army,  30  Aug.,  1771,  became  lieutenant,
18  June,  1775,  the  day  following  the  battle  of
Bunker  Hill;  captain,  21  Nov.,  1777;  colonel  in
1800;  and  general,  27  May,  1825.  He  was  at
Bunker  Hill,  Brooklyn,  and  Brandywine,  in  the
storming  of  Fort  Washington,  and  in  the  night
attack  on  Gen.  Wayne's  brigade,  in  which  he  was
wounded.  He  served  afterward  in  the  East  Indies,
and  in  1797  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  capture
of  Trinidad  and  the  siege  of  Porto  Rico.  Subse-
quently he  was  commander-in-chief  at  Halifax,
and  governor  of  New  Brunswick

HUNTER,  Morton  Craig,  soldier,  b.  in  Ver-
sailles, Ind.,  5  Feb.,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at
the  law  department  of  Indiana  university  in  1849,
and  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature  of  that
state  in  1858.  He  was  colonel  of  the  82d  regi-
ment of  Indiana  infantry  in  the  civil  war,  until
the  fall  of  Atlanta.  He  then  commanded  a  bri-
gade in  the  14th  army  corps  till  the  end  of  the
war,  taking  part  in  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea.
He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
13  March,  1865,  and  was  afterward  elected  to  con-
gress from  Indiana  as  a  Republican,  serving  from
4  March,  1867,  till  3  March,  1869,  and  again  from
1  Dec,  1873,  till  4  March,  1879.


HUNTER


HUNTER


323


HUNTER,  Peter,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Scotland
in  1746  ;  d.  in  Quebec,  21  Aug.,  1805.  He  entered
the  army,  and  had  attained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
general,"  when  he  was  appointed  in  1799  to  admin-
ister the  government  of  Upper  Canada,  succeeding
Lord  Simcoe,  and  made  commander-in-chief  of  the
forces  in  Canada.  He  was  eminently  successful  in
his  administration,  and  to  his  policy  Canada  is
indebted  for  many  benefits  that  probably  it  would
otherwise  never  have  known.  His  brother  John
(not  the  celebrated  anatomist)  erected  a  monument
to  him  in  the  English  cathedral  of  Quebec.

HUNTER,  Robert,  colonial  governor,  d.  in
Jamaica,  11  March,  1734.  He  entered  the  British
army,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major-general.  He
was  appointed  governor  of  Virginia  in  1707,  but
while  on  the  voyage  was  captured  by  a  French
privateer,  and  retained  a  captive  till  the  end  of
1709.  In  June,  1710,  he  became  governor  of  New
York  and  the  Jerseys,  at  the  head  of  2,000  Pala-
tine colonists.  He  was  one  of  the  ablest  of  the
series  of  royal  governors,  but  had  frequent  dis-
putes with  the  assembly,  which  almost  invariably
refused  to  grant  the  required  appropriations.  He
retired  from  the  governorship  of  New  York  in
1719,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  Jamaica  in
July,  1727,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death.  He
was  the  author  of  the  famous  letter  on  "  Enthu-
siasm," which  was  attributed  by  some  to  Swift
and  by  others  to  Shaftesbury,  and  was  also  the
reputed  author  of  a  farce  called  "  Androboros."

HUNTER,  Robert  Mercer  Taliaferro,  states-
man, b.  in  Essex  county,  Va.,  21  April,  1809;  d.
there,  18  July,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia,  studied  at  the  Winchester,  Va.,
law-school,  and  be-
gan practice  in  1830.
After  serving  in  the
Virginia  legislature
in  1833,  he  was  elect-
ed to  congress  as  a
Democrat  in  1836  and
1838,  and  in  1839
chosen  speaker  of  the
house  of  representa-
tives. He  was  de-
feated in  1842,  re-
elected in  1844.  and
in  1846  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator,  taking
his  seat  in  December,
x-j  . ,  .  _ 1847. Meanwhile  he

7f  -4t<—  *f  M-^-^^c^,  hore  a  conspicuous
'  part  in  the  political
discussions  of  the  day.  He  favored  the  annexation
of  Texas  and  the  compromise  of  the  Oregon  ques-
tion, took  an  active  part  in  favor  of  the  retrocession
of  the  city  of  Alexandria  by  the  general  govern-
ment to  Virginia,  supported  the  tariff  bill  of  1846,
originated  the  warehouse  svstem,  and  opposed  the
Wilmot  proviso.  From  1847  till  1861  he  was  U.  S.
senator.  He  voted  for  the  extension  of  the  Missouri
compromise  line  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  opposed  the
abolition  of  the  slave-trade  in  the  District  of  Co-
lumbia or  any  interference  with  that  institution  in
the  states  and  territories,  opposed  the  admission  of
California,  and  supported  the  fugitive-slave  law.
As  chairman  of  the  finance  committee,  he  made  an
■elaborate  report  on  the  gold  and  silver  coinage  of
the  country,  and  proposed  the  reduction  of  the
value  of  the  silver  coins  of  fifty  cents  and  less,  by
which  shipment  to  foreign  countries  was  assisted.
In  the  presidential  canvass  of  1852  he  delivered
an  address  in  Richmond,  Va.,  urging  the  sound-
ness of  the  state-rights  policy. He  advocated  the


bill  of  1855,  forbidding  the  use  of  the  army  to  en-
force the  acts  of  the  pro-slavery  Kansas  legislature,
and  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  pro-slavery  law,
which  declared  the  death  penalty  for  nearly  fifty
slavery  offences.  Mr.  Hunter  framed  the  tariff
act  of  1857,  by  which  the  duties  were  considerably
lowered,  and  the  revenue  reduced.  In  the  session
of  1857-8  he  advocated  the  admission  of  Kansas
under  the  Lecompton  constitution  with  slavery.
In  1860  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  Democratic  nom-
ination for  president,  receiving  upon  several  ballots
in  the  Charleston  convention  the  next  highest  vote
to  that  for  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  and  in  January  of
this  year  made  an  elaborate  speech  in  the  senate
in  favor  of  slavery  and  the  right  of  the  slave-holder
to  carry  his  slaves  into  the  territories.  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  secession  movement,  and  in
July,  1861,  was  formally  expelled  from  the  senate.
He  was  a  member  of  the  provisional  Confederate
congress,  and  according  to  the  original  scheme  he
was  to  have  been  president  of  the  new  government,
with  Jefferson  Davis  as  commander-in-chief  of  the
army.  He  was  for  a  short  time  Confederate  secre-
tary of  state,  and  afterward  was  elected  to  the  senate,
in  opposition  to  the  administration  of  Mr.  Davis.  In
February,  1865,  he  was  one  of  the  peace  commission-
ers that  met  President  Lincoln  and  William  H.  Sew-
ard upon  a  vessel  in  Hampden  Roads.  The  confer-
ence was  futile,  as  Mr.  Lincoln  refused  to  recognize
the  independence  of  the  Confederacy.  Hunter  then
presided  over  a  war  meeting  in  Richmond,  at  which
resolutions  were  passed  that  the  Confederates
would  never  lay  down  their  arms  till  they  should
have  achieved  their  independence.  When  a  bill
came  before  the  Confederate  congress,  shortly
afterward,  freeing  such  negroes  as  should  serve  in
the  Confederate  army,  Mr.  Hunter  at  first  opposed
it,  but,  having  been  instructed  by  the  Virginia
legislature  to  vote  in  its  favor,  did  so,  accompany-
ing his  vote  with  an  emphatic  protest.  At  the
ciose  of  the  war  he  was  arrested,  but  was  released
on  parole,  and  in  1867  was  pardoned  by  President
Johnson.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for
U.  S.  senator  in  1874,  became  treasurer  of  Virginia
in  1877,  and  in  1880  retired  to  the  farm  in  Essex
county,  Va.  A  few  months  previous  to  his  death
he  was  appointed  collector  at  Tappannock,  Va.

HUNTER,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  26  Nov.,  1774:  d.  there.  3  Dec,  1849.  His
father,  Dr.  William  Hunter,  a  physician  of  Scottish
birth,  gave  in  Newport  in  1754-'6  the  first  lectures
on  anatomy  that  were  delivered  in  New  England,
and  probably  in  the  United  States.  The  son  studied
medicine  with  his  kinsman.  John  Hunter,  in  Eng-
land, but,  abandoning  it  for  law.  read  in  the  Tem-
ple, and  on  his  return  to  the  United  States  in  1795
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Newport,  R.  I.  From
1799  till  1811  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  to
fill  out  the  term  of  Christopher  G.  Champlin.  He
was  re-elected,  and  served  till  1821  with  success  as
a  statesman  and  orator,  his  speeches  on  the  acqui-
sition of  Florida  and  the  Missouri  compromise
giving  him  a  wide  reputation.  Resuming  his  pro-
fession at  Newport,  he  practised  till  1834.  when  he
was  commissioned  charge  d'affaires  in  Brazil,  be-
coming minister  plenipotentiary  in  1841,  and  serv-
ing till  1843.  Returning  to  Newport  at  the  con-
clusion of  his  service,  he  resided  there  till  his
death. — His  son,  William,  diplomatist,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  8  Nov.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
22  July,  1886.  entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
but  left  it  in  two  years  on  account  of  trouble  with
his  eyes.  He  then  studied  law,  and  practised  in
|  New  Orleans,  La.,  and  Providence,  R.  I.,  till  1829.


324


HUNTINGTON


HUNTINGTON


when  he  accepted  a  clerkship  in  the  state  depart-
ment at  Washington.  He  remained  in  the  govern-
ment service  till  his  death,  when  he  held  the  office
of  second  assistant  secretary  of  state,  to  which  he
had  been  appointed  in  1866  by  special  act  of  con-
gress. His  thorough  familiarity  with  all  branches
of  our  foreign  relations  rendered  him  one  of  the
most  efficient  servants  of  the  government  either  at
home  or  abroad.  His  memory  was  prodigious,  and
he  was  always  able  to  set  forth  clearly  the  thread
of  a  protracted  by-gone  negotiation  or  the  history
of  a  half-forgotten  claim. — Another  son,  Charles,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1813 ;  d.  at
sea,  22  Nov.,  1873,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1831,
was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  in  1841,  and  re-
tired at  his  own  request  in  1855.  When  the  civil
war  began  he  volunteered  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  was
commissioned  commander,  and  assigned  to  the
steamer  "  Montgomery  "  of  the  Gulf  squadron.  In
1862,  while  in  command  of  this  ship,  he  chased  a
British  blockade  runner  into  Cuban  waters,  and
fired  on  her.  This  breach  of  neutrality  was  inves-
tigated, and  Commander  Hunter  was  placed  on
the  retired  list.  In  1866,  by  an  act  of  congress,  he
was  made  captain  on  the  retired  list,  and  he  after-
ward resided  at  Newport,  R.  I.

HUNTINGTON,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  19  April,  1736;  d.  there,  16  Oct.,  1800.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1761,  practised  law
in  Norwich,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  in  1780-'4  and  1787-'8.  In  1789-'91  he
served  in  the  1st  congress  under  the  constitution,
and  in  1781-'91  and  1791-'3  was  state  senator.  In
1793  he  became  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  the
state,  which  office  he  held  till  1798.  From  1784
till  1796  he  was  mayor  of  Norwich.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  in  1782. — His  son,
Benjamin,  b.  in  1777;  d.  3  Aug.,  1850,  was  a
broker  of  New  York  city,  married  the  daughter  of
Gen.  Jedediah  Huntington. — Their  son,  Jedediah
Vincent,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  20  Jan.,
1815  ;  d.  in  Pau,  France,  10  March,  1862,  was
graduated  at  New  York  university  in  1835,  and  in
medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1838.  He  devoted  himself  to  literature,  and  was
professor  of  mental  philosophy  in  St.  Paul's  college,
near  Flushing,  L.  I.,  for  three  years.  He  was  or-
dained in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1841,
and  was  rector  of  a  church  in  Middlebury,  Vt.  In
1846  he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  remained  till
1849,  and  where  he  became  a  Roman  Catholic.  He
edited  the  "  Metropolitan  Magazine  "  in  Baltimore
from  1853  till  1854,  after  which  he  founded  the
"Leader "in  St.  Louis,  and  edited  it  from  1855
till  1857.  He  returned  to  France  in  1861.  He
published  "  Poems  "  (New  York,  1843) ;  "  Lady
Alice,  or  The  New  Una "  (3  vols.,  New  York  and
London,  1849) ;  "  Alban,  or  the  History  of  a  Young
Puritan  "  (1850 ;  2d  ed.,  1853) ;  "The  Pretty  Plate "
(1852);  "The  Forest,"  a  sequel  (1853) ;  "America
Discovered  "  (1853) ; "  Blonde  and  Brunette  "  (1858) ;
and  "Rosemary"  (1860).  Mr.  Huntington  trans-
lated Franchere's  "  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the
Northwest  Coast  of  America  in  1811-14"  (1854);
and  Segur's  "  Short  and  Familiar  Answers  to  Ob-
jections against  Religion"  (1854). — Another  son,
Daniel,  artist,  b.  in  New  York,  14  Oct.,  1816,
studied  at  Hamilton  college,  and  while  there  made
the  acquaintance  of  Charles  L.  Elliott,  from  whom
he  imbibed  a  love  of  art.  In  1835  he  studied
with  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse,  who  was  then  president
of  the  National  academy  of  design,  and  produced
"  The  Bar  -  Room  Politician  "  and  "  A  Toper
Asleep."  In  1836  he  spent  several  months  in  the
highlands  of  the  Hudson,  and  painted  views  near


Verplanck's,  the  Dunderberg  mountain,  and  Ron-
dout  creek  at  twilight  and  sunset.  He  went  to
Europe  in  1839,  and  resided  for  a  time  in  Koine.
On  his  return  to  New  York  he  painted  portraits,
and  began  to  illustrate  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  but
his  eyesight  failed
and  he  returned
to  Europe  in  1844.
In  1846  he  again
returned  to  New
York  and  devoted
himself  chiefly  to
portraits,  although
he  has  executed  a
great  number  of
genre  and  histori-
cal pieces.  He  be-
came an  associate
of  the  National
academy  in  1839,
an  academician  in
1840,  and  its  presi-
dent in  1862,  hold-
ing that  office  un-
til 1869,  and  being
re-elected  in  1877.
His  works  include  "The  Florentine  Girl"  and
"Early  Christian  Prisoners"  (1839);  "The  Shep-
herd Boy  of  the  Campagna  "  (1840) :  "  The  Roman
Penitents  "  (1844) ;  "  Christiana  and  her  Children,"
"  Queen  Mary  signing  the  Death  Warrant  of  Lady
Jane  Grey,"  "  Lady  Jane  Grey  and  Feckenham  in
the  Tower"  (1850);  "Chocorua"  (1860);  "Repub-
lican Court  "  (1861) ;  "  Sowing  the  Word  "  (1869) ;
"  St.  Jerome,"  "  Juliet  on  the  Balcony  "  (1870) ;  "  The
Narrows,  Lake  George  "  (1871) ;  "  Titian,"  "  Clem-
ent VII.  and  Charles  V.  at  Bologna,"  "  Philoso-
phy and  Christian  Art "  (1878; :  and  "  Gold-
smith's Daughter"  (1884).  Among  his  portraits
are  those  of  President  Lincoln  in  the  Union  League
club,  New  York  city;  Chancellor  Ferris,  of  New
York  university;  Sir  Charles  Eastlake,  and  the
Earl  of  Carlisle,  owned  by  the  New  York  historical
society ;  President  Van  Buren,  in  the  State  library
at  Albany ;  James  Lenox,  in  Lenox  library ;  Louis
Agassiz  (1856-'7) ;  William  Cullen  Bryant  (1866) ;
John  A.  Dix  (1880) ;  and  John  Sherman  (1881).

HUNTINGTON,  Collis  Potter,  railroad-build-
er, b.  in  Harwinton,  Litchfield  co..  Conn.,  22  Oct.,
1821.  He  was  educated  in  a  local  school,  secured
his  freedom  from  his  father  when  fourteen  years
old  by  promising  to  support  himself,  and,  engaging
in  mercantile  business,  spent  ten  years  in  travel-
ling through  the  south  and  west,  subsequently
settling  with  an  elder  brother  in  Oneonta,  Otsego
co.,  N.  Y.  In  October,  1848,  the  brothers  made  a
shipment  of  goods  to  California,  which  Collis  fol-
lowed in  March.  After  spending  three  months  in
trading  on  the  isthmus,  he  began  business  in  a  tent
in  Sacramento,  dealing  in  the  various  articles  that
are  required  in  mining  life.  He  afterward  opened  a
large  hardware-store  in  the  city,  became  associated
in  business  with  Mark  Hopkins,  and  in  1860  ma-
tured a  scheme  for  a  transcontinental  railroad,  Le-
land  Stanford,  Charles  Crocker,  and  Mr.  Hopkins
having  united  with  him  in  paying  the  expenses  of
a  survey  across  the  Sierra  Nevada  mountains.
Five  men  organized  the  Central  Pacific  railroad
company,  of  which  Mr.  Stanford  was  elected  presi-
dent, Mr.  Huntington,  vice-president,  and  Mr.
Hopkins,  treasurer.  After  congress  had  agreed  to
aid  the  enterprise  by  an  issue  of  bonds,  Mr.  Hunt-
ington and  his  associates  carried  on  the  construc-
tion of  the  railroad  out  of  their  private  means
until  the  bonds  became  available  by  the  comple-


HUNTINGTON


HUNTINGTON


325


tion  of  a  stipulated  mileage.  In  addition  to  this
undertaking,  Mr.  Huntington  planned  and  per-
fected the  whole  California  railroad  system,  which
extends  over  8.900  miles  of  steel  track,  built  an
Atlantic  system,  which,  by  the  Southern  Pacific
railroad  and  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  railway,
forms  a  continuous  line  4,000  miles  long  from  San
Francisco  to  Newport  News,  and  developed  an
aggregate  of  16.900  miles  of  steam  water-lines,  in-
cluding the  route  to  China  and  Japan.  He  is
president  of  the  Newport  News  and  Mississippi
valley  company,  and  vice-president  of  the  Central
Pacific  and  Southern  Pacific  railroad  companies.
He  resides  in  New  York  city.

HUNTINGTON,  Elisha,  physician,  b.  in  Tops-
field,  Mass.,  9  April,  1796;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  10
Dec,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1815  and  from  Yale  medical  school  in  1823.  He
practised  in  Lowell  with  great  success,  and  was
for  eight  years  mayor  of  that  city.  He  was  lieu-
tenant-governor of  Massachusetts  in  1853,  and  was
at  one  time  president  of  the  Massachusetts  medical
society.  Dr.  Huntington  published  addresses  and
a  "Memoir  of  Prof.  Elisha  Bartlett "  (Lowell,
1856). — His  son,  William  Reed,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lowell,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1838,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1859,  and  was  temporary  instructor  in
chemistry  there  in  1859-'60.  He  then  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  was
assistant  rector  of  Emmanuel  church,  Boston,  in
1861-'2,  rector  of  All  Saints'  church,  Worcester,
Mass.,  in  1862-'83,  and  in  the  latter  year  accepted
a  call  to  Grace  church,  New  York  city.  Columbia
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1873.  He  was
class  poet  at  Harvard  in  1859,  and  Phi  Beta  Kappa
poet  there  in  1870.  Besides  papers  on  liturgical
revision  in  the  United  States,  he  has  published
"  The  Church  Idea,  an  Essav  toward  Unity  "  (New
York,  1870),  and  "  Conditional  Immortality  "  (1878).
Among  his  later  pamphlets  is  "  The  Book  An-
nexed, its  Critics  and  its  Prospects  "  (1886).

HUNTINGTON,  Elisha  Mills,  jurist,  b.  in
Otsego  countv,  N.  Y.,  26  March,  1806 ;  d.  in  St.
Paul,  Minn.,  26  Oct.,  1862.  He  removed  to  Vigo
county,  Ind.,  in  1822,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  that  state.  In  1829  he  was  appointed  by  the
legislature  prosecuting  attorney  of  his  circuit,  and
in  1831  was  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature.
On  leaving  the  legislature  after  two  re-elections.
he  was  chosen  president- judge  of  his  circuit,  and
in  1841  was  appointed  commissioner  of  the  general
land-office  at  Washington.  In  May,  1842,  he  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  for
Indiana,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death.

HUNTINGTON,  Frederick  Dan,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Hadley,  Mass.,  28  May,  1819.  His  father,
Dan  Huntington,  was  a  graduate  and  tutor  of  Yale,
and  had  charge  of  Congregational  churches  in  Con-
necticut, but  subsequently  became  a  Unitarian.
He  published  "Personal  Memoirs"  (1857).  The
son  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1839,  and  at  Har-
vard divinity-school  in  1842.  He  was  then  or-
dained pastor  of  the  South  Congregational  church
in  Boston,  and  in  1855  became  preacher  to  Har-
vard, and  Plummer  professor  of  Christian  morals
in  that  university,  which  post  he  held  till  1860.
He  also  served  as  chaplain  and  preacher  to  the
Massachusetts  legislature.  He  withdrew  from  the
Unitarian  denomination,  and  took  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1860.  He  then  or-
ganized the  Emmanuel  parish  of  Boston,  and  was
its  rector  until  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  cen-
tral New  York,  8  April,  1869.  In  1861  he  estab-
lished with  Dr.  George  M.  Randall  the  "  Church
Monthly." He  has  contributed  to  various  reviews


and  periodicals,  and  published  many  sermons  and
addresses.  Among  these  are  "Sermons  for  the
People "  (Boston,  1836 ;  9th  ed.,  1869) ;  "  Lessons
on  the  Parables  of  our  Saviour  "  (1856) ;  "  Sermons
on  Christian  Living  and  Believing"  (1860);  "  Lec-
tures on  Human  Society  as  illustrating  the  Power,
Wisdom,  and  Goodness  of  God  "  (1860) ;  "  Elim,  or
Hymns  of  Holy  Refreshment "  (1865) ;  "  Lessons
for  the  Instruction  of  Children  in  the  Divine  Life  "
(1868) ;  "  Helps  to  a  Holy  Lent "  (1872) ;  and  "Steps
to  a  Living  Faith"  (1873).  Bishop  Huntington
has  edited  various  works,  including  Archbishop
Whately's  "  Christian  Morals  "  (1856) ;  and  "  Me-
morials' of  a  Quiet  Life  "  (1874).  He  was  chosen
by  the  house  of  bishops  to  write  the  "  Pastoral
Letter,"  and  to  read  the  same  at  the  general  con-
vention of  1883  in  Philadelphia.  Amherst  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1887.

HUNTINGTON,  Jabez,  soldier,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  7  Aug.,  1719 ;  d.  there,  5  Oct.,  1786.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1741,  engaged  in  the  West
India  trade,  and  amassed  a  fortune.  After  1750
he  was  frequently  a  member  of  the  legislature,
speaker  for  several  years,  and  also  a  member  of  the
council.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he
owned  a  large  amount  of  shipping,  and  lost  heavily
by  the  capture  of  his  vessels.  During  the  war  he
was  active  on  the  committee  of  safety,  and  from
September,  1776,  was  major-general  of  militia.  His
great  exertions  in  the  patriot  cause  and  his  heavy
losses  impaired  his  physical  and  mental  powers,  and
he  was  thus  compelled  to  resign  his  employments
in  1779. — His  son,  Jedidiah,  soldier,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  4  Aug.,  1743;  d.  in  New  London,
Conn.,  25  Sept.,  1818,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1763.  He  was  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits
with  his  father,  was  an  active  Son  of  Liberty,  and  a
member  of  the  committee  of  correspondence  that
was  established  at  a  Norwich  town-meeting  on  6
June,  1774.  He  raised  a  regiment  in  which  he  was
made  captain,  joined  the  army  at  Cambridge  on  26
April,  1775.  and  aided  in  repulsing  the  British  at
Danbury  in  April,  1776.  Having  been  appointed
brigadier-general  on  12  May,  1777,  he  joined  the
main  army  near  Philadelphia  in  September  of  that
year,  and  in  May,  1778,  was  ordered  to  Hudson
river.  He  served  in  the  court-martial  that  tried
Gen.  Charles  Lee  for  misconduct  at  Monmouth  in
1778,  and  in  the  court  that  was  summoned  to  ex-
amine John  Andre  in  Tappan  on  29  Sept.,  1780.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  brevetted  major-
general.  He  resumed  his  business,  and  was  succes-
sively sheriff  of  the  county,  state  treasurer,  and
delegate  to  the  convention  that  adopted  the  consti-
tution of  the  United  States.  He  was  then  ap-
pointed by  Washington  to  the  post  of  collector  of
customs  at  New  London,  where  he  removed  in
1789,  and  held  the  office  for  twenty-six  years.  He
was  one  of  the  first  board  of  foreign  missions,  and
a  zealous  supporter  of  charitable  institutions.  His
first  wife,  Faith,  was  a  daughter  of  Gov.  Trumbull,
and  his  second  wife  was  the  sister  of  Bishop  Moore
of  Virginia.  He  entertained  many  distinguished
officers  in  his  house,  among  whom  were  Lafayette,
Steuben,  and  Pulaski.  When  Lauzun's  legion  was
stationed  at  Lebanon  during  the  winter  of  1780-'l,
he  invited  that  commander  and  his  officers  to  a
banquet.  On  10  May,  1783,  at  a  meeting  of  offi-
cers, he  was  appointed  one  of  a  committee  of  four
to  draft  a  plan  of  organization,  which  resulted  in
their  reporting  on  the  13th  of  that  month  the  con-
stitution of  the  Societv  of  the  Cincinnati. — Another
son,  Andrew,  b.  21  June,  1745;  d.  7  April,  1824,
engaged  in  commercial  pursuits,  and  in  1795  was
a  manufacturer  of  paper  at  the  Falls  of  Norwich.


326


HUNTINGTON


He  was  judge  of  probate  in  his  district  in  1813.
During  the  Revolution  he  was  a  commissary  of  bri-
gade, and  untiring  in  his  exertions  to  procure  sup-
plies for  the  army. — Another  son,  Joshua,  soldier,
b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  10  Aug.,  1751,  began  business
with  his  father.  After  the  battle  of  Lexington  he
commanded  a  hundred  boys  of  the  town,  and  joined
Putnam's  brigade.  Subsequently  he  was  ordered
by  the  Continental  congress  to  build  a  frigate  of
thirty-six  guns,  which  was  constructed  in  the
Thames  at  Gale's  Ferry  in  1777. — Another  son,
Ebenezer,  soldier,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  26  Dec,
1754 ;  d.  there,  17  June,  1834,  entered  Yale  in  1771,
but  left  to  join  the  army,  and  afterward  was  given
his  degree.  He  served  first  as  a  lieutenant  in  Col.
Samuel  Wyllis's  regiment,  and  was  made  captain
in  June,  1776.  Afterward  he  became  brigade-ma-
jor under  Gen.  Parsons,  and  deputy  adjutant-gen-
eral to  Gen.  Heath  on  the  Hudson  river.  In  1777
he  was  a  major  in  Col.  Webb's  regiment,  which  he
commanded  in  Rhode  Island  in  1778.  In  that  year
he  became  lieutenant-colonel,  and  commanded  a
battalion  of  light  troops  at  Yorktown,  afterward
serving  as  volunteer  aide  to  Gen.  Lincoln  till  the
close  of  the  war.  He  retired  to  private  life  in
1783,  and  in  1792  was  made  a  general  of  state
militia.  He  was  named  a  brigadier-general  by
Gen.  Washington  in  1799  when  war  with  France
was  threatened.  He  served  in  congress  in  1810-'ll
and  in  1817-'19,  and  was  also  a  member  of  the
legislature.  Gen.  Huntington  was  considered  one
of  the  best  disciplinarians  in  the  army. — Jedidiah's
son,  Joshua,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  31
Jan.,  1786;  d.  in  Groton,  Mass.,  11  Sept.,  1819,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1804.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  New  London  association  in  Septem-
ber, 1806,  and  ordained  pastor  of  the  Old  South
church,  Boston,  on  18  May,  1808,  which  charge  he
held  till  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  American  educational  society  in  1815,  and  was
president  of  the  Boston  society  for  the  religious
and  moral  instruction  of  the  poor,  which  was
founded  in  1816.  He  was  the  author  of  the  "  Life  of
Abigail  Waters"  (1817). — His  wife,  Susan  Mans-
field, author,  b.  27  Jan.,  1791 ;  d.  in  1823,  wrote  a
story  entitled  "  Little  Lucy."  Her  memoirs,  with
her  letters,  journal,  and  poetry,  were  published  by
Benjamin  B.  Wisner  (Boston,  1829 ;  republished
in  Scotland). — Jedidiah's  second  son,  Daniel,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  17  Oct.,  1788;  d.  in
New  London,  Conn.,  21  May,  1858,  studied  in
Brown,  but  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1807.  He
was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  North
Bridgewater,  Mass.,  from  1812  till  1832.  He  then
taught  a  young  ladies'  school  in  New  London,
but  in  1841  resumed  his  pastoral  charge  in  North
Bridgewater.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Religion,"  a
poem  delivered  at  Brown,  31  Aug.,  1819;  "Tri-
umphs of  Faith,"  delivered  at  Andover  seminary,
21  Sept.,  1830 ;  and  a  "  Memorial "  of  his  daughter,
Mary  Hallam. — Jedidiah's  nephew,  Jabez  Will-
iams, jurist,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  8  Nov.,  1788  ;
d.  there,  1  Nov.,  1847,  was  the  son  of  Zachariah
Huntington.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806,
studied  in  the  Litchfield  law-school,  and  practised
in  that  town  for  thirty  years.  He  was  a  member  of
the  assembly  in  1829,  and  a  representative  in  con-
gress from  1829  till  1834,  when  he  removed  to  Nor-
wich, became  judge  of  the  superior  court  the  same
year,  and  also  of  the  supreme  court  of  errors.  He
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Whig  in  place  of
Thaddeus  Betts,  serving  from  1840  till  his  death.
HUNTINGTON,  Lucius  Seth,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Compton,  Quebec,  26  May,  1827 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  19  May,  1886. He  was  the  grand-


HUNTINGTON

son  of  a  New  England  loyalist  who  removed  to
Canada  and  settled  at  Compton  toward  the  end  of
the  18th  century.  He  was  educated  at  Sherbrooke,
where  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Lower  Canada  in  1853,  and  appointed  queen's  coun-
sel in  1863.  He  contested  Shefford  for  the  Canada
assembly  in  1860,  when  there  was  no  return,  repre-
senting that  constituency  from  the  general  election
of  1861  till  the  union,  and  in  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment from  1867  till  1882,  when  he  was  defeated.
He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of
Canada,  and  solicitor-general  of  Lower  Canada
from  May,  1863,  till  March,  1864,  when  the  Sand-
field  Macdonald-Dorion  government  resigned.  He
became  a  member  of  the  privy  council  of  Canada,
29  Jan.,  1874,  and  was  president  of  that  body  from
that  time  until  appointed  postmaster-general,  9
Oct.,  1875,  which  portfolio  he  held  until  the  resig-
nation of  the  government  in  October,  1878.  Dur-
ing the  absence  of  the  premier,  Alexander  Mac-
Kenzie,  in  England  in  1875,  Mr.  Huntington  acted
as  minister  of  public  works.  He  took  an  active
part  in  prosecuting  the  inquiry  relative  to  the
Canadian  Pacific  railway  scandal,  which  resulted
in  the  fall  of  the  Conservative  government  in  Oc-
tober, 1873.  He  was  largely  interested  in  mining
industries,  and  had  for  years  been  engaged  in  de-
veloping those  of  the  province  of  Quebec.  For
three  years  before  his  death  he  resided  in  New  York
city,  undergoing  treatment  for  a  malady  that  at
last  proved  fatal.  He  was  regarded  in  Canada  as
a  pronounced  annexationist,  and  some  of  his  politi-
cal titterances  in  favor  of  this  project  tended  to
render  him  unpopular  toward  the  close  of  his  po-
litical career.  He  was  the  author  of  a  novel,  "  Pro-
fessor Conant "  (New  York,  1884).

HUNTINGTON,  Samuel,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in  Windham,  Conn.,  3
July,  1731 ;  d.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  5  Jan.,  1796.
His  education  was  limited,  and  he  learned  the  trade
of  a  cooper,  also
working  on  his
father'sfarm,and
devoting  his  lei-
sure to  study  till
he  was  twenty-
two,  when  he
turned  his  atten-
tion to  law.  He
settled  in  Nor-
wich about  1758,
which  town  he
represented  in
the  general  as-
sembly in  1764.
He  received  the
office  of  king's
attorney  in  1765,
and  in  1775  sat  in  the  upper  house  of  the  Connecti-
cut assembly.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  from  1776  till  1783,  and  served  as  president
of  this  body  from  28  Sept.,  1779,  till  6  July,  1781,
when  he  retired,  receiving  the  thanks  of  congress
"  in  testimony  of  appreciation  of  his  conduct  in  the
chair  and  in  the  execution  of  public  business."
From  1774  till  1784  he  was  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Connecticut,  and  was  chief  justice  in  1784.
In  1785  he  was  lieutenant-governor,  and  he  was
governor  of  Connecticut  from  1786  till  1796.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Dart-
mouth in  1785,  and  by  Yale  in  1787. — His  brother,
Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Windham,  Conn.,  5  May,
1735;  d.  in  Coventry,  Conn.,  25  Dec,  1794.  was
compelled  by  his  father  to  be  a  clothier,  but  when
he  was  of  age  he  went  to  Yale,  where  he  was  gradu-


Jam *" feu^fcrij'unx


HUNTINGTON


HUPP


327


ated  in  1762.  On  29  June,  1763,  he  became  pastor  of
a  Congregational  church  in  Coventry,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1780,  when  he  was  made
a  trustee,  serving  till  1788.  He  inculcated  the
doctrine  of  universal  salvation,  and  wrote  many
sermons  and  addresses,  among  which  were  an
"Address  to  his  Anabaptist  Brethren  "  (1783) ;  and
"Thoughts  on  the  Atonement  of  Christ"  (1791).
He  left  a  work  in  manuscript  entitled  "  Calvinism
Improved,"  which  was  published  in  1796. — Joseph's
son,  Samuel,  governor  of  Ohio,  b.  in  Coventry,
Conn.,  4  Oct..  1765 ;  d.  in  Painesville,  Ohio,  8  June,
1817,  was  adopted  and  educated  by  his  uncle
Samuel,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1785.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Norwich  in  1793,  and
removed  to  Cleveland  in  1801,  after  which  he  re-
moved to  Painesville  in  1805.  He  was  a  judge  of
the  court  of  common  pleas  in  1802-'3,  of  the  supe-
rior court  in  1803,  and  afterward  chief  justice.  He
was  a  member  of  the  first  constitutional  conven-
tion of  Ohio  in  1802,  a  senator  in  its  first  legisla-
ture, and  served  as  speaker.  He  was  governor  of
Ohio  from  1808  till  1810.  Gov.  Huntington  was
one  of  the  original  proprietors  of  Fairport,  founded
in  1812.  He  held  the  office  of  district  paymaster
with  the  rank  of  colonel  from  1812  till  1814.
HUNTINGTON,  William  Henry,  philanthro-

?ist,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  30  May,  1820 ;  d.  in
'aris,  France,  1  Oct.,  1885.  He  went  to  Europe
in  1858,  and  was  correspondent  of  the  New  York
"  Tribune  "  for  twenty  years.  He  was  the  friend  of
Louis  Blanc,  Clemenceau,  and  other  noted  French-
men, was  fond  of  art,  and  among  the  first  to  recog-
nize new  talent.  Mr.  Huntington  gave  away  a
large  part  of  his  income  in  private  charities,  and
voluntarily  remained  in  Paris  during  the  siege  of
1870-'l  to  relieve  the  suffering  and  poor  in  his
own  quarter.  Clemenceau,  who  was  at  this  time
mayor  of  Montmartre,  wrote,  "  During  the  long
months  of  the  siege,  not  a  week  passed  that  Hunt-
ington did  not  visit  the  mayor  with  his  hands  full
of  gold  and  bank-notes,  to  be  used  in  the  best  in-
terests of  France  and  of  the  republic.  The  sole
condition  of  his  gifts  was  that  his  name  should  be
kept  absolutely  secret."  He  bequeathed  a  large
collection  of  miniatures,  bronzes,  and  rare  steel  en-
gravings of  Franklin,  Lafayette,  and  Washington
to  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art  in  New  York.

HUNTLEY,  Elias  Hewitt,  clergyman,  b.  in
Elmira,  N.  Y.,  19  April,  1840.  He  was  graduated
at  Genesee  in  1866,  and  in  1866  entered  the  minis-
try of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  In  1867
he  was  sent  to  Nunda  circuit,  after  which  he  was
for  six  months  professor  of  ancient  languages  in
Genesee  Wesleyan  seminary.  He  then  was  sent  to
Wisconsin,  and,  after  serving  as  presiding  elder  of
the  Madison  district,  was  president  of  Lawrence
university  from  1879  till  1883,  when  he  resigned  to
become  pastor  of  the  Metropolitan  church  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  In  1883  he  was  transferred  to  the
Baltimore  conference,  and  also  elected  chaplain  of
the  U.  S.  senate,  which  office  he  held  till  1886.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Oecumenical  Methodist  con-
ference, which  met  in  London,  England,  in  1881.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  East  Tennes-
see Wesleyan  university  in  1879,  and  from  the
Grant  memorial  university  in  1886.  In  1879  the
University  of  Iowa  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
HUNTON,  Eppa,  soldier,  b.  in  Fauquier  county,
Va.,  23  Sept.,  1823.  His  early  education  was  lim-
ited. He  studied  and  practised  law,  and  was  com-
monwealth attorney  for  Prince  William  countv
from  1849  till  1862.  He  was  elected  to  the  Virginia
convention  of  1861,  and  after  serving  through  its


first  session  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  colo-
nel of  the  8th  Virginia  infantry.  After  the  battle
of  Gettysburg  he  was  promoted  and  served  through
the  rest  of  the  war  as  brigadier-general.  He  was
captured  at  Sailor's  Creek,  6  April,  1865,  and  im-
prisoned in  Fort  Warren,  but  was  released  in  July.
1865.  Gen.  Hunton  was  elected  a  representative
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1873,  and  re-elected
to  the  three  succeeding  congresses.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  joint  committee  that  formed  the  elec-
toral bill  in  the  44th  congress,  and  one  of  the  elec-
toral commission  of  1876-'7.

HUNTON,  Logan,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albemarle
county,  Va.,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis  county,  Mo.,
in  1880.  His  father  went  to  Kentucky  about  1818,
and  settled  in  Lincoln  county.  The  son  was  edu-
cated at  Centre  and  Transylvania  universities,
studied  law,  and  practised  in  Stanford.  He  served
in  the  legislature  and  hela  other  public  offices  in
Kentucky,  and  in  1838  removed  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
where  he  practised  with  success.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Harrisburg  Whig  convention  in  1840,
and  on  his  return  engaged  actively  in  the  presi-
dential canvass  in  favor  of  Gen.  Harrison.  In  1844
he  went  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  served  as  U.  S.
district  attorney,  to  which  office  he  was  appointed
by  President  Taylor.  He  subsequently  returned  to
St.  Louis,  and  was  active  in  the  councils  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  serving  also  as  a  member  of
the  board  of  trustees  of  Westminster  college.

HUON  HE  PENANSTER,  Charles  Henry,
French  botanist,  b.  in  Dinan  in  1727 ;  d.  in  Santo
Domingo  in  1771.  He  was  descended  from  an
ancient  family  of  Brittany,  and  left  the  French
navy  in  1751  to  devote  himself  to  botany.  He
had  seen  in  New  Spain  the  cochineal  insect,  of
which  the  Mexicans  forbade  the  sale  to  foreigners,
and,  resolving  to  naturalize  it  in  Santo  Domingo,
he  went  in  1752  to  Mexico  under  the  disguise  of
a  Spanish  physician.  He  remained  three  years  in
the  country  learning  how  to  breed  the  insect,  and
also  ascertaining  the  use  of  the  nopal-plant,  on
which  it  feeds  :  and,  having  at  last  obtained  speci-
mens of  both  in  1755,  he  transported  them,  at  great
personal  risk,  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  their  culti-
vation soon  became  a  prosperous  industry.  Louis
XV.  made  Huon  knight  of  St.  Louis,  the  governor-
general  of  Santo  Domingo  granted  him  a  large
tract  of  land  near  the  city  of  Cape  Francais,  and
the  inhabitants  of  the  colony,  through  a  public
subscription,  presented  him  with  a  gold  medal  in
1758.  Huon  never  returned  to  the  Spanish  posses-
sions, as  the  Mexicans  were  greatly  incensed  against
him  for  depriving  them  of  the  tribute  for  cochineal
from  European  countries.  He  made  Santo  Do-
mingo his  home,  and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his
life  to  the  welfare  of  the  colony.  He  was  pensioned
as  royal  botanist  in  1763.  and  founded  in  Cape
Francais  the  botanical  society  of  the  Philadelphes,
establishing  also  a  botanical  garden,  which  is  still
one  of  the  ornaments  of  the  city,  and  opening  a
museum  of  natural  history,  the  contents  of  which
he  had  himself  collected. "  He  published  "  Traite
de  culture  du  nopal  "  (Cape  Francais,  1758) ;  "De
l'education  de  la  eochenille,  et  de  leur  acclimata-
tion  a  Saint  Domingue"  (1767,  reprinted  in  "  Me-
moires  de  l'Academie  des  Sciences  "),  and  "  Voyage
a  Guaraxa  dans  la  Nouvelle  Espagne  "  (1761).

HUPP,  John  Cox,  physician,  b.  in  Donegal,
Washington  co.,  Pa.,  24  Nov.,  1819.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Washington  college,  Pa.,  in  1844,  at  Jeffer-
son medical  college  in  1847,  and  began  practice  in
Wheeling,  W.  Va.  He  has  been  president  of  the
board  of  examining  surgeons  for  pensions,  and  was
appointed  in  1875  a  delegate  of  the  American  med-


328


HURD


nURST


ical  association  to  the  European  medical  associa-
tions. He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Medical
society  of  West  Virginia,  and  in  addition  to  con-
tributions to  medical  journals  and  other  periodicals
has  published  a  "  Biographical  Sketch  of  Joseph
Thoburn,  M.  D."  (1865) ;  a  memorial  to  the  legis-
lature of  West  Virginia  on  the  appointment  of  a
state  geologist  (1870) ;  and  a  memorial  to  the  same
body  to  establish  a  state  board  of  health  (1877).
Some  of  his  sketches  descriptive  of  the  early  his-
tory of  his  native  county  appeared  in  Creigh's
"  History  of  Washington  County."

HURD,  Frank  Hunt,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mount
Vernon,  Ohio,  25  Dec,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at
Kenyon  college  in  1858,  studied  law,  became  county
prosecuting  attorney  in  1863,  and  a  state,  senator
in  1866.  In  1874  he  was  elected  a  representative
in  congress  from  Ohio  as  a  Democrat,  and  served
one  term,  being  defeated  in  1876.  He  was  again
elected  in  1878  and  1882,  but  was  defeated  in  1880
and  1886.  Mr.  Hard  has  been  conspicuous  as  an
active  advocate  of  free  trade  doctrines.  He  codified
the  criminal  laws  of  Ohio  in  1868.

HURD,  John  Codman,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  11  Nov.,  1816.  He  was  educated  at  Colum-
bia and  at  Yale,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1836.
Mr.  Hurd  has  travelled  extensively  in  Egypt,
Japan,  China,  and  India,  and  now  (1887)  resides  in
Boston.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Law  of  Freedom
and  Bondage  in  the  United  States  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,
1858-'62),  and  "  The  Theory  of  our  National  Exist-
ence as  shown  by  the  Action  of  the  Government  of
the  United  States  since  1861 "  (1881).

HURD,  Nathaniel,  engraver,  b.  13  Feb.,  1730  ;
d.  17  Dec,  1777.  His  grandfather  came  from
England,  and  settled  in  Charlestown,  Mass.  Na-
thaniel engaged  in  the  business  of  seal-cutting  and
die-engraving  in  Boston,  and  was  considered  su-

Ferior  to  any  one  in  the  colonies  in  his  occupation,
ndependently  of  his  superior  execution,  his  works
often  displayed  character  and  humor.  Among  his
engravings  is  a  descriptive  representation  of  Hud-
son, a  swindler  and  forger,  standing  in  the  pillory,
the  likenesses  of  well-known  characters  being  intro-
duced among  the  spectators.  Hurd  was  probably
the  first  in  this  country  to  engrave  on  copper.  He
also  engraved  the  seal  of  Harvard  university.

HURLBUT,  Stephen  Augustus,  soldier,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  29  Nov.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,
27  March,  1882.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1837,  and  practised  in  Charleston  until
the  Florida  war,  in  which  he  served  as  adjutant  in
a  South  Carolina  regiment.  In  1845  he  went  to
Illinois  and  practised  his  profession  in  Belvidere.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Whig  ticket
in  1848,  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1859,
1861,  and  1867,  and  presidential  elector  at  large  on
the  Republican  ticket  in  1868.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  and  commanded  at  Fort
Donelson  after  its  capture  in  February,  1862.
When  Gen.  Grant's  army  moved  up  Tennessee
river,  Hurlbut  commanded  the  4th  division,  and
was  the  first  to  reach  Pittsburg  Landing,  which
he  held  for  a  week  alone.  He  was  promoted  major-
general  for  meritorious  conduct  at  the  battle  of
Shiloh,  was  then  stationed  at  Memphis,  and  after
the  battle  of  Corinth,  in  October,  1862,  pursued
and  engaged  the  defeated  Confederates.  He  com-
manded at  Memphis  in  September,  1863,  led  a  corps
under  Sherman  in  the  expedition  to  Meridian  in
February,  1864,  and  succeeded  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.
Banks  in  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,
serving  there  from  1864  till  1865,  when  he  was
honorably  mustered  out. He  was  minister  resi-


dent to  the  United  States  of  Colombia  from  1869
till  1872,  and  then  elected  a  representative  to  con-
gress from  Illinois  as  a  Republican  for  two  con-
secutive terms,  serving  from  1873  till  1877.  In
1881  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Peru,  which
office  he  retained  till  his  death.  —  His  brother,
William  Henry,  journalist,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,
3  July,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1847,  at
the  divinity-school  there  in  1849,  and  then  studied
in  Berlin,  Rome,  and  Paris.  After  a  few  years  in
the  Unitarian  ministry,  he  entered  Harvard  law-
school  in  1852,  in  1855  was  a  writer  on  "  Putnam's
Magazine  "  and  the  "  Albion,"  and  joined  the  staff
of  the  New  York  "  Times  "  in  1857.  While  visit-
ing the  south  in  1861,  he  was  arrested  by  a  vigilance
committee  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  imprisoned  for  a  time,
and  then  released,  but  he  was  refused  a  passport
unless  upon  conditions  with  which  he  would  not
comply,  and  finally  in  August,  1862,  made  his
escape  through  the  Confederate  lines,  and  reached
Washington.  He  became  connected  with  the  New
York  "  World  "  in  1862,  and  in  1864  purchased  the
•'  Commercial  Advertiser,"  intending  to  publish  it
as  a  free-trade  paper,  but,  he  and  his  associates
in  the  enterprise  failing  to  agree,  the  paper  was
sold  in  1867  to  Thurlow  Weed.  He  went  to  Mex-
ico in  1866,  and  was  invited  to  the  capital  by  Max-
imilian, represented  the  New  York  "World"  at
the  World's  fair  at  Paris  in  1867,  and  the  Centenary
festival  of  St.  Peter  at  Rome,  and  in  1871  accom-
panied the  U.  S.  expedition  to  Santo  Domingo,  dur-
ing which  time  he  wrote  and  published  the  most
complete  account  in  any  language  of  the  modern
history  of  that  island.  In  1876-'83  he  was  editor-
in-chief  of  the  "  World,"  and  in  the  latter  year
went  to  Europe,  where  he  has  since  chiefly  resided.
He  has  contributed  largely  to  American  periodicals
and  to  the  "  Edinburgh  "  and  other  British  maga-
zines, and  has  published  "  Gan-Eden  "  (Boston,
1854) :  "  General  McClellan  and  the  Conduct  of  the
War  "  (New  York,  1864),  and  other  works,  besides
several  hymns  and  poems.

HURST,  John  Fletcher,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Dorchester  county,  Md.,  17  Aug.,  1834.  He  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1854.  and  after
teaching  for  two  years  pursued  theological  studies
at  the  universities  of
Halle  and  Heidel-
berg, Germany.  He
returned  home  in
1858  and  entered  on
the  work  of  the  min-
istry in  the  Newark
conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal
church.  In  1866  he
again  went  to  Ger-
many, to  become  the-
ological instructor  in
the  Methodist  mis-
sion institute  at  Bre-
men. Here  he  re-
mained for  three
years,  serving  both  as
teacher  and  director
of  the  institution.
He  also  travelled  extensively  in  Europe.  Syria,  and
Egypt.  In  1871  he  returned  to  the  United  States,
having  been  elected  professor  of  historical  theology
in  Drew  theological  seminary,  Madison,  N.  Y.,  and
in  1873  he  was  chosen  president  of  that  institution.
Here  he  continued  till  1880,  when  at  the  general
conference  in  Cincinnati  he  was  elected  and  ordained
bishop.  In  the  performance  of  his  episcopal  duties
he  has  not  only  visited  every  part  of  the  United


/f'fitf1**^'


HURTADO  DE  MEXDOZA


HUSBANDS


329


States,  but  has  spent  much  time  abroad  among  the
mission  stations  and  conferences  in  Germany,  Den-
mark. Sweden,  Norway,  Bulgaria,  and  Italy,  and
also  in  India.  He  has  been  extensively  occupied
with  literary  labors,  especially  in  the  reproduction
of  the  works  of  the  best  German  authors  in  Eng-
lish translations.  He  has  translated  Hagenbach's
"  History  of  the  Church  in  the  18th  and  19th  Cen-
turies "  (2  vols.,  1869) ;  Van  Oosterzee's  "  Lectures
in  Defence  of  John's  Gospel "  (1869) ;  Lange"s
"  Romans  "  (1870) ;  and  Seneca's  "  Moral  Essays."
His  original  works  are  "  History  of  Rationalism  "
(1865) ;  "  Martyrs  to  the  Tract  Cause  "  (1873) ;  "  Out-
lines of  Biblical  History  "  (1873) ;  "  Life  and  Liter-
ature in  the  Fatherland  "  (1874) ;  "  Our  Theological
Culture  " ;  "  Bibliotheca  Theologica  " ;  and  "  A
General History of the  Christian  Church"  (in

E reparation,  1887). Dickinson  college  has  given
im  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  and  Indiana  Asbury  uni-
versity that  of  LL.  D.

HURTADO  DE  MENDOZA,  Andres  (oor-tah  -
do),  marquis  of  Caiiete,  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Canete
about  1500;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  30  March,  1561.  He
had  served  with  distinction  in  the  wars  of  Germany
and  Flanders,  and  was  royal  chief-huntsman  and
governor  of  Cuenca  when  Charles  V.  appointed
him  in  1555  viceroy  of  Peru.  He  left  Spain  in  the
same  year,  and,  after  arranging  several  difficulties
in  Panama  and  subduing  a  revolution  of  the  fugi-
tive negro  slaves,  entered  Lima,  29  June,  1556.  He
found  the  country  in  a  very  unsatisfactory  situa-
tion in  consequence  of  the  scarcely  subdued  revolu-
tions of  Sebastian  del  Castillo,  Godinez,  and  Giron.
The  audiencia  had  been  ruling  for  nearly  four
years,  and  its  judges  were  in  discord  and  arrogant
toward  the  viceroy,  who  immediately  petitioned
the  emperor  for  the  recall  of  the  most  offensive.
The  insurgents  who  had  been  pardoned  were
turbulent,  and  those  who  had  assisted  the  govern-
ment against  them  were  clamoring  for  larger  re-
wards, and  the  viceroy  adopted  despotic  measures,
banishing  the  latter  and  cruelly  persecuting  and
executing  the  greater  part  of  the  former.  He
founded  the  hospital  of  San  Andres  at  Lima,
and  had  the  mummies  of  the  Incas  Huiracocha,
Yupanqui,  and  Huaina  Capac  transported  to  the
vaults  of  the  hospital,  in  order  to  remove  them
from  the  fanatical  superstition  of  the  Indians  at
Cuzco.  In  1558  he  founded  the  city  of  Cuenca
near  the  site  of  the  former  imperial  residence  of
Tomebampa,  and  in  the  same  year  re-established
the  local  jurisdiction  of  native  chiefs.  He  also
induced  the  Inca  Sayri  Tupac,  the  last  grandson
of  Huaina  Capac,  to  present  himself  in  Lima,  5
Jan.,  1560,  renounce  his  claims  to  the  throne,  and,
receiving  in  baptism  the  name  of  Diego,  to  take
the  title  of  Prince  of  Yucay,  with  a  rich  revenue.
In  the  same  year,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  turbulent
adventurers,  the  viceroy  sent  out  several  exploring
expeditions.  Meanwhile  continuous  complaints
of  Hurtado's  arbitrary  and  cruel  government  had
reached  court,  and  finally  the  king  deprived  him
of  the  government  and  sent  as  substitute  Lopez  de
Zuiiiga.  who  arrived  at  Paita  in  January,  1561,
and  in  his  communications  purposely  treated  Hur-
tado  with  disrespect.  This,  together  with  his  re-
call, preyed  on  the  latter's  mind,  and  he  fell  sick
and  died  a  short  time  before  the  arrival  of  his  suc-
cessor in  Lima. — His  son,  Garcia,  fourth  Marquis
of  Canete.  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Cuenca  in  1531 ;
d.  in  Spain  about  1610,  had  served  in  his  youth  in
the  wars  of  Italy.  Flanders,  and  Germany,  and  in
1556  came  to  Peru  in  the  retinue  of  his  father,
who  in  the  following  year  sent  him  as  governor  to
Chili,  to  adjust  the  dissensions  which  had  broken


out  after  Valdivia's  death.  After  arresting  Villa-
gra  and  Aguirre,  the  rival  leaders,  he  began  at
once  the  campaign  against  the  Araucanians,  and
was  generally  fortunate,  being  greatly  assisted  by
constant  re-enforcements  from  Peru.  He  founded
the  cities  of  CaSete  and  Osorno,  rebuilt  Concepcion,
defeating  and  taking  prisoners  the  caciques  Gal-
varino  and  Caupolican,  who  were  executed.  He
sent  an  unsuccessful  expedition  to  explore  the
Strait  of  Magellan,  and  led  an  exploration  along
the  coast  as  far  as  Chiloe,  which  archipelago  was
visited  by  some  of  his  lieutenants.  He  repaired
and  provisioned  the  forts  of  Arauco,  Angol,  and
Tucapel,  and  his  lieutenants  founded  Mendoza  and
San  Juan  on  the  east  of  the  Andes.  After  the
death  of  his  father,  he  returned  to  Spain,  where
his  administration  was  fully  approved.  On  the
death  of  his  elder  brother,  he  inherited  the  estates
and  title  of  Marquis  of  Canete,  and  was  several
times  sent  by  Philip  II.  on  important  diplomatic
missions.  The  king  appointed  him  viceroy  of  Peru
in  1588,  and  he  arrived  on  28  Nov.,  1589,  in  Callao,
where  he  despatched  a  vessel  with  re-enforcements
for  Chili,  and  on  6  Jan.,  1590,  entered  Lima  and
took  charge  of  the  government.  He  began  at
once,  by  royal  order,  to  gather  all  available  funds
and  solicit  donations  for  the  war  in  the  Netherlands
and  against  England,  and  before  the  end  of  the
year  sent  to  Spain  over  1,500.000  ducats  in  money,
besides  a  great  quantity  of  plate  and  jewelry.  It  is
said  that  the  ladies  of  Arequipa.  scarcely  without
exception,  despoiled  themselves  of  all  their  jewelry,
to  contribute  to  the  national  cause.  In  view  of
the  probable  invasion  of  the  Pacific  by  an  English
fleet,  Garcia  repaired  the  fortifications  of  Callao
and  fitted  out  the  men-of-war  that  were  stationed
there,  and  when  toward  the  end  of  1593  Richard
Hawkins  with  two  vessels  passed  the  straits  and
began  his  depredations,  the  viceroy  despatched
three  vessels  under  command  of  his  brother-in-law,
Beltran  del  Castro,  who  defeated  Hawkins  and  took
him  prisoner.  In  1592  the  viceroy  founded  the
College  of  San  Marcos,  and  from  that  year  till
1593  sustained  continuous  litigation  against  the
encroachments  of  the  archbishop.  Finally,  desir-
ing to  enjoy  his  riches  in  Europe,  he  petitioned  for
recall,  and  was  succeeded  in  1596  by  the  Marquis
of  Salinas,  formerly  viceroy  of  Mexico.  Hurtado
then  sailed  for  Spain,  where  he  was  appointed  gen-
tleman of  the  bedchamber.  Pedro  de  Ona  in  his
"  Arauco  domado "  praises  Garcia  and  Suarez  de
Figueroa  in  his  life  of  the  viceroy  says  Ercilla
(q.  v.)  was  unjust  toward  him  in  his  "  Araucana,"
on  account  of  the  poet's  expulsion  from  Chili.

HUSBANDS,  Herman,  patriot,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania; d.  near  Philadelphia  in  1795.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  is  said  to
have  been  related  to  Benjamin  Franklin.  After
removing  to  Orange  county,  N.  C,  he  served  in  the
legislature  of  that  colony,  became  obnoxious  to  the
royalists  from  his  independence,  and  was  a  leader
of  the  "Regulators,"  an  organization  formed  in
1768  for  the  redress  of  grievances,  and  was  the
particular  object  of  William  Tryon's  persecutions,
though  he  took  no  part  in  the  resulting  acts  of
violence.  On  24  Sept..  1770.  the  Regulators  broke
up  the  court  at  Hillsboro.  maltreated  some  of  the
officials,  and  demolished  the  house  of  Edmund
Fanning.  His  connection  with  the  Regulators
led  to  his  expulsion  from  the  legislature.  20  Dec,
1770,  and  on  31  Jan.,  1771.  he  was  arrested  by
order  of  Gov.  Tryon  for  libel,  and  put  in  New
Berne  jail.  On  16  May,  1771,  a  battle  was  fought
on  the  banks  of  the  Alamance  creek  between  1,000
men  under  Gov.  Tryon  and  2,000  Regulators,  in


330


HUSKE


HUTCHINS


which  the  latter  were  defeated.  Though  Husbands,
pleading  the  pacific  character  of  his  sect,  did  not
participate  in  the  fight,  he  found  it  necessary  to
take  flight  first  to  Maryland  and  thence  to  Penn-
sylvania, and  settled  near  Pittsburg.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature  in  1778,
was  concerned  in  the  whiskey  insurrection  in  west-
ern Pennsylvania  in  1794,  and  was  on  the  com-
mittee of  safety  with  Albert  Gallatin  and  others.
For  his  connection  with  this  uprising  Husbands
was  imprisoned  for  a  short  time  in  Philadelphia,
but  was  released  by  the  advice  of  Dr.  David  Cald-
well, and  died  on  his  way  home.  He  published  an
account,  of  the  Regulator  movement  (1771).

HUSKE,  Ellis,  journalist,  b.  about  1700;  d.  in
1755.  He  was  a  brother  of  Gen.  Huske,  who  was
in  the  battle  of  Culloden.  Ellis  was  a  resident  of
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  previous  to  his  becoming  post-
master of  Boston  in  1734,  and  was  a  councillor  of
New  Hampshire  in  1733-55.  He  was  superseded
in  the  office  of  deputy  postmaster-general  of  the
colonies  by  Franklin  and  Hunter  in  1753.  He
published  the  "Boston  Weekly  Post-Boy"  from
October,  1734,  till  1755,  and  was  the  reputed  author
of  "  The  Present  State  of  North  America "  (Lon-
don, 1755). — His  son,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  about  1721 ;  d.  in  England  in  1773,
was  educated  in  Boston,  and  engaged  in  mercan-
tile pursuits.  In  1764  he  became  a  member  of  the
British  parliament  from  Maiden,  Essex,  and  was
re-elected  to  the  succeeding  parliament.  For  his
share  in  bringing  about  the  stamp-act,  his  effigy
was  hung  with  Grenville's  on  the  liberty  -  tree,
Boston,  on  1  Nov.,  1765.  He  was  described  as  a
flashy  fellow,  who  by  stock-jobbing  and  servility
raised  himself  to  a  seat  in  parliament.

HUSS,  Magnus,  Swedish  naturalist,  b.  in
Upsala  in  1752 ;  d.  in  Stockholm  in  1799.  He
was  secretary  in  1781  of  one  of  the  ministers  that
were  sent  by  Spain  to  determine  the  boundaries
between  the  Portuguese  and  the  Spanish  posses-
sions in  South  America,  according  to  the  treaty  of
San  Ildefonso,and  during  his  sojourn  of  fifteen  years
in  the  country  he  made  a  chart  of  the  province  of
Asuncion,  which  was  considered  until  recently  as  a
valuable  one.  He  studied  also  the  natural  history
of  South  America,  and  published  among  other
works  "  Reisa  y  Amerika  och  det  indre  Paraguay  "
(Stockholm,  1796 ;  translated  into  French  as  "  Voy-
age au  Paraguay,"  2  vols.,  Paris,  1798;  and  into
English  as  "A  Relation  of  a  Journey  through  South
America  in  the  Paraguay  Province,"  London,
1800) ;  "  Essai  sur  l'histoire  naturelle  des  quadru-
ples des  provinces  du  Paraguay  et  de  rUruguay  "
(5  vols.,  Stockholm,  1797);  "Traite  sur  les  reptiles
de  l'Amerique  du  Sud,"  which  is  yet  considered  as
an  authority  (2  vols.,  Stockholm,  1799);  "Ameri-
kanisk  nationens  Seder,  Bruk,  och  Klaededraegter,"
a  dissertation  on  the  customs  of  South  America ;
and  "Delimitation  des  frontieres  des  possessions
Espagnoles  et  Portugaises  dans  l'Amerique  du
Sud,  selon  le  traite  de  San  Ildefonso"  (2  vols.,
with  charts,  Stockholm,  1799).

HUSSEY,  Curtis  Grubb,  manufacturer,  b.
near  York,  Pa.,  in  August,  1802.  He  is  descended
from  Christopher  Hussey,  who,  with  others  of  the
Society  of  Friends,  bought  the  island  of  Nantucket
as  a  place  of  refuge  from  persecution  in  1658-'9.
In  childhood  he  was  taken  by  his  parents  to  Ohio,
where  he  studied  medicine  at  Mount  Pleasant,
Jefferson  co.  In  1825,  and  for  some  years  after,  he
practised  in  Morgan  county,  Ind.  He  then  engaged
in  mercantile  pursuits  and  in  the  provision  trade,
and  was  a  member  of  the  Indiana  legislature  in
1829,  but  declined  re-election. In  1848  he  deter-


mined to  explore  and  develop  the  Lake  Superior
copper  region,  and  formed  with  others  the  Pitts-
burg and  Boston  mining  company.  Under  his  di-
rection the  first  mining  shaft  was  sunk  in  the  vicin-
ity of  what  is  now  known  as  Copper  harbor.  In
the  summer  of  1845  regular  mining  operations  were
begun,  and  proved  remunerative  beyond  his  most
sanguine  expectations.  The  Pittsburg  copper  and
brass  rolling  mills,  owned  by  him,  are  the  outgrowth
of  his  successful  mining  enterprises.  He  was  also
the  first  person  to  succeed  in  making  the  best  qual-
ity of  all  descriptions  of  crucible  steel,  and  the  es-
tablishment of  Hussey,  Howe  and  Co.,  Pittsburg,
is  engaged  in  this  enterprise.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Alleghany  observatory  and  of  the
School  of  design  for  women  at  Pittsburg.

HUSTED,  James  William,  politician,  b.  in
Bedford,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1833.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1854,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1857.  He  was  school-commissioner  of
Westchester .  county  in  1858-'60,  deputy  superin-
tendent of  the  State  insurance  department  in
1860-'2,  harbor-master  of  the  port  of  New  York  in
1862-'70,  and  state  commissioner  of  emigration  in
1870-'72.  He  has  been  for  many  years  a  member
and  also  speaker  of  the  assembly.  In  1873  he  was
appointed  major-general  of  the  National  guard
of  the  state  of  New  York,  which  office  he  still  holds.
He  was  president  of  the  New  York  state  military
association  in  1875-'6,  and  is  popularly  known  as
the  "  Bald  Eagle  of  Westchester."

HUTCHINS,  Charles  Lewis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Concord,  N.  H.,  5  Aug.,  1838.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1861,  and  at  the  General  theological
seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1865,  entered  the  min-
istry of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  in
1871  and  1874  was  assistant  secretary  of  the  gen-
eral convention.  In  1877  he  was  made  secretary
of  the  convention,  which  post  he  now  (1887)  holds.
Since  1872  he  has  been  rector  of  Grace  church,
Medford,  Mass.  He  has  published  several  collec-
tions of  church  music,  among  which  are  "  Sunday-
School  Hymnal "  (Buffalo,  1871) ;  "  Annotations  of
the  Hymnal "  (Hartford,  1872) ;  "  Church  Hvmnal "
(Medford,  1879) ;  and  "  Sunday-School  Hymnal
and  Service-Book "  (Medford,  1880).  From  1874
till  the  present  time  (1887)  he  has  edited  "The
Parish  Choir,"  a  weekly  publication.

HUTCHINS,  Thonias,  geographer,  b.  in  Mon-
mouth, N.  J.,  in  1730;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  28
April,  1789.  Before  he  was  sixteen  he  entered  the
British  army  as  an  ensign,  and  became  paymaster
and  captain  of  the  60th  Royal  American  regiment.
He  was  assistant  engineer  in  the  expedition  of
Gen.  Henry  Bouquet  (q.  v.)  in  1764,  and  took  part
in  a  campaign  against  the  Florida  Indians.  When
he  was  in  London  in  1779  his  known  devotion  to
the  cause  of  American  independence  caused  his
imprisonment  for  six  weeks  on  a  charge  of  main-
taining correspondence  with  Benjamin  Franklin,
who  was  then  in  France.  By  this  imprisonment
he  is  said  to  have  lost  £12,000.  He  soon  afterward
went  to  France,  and  thence  to  Charleston,  S.  C,
where  he  joined  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,  and  re-
ceived the  title  of  "  geographer-general."  He  fur-
nished the  maps  and  plates  of  Dr.  William  Smith's
"  Account  of  Bouquet's  Expedition  "  (Philadelphia,
1765) ;  and  is  the  author  of  "  A  Topographical  De-
scription of  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,
and  North  Carolina"  (London,  1778);  "History,
Narrative,  and  Topographical  Description  of  Lou-
isiana and  West  Florida"  (Philadelphia,  1784);
three  papers  in  the  "  Philadelphia  Transactions  "
(1775-6  and  1783) ;  and  one  in  the  "  Transactions
of  the  American  Society."


HUTCHINSON


HUTCHINSON


331


HUTCHINSON,  Aaron,  clergyman,  b.  in  He-
bron, Conn.,  in  March,  1722;  d.  in  Pomfret,  Vt.,
27  Sept.,  1800.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1747,
studied  for  the  ministry  in  Hebron  for  about  three
years,  and  on  6  June,  1750,  responded  to  a  call  to
preach  in  Grafton,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  for
about  twenty-two  years.  In  1776  he  moved  to
Pomfret,  Vt.,  established  a-  congregation  there,
and  two  others  in  the  adjoining  towns  of  Hartford
and  Woodstock,  and  for  several  years  performed
the  pastoral  duties  for  the  three  congregations.
During  his  fifty  years  of  preaching  he  lost  only
two  services  from  illness,  and  never  used  a  book
for  conducting  his  services.  Dr.  Hutchinson  was
one  of  the  foremost  classical  scholars  of  his  time  in
this  country.  It  was  said  of  him  by  those  who  had
an  intimate  knowledge  of  his  attainments,  that  if
the  New  Testament  had  been  lost  he  could  have
reproduced  it  from  memory  in  the  original  Greek.
Upon  one  occasion,  when  he  was  at  Bennington
attending  the  sittings  of  the  council  of  safety,  he
met  Ethan  Allen,  who  invited  him  to  preach  at
his  house  the  next  Sunday,  and  at  the  same  time
handed  to  him  the  manuscript  of  his  "  Oracles  of
Reason,"  which  Allen  called  his  Bible.  The  Sun-
day arrived,  a  chapter  from  the  Old  Testament,
specially  selected  for  the  occasion,  was  recited,  and
the  first  hymn  that  was  given  out  began  with  the
verse

"  Let  all  the  heathen  writers  join

To  form  a  perfect  book,
But,  0  good  Lord !  compared  with  thine,

How  mean  their  writings  look  ! "
This  was  followed  by  an  orthodox  sermon.  Allen
never  forgave  Hutchinson  for  this,  and  never  in-
vited him  to  preach  again.  Of  his  sermons  only
eight  were  published.  The  most  notable  among
them  was  "  Mr.  Hutchinson's  Sermon  at  Windsor,
July  2, 1777,  at  the  Convention  for  the  Forming  of
the  State  of  Vermont :  A  well-tempered  Self  Love
a  Rule  of  Conduct  towards  Others"  (Dresden,
1777),  which  was  the  first  book  issued  from  a  print-
ing-press in  the  state  of  Vrermont.  Among  the
others  are  "  Valour  for  the  Truth  "  (Boston,  1767) ;
"  Coming  of  Christ "  (1773) ;  and  "  Meat  out  of  the
Eater,  or  Samson's  Riddle  Unriddled  "  (1774).

HUTCHINSON,  Anne  (Marbnry),  religious
teacher,  b.  in  Lincolnshire,  England,  about  1590 :
d.  near  Stamford,  Conn.,  in  September,  1643.  She
was  a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Francis  Marbury,
and  descended  from  the  Blunts,  a  distinguished
family.  About  1612  she  married  William  Hutchin-
son, of  Alford,  Lincolnshire,  a  distant  cousin  of
the  celebrated  Col.  John  Hutchinson.  Mary,  a
younger  sister  of  William  Hutchinson,  married  the
Rev.  John  Wheelwright,  a  Lincolnshire  preacher.
In  1633  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  eldest  son,  Edward,  ac-
companied the  Rev.  John  Cotton  to  Massachu-
setts, and  in  the  course  of  the  next  year  he  was
followed  by  his  father  and  mother.  Mrs.  Hutchin-
son, says  Winthrop,  brought  with  her  to  Massa-
chusetts "two  dangerous  errors:  first,  that  the
person  of  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  a  justified
person ;  second,  that  no  sanctification  can  help  to
evidence  to  us  our  justification."  To  these  opin-
ions Mrs.  Hutchinson  attached  so  much  impor-
tance that  she  held  meetings  in  Boston  and  gave
lectures  expounding  them.  In  this  she  was  ably
supported  by  her  brother-in-law,  Wheelwright,
who  came  to'  Boston  in  1636.  She  violently  at-
tacked the  Massachusetts  clergy,  all  except  Wheel-
wright and  Cotton,  whom  she  declared  to  be
"  under  a  covenant  of  grace,"  while  the  rest  were
only  "  under  a  covenant  of  works."  Great  excite-
ment was  aroused  by  her  preaching,  and  for  a  while


Boston  was  divided  into  two  hostile  theological
camps.  Mrs.  Hutchinson  went  far  toward  win-
ning to  her  cause  not  only  the  powerful  preacher,
Cotton,  but  also  the  youthful  and  enthusiastic
governor,  Harry  Vane.  The  doughty  Capt.  Under-
bill was  one  of  her  converts.  The"  agitation  was
fraught  with  danger  to  the  infant  colony.  On  the
eve  of  the  Pequot  war  a  company  of  militia  was
found  unwilling  to  march,  because  its  chaplain
was  held  to  be  "under  a  covenant  of  works."
When  things  had  come  to  such  a  pass,  it  was
thought  to  be  high  time  to  put  Mrs.  Hutchinson
down.  She  was  tried  for  heresy  and  sedition,  and
banished  from  Massachusetts,  along  with  Wheel-
wright and  several  others  of  her  followers,  who
were  known  as  "  Antinomians."  Wheelwright  and
others  went  northward  and  founded  the  towns  of
Exeter  and  Dover,  in  New  Hampshire.  Mrs.  Hut-
chinson, with  her  husband  and  fifteen  children,
bought  for  forty  fathoms  of  wampum  the  island
of  Aquidneck  from  the  Narragansett  Indians,  and
founded  the  town  of  Portsmouth,  while  Codding-
ton,  one  of  her  followers,  founded  Newport.  After
the  death  of  her  husband  in  1642,  Mrs.  Hutchinson
left  Rhode  Island,  and  settled  upon  some  land  to
the  west  of  Stamford,  supposed  to  be  within  the
territory  of  the  New  Netherlands.  There  in  the
following  year  she  was  cruelly  murdered  by  Indians,
together  with  most  of  her  children  and  servants,
sixteen  victims  in  all.  Her  child,  Susanna,  ten
years  old,  was  carried  into  captivity  by  the  Indians,
but  four  years  afterward  was  ransomed,  and  in
1651  married  John  Cole,  of  Rhode  Island. — Ed-
ward, eldest  son  of  William  and  Anne  Hutchin-
son, b.  in  Alford,  Lincolnshire,  28  May,  1613 ;  d.
in  Brookfield,  Mass..  2  Aug.,  1675,  left"  Boston  in
1638,  at  the  time  of  his  mother's  banishment,  but
returned  some  years  afterward,  and  from  1658  till
1675  was  deputy  to  the  general  court.  He  was  a
captain  of  militia,  and  in  July,  1675.  after  the
disastrous  beginning  of  Philip's  war,  was  sent  to
Brookfield  to  negotiate  with  the  Nipmuck  Indians.
The  treacherous  savages  appointed  a  place  for  a
rendezvous,  but  lay  in  ambush  for  Hutchinson  as
he  approached,  and  slew  him,  with  several  of  his
company. — Thomas,  royal  governor  of  Massachu-
setts, b.  in  Boston,  9  Sept.,  1711 ;  d.  in  Brompton.
near  London,  3  June.  1780,  was  a  great-grandson
of  Capt.  Edward  Hutchinson,  just  mentioned.  His
father,  a  merchant  in  high  standing,  and  at  one
time  quite  wealthy,  was  for  twenty-six  years  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  of  assistants.  At  five  years  of
age  Thomas  was  admitted  to  the  North  grammar-
school,  and  in  1727  he  was  graduated  at  Harvard.
While  in  college  he  began  carrying  on  a  little  trade
by  sending  ventures  in  his  father's  vessels.  He
was  not  very  attentive  to  his  studies  at  college,  but
afterward  acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Latin
and  French.  From  early  childhood  he  took  great
delight  in  reading  history.  After  leaving  college
he  spent  four  years  in  his  father's  counting-house,
and  showed  himself  extremely  methodical,  exact,
and  business-like  in  his  habits.  On  16  May,  1734,
he  married  Margaret  Sanford.  a  beautiful  girl  of
seventeen,  with  whom  he  lived  happily  until  her
death  in  1753.  He  never  married  again.  In  1737
he  was  chosen  a  selectman  for  the  town  of  Boston,
and  about  a  month  afterward  was  elected  repre-
sentative to  the  general  court.  The  people  were
there  greatly  agitated  over  the  question  of  paper
money.  Bills  of  credit  had  been  issued  since  the
beginning  of  the  century,  partly  to  meet  the  ex-
penses of  the  French  and  Indian  wars  on  the  north-
ern frontier.  In  all  the  New  England  states  the
depreciation  of  the  paper  wrought  serious  disturb-


332


iinriiiNsoN


HUTCHINSON


C/#^zC>£k/^?  &V5U


ance  to  trade,  and  then,  as  always,  ignorant  people
and  tricksome  demagogues  sought  a  cure  for  the
trouble  In  fresh  issues  of  paper.  Wildcat  banking-
schemes  were  devised,  two  of  which,  the  "  silver-
scheme  "  and  the
"  land-bank,"  were
especially  promi-
nent. (See  Adams,
Samuel.)  Upon  all
financial  questions
Hutchinson  had  a
remarkably  clear
head,  and  there  was
nothing  of  the  dem-
agogue about  him.
He  would  not  falter
with  a  question  of
public  policy,orseek
to  hide  his  opinions
in  order  to  curry  fa-
vor with  the  people.
He  was  a  man  of
strong  convictions
and  dauntless  cour-
age, and  he  opposed
the  paper-money  scheme  with  untiring  zeal.  In
spite  of  this,  he  was  re-elected  in  1738.  Short-
ly afterward  in  town-meeting  a  set  of  instruc-
tions were  reported,  enjoining  it  upon  the  repre-
sentatives to  vote  for  the  further  emission  of  pa-
per. Hutchinson  then  and  there  exposed  such  in-
structions, argued  against  them  as  iniquitous,  and
flatly  refused  to  observe  them.  There  were  cries
of  "Choose  another  representative,  Mr.  Modera-
tor ! "  But  this  was  too  silly.  Hutchinson  opposed
the  instructions  in  the  general  court,  and  next
year  failed  of  a  re-election.  About  this  time  Mr.
Hutchinson  was  seized  with  typhoid  fever.  In
1740  the  public  confidence  in  his  ability  and  in-
tegrity prevailed  over  the  general  dislike  for  his
policy,  and  he  was  again  chosen  as  representa-
tive. In  this  year  there  was  an  outburst  of  excite-
ment in  Boston,  not  unlike  those  that  ushered  in
the  Revolutionary  war.  The  land-bank  and  the
silver-scheme  had  both  been  put  into  operation  in
spite  of  the  opposition  of  Gov.  Belcher,  who  had
appealed  to  parliament  for  assistance.  Parlia-
ment now  declared  the  old  "  Joint  Stock  Com-
panies Act,"  passed  in  1720  after  the  South  Sea
bubble,  to  be  of  force  in  the  colonies.  Both  the
Massachusetts  companies  were  thus  abruptly  com-
pelled to  wind  up  their  affairs,  and  many  of  the
partners  were  ruined,  among  them  the  elder
Samuel  Adams.  The  question  as  to  the  authority
of  parliament  over  the  colonies,  which  had  been
discussed  as  long  ago  as  1G44,  was  now  warmly
agitated.  The  friends  of  the  land-bank  loudly
denounced  the  act  of  1740  as  a  violation  of  the
chartered  rights  of  the  colony,  and  the  bitter
feelings  engendered  by  this  quarrel  must  be  set
down  among  the  causes  of  the  American  Revo-
lution. Mr.  Hutchinson's  conduct  at  this  time  was
eminently  wise  and  patriotic.  On  theory  he  was  a
firm  believer  in  the  ultimate  supremacy  of  parlia-
ment over  every  part  of  the  British  empire ;  but
he  saw  distinctly  the  foolishness  of  enlisting  such
a  wholesome  feeling  as  the  love  of  self-government
in  behalf  of  such  an  institution  as  the  land-bank,
and  he  accordingly  advised  Gov.  Belcher  to  bide
his  time  and  suppress  it  in  some  other  way  than
by  an  appeal  to  parliament.  This  was  the  first
but  not  the  last  time  that  trouble  between  Eng-
land and  the  colonies  was  occasioned  by  disregard
of  Hutchinson's  sagacious  advice.  In  the  autumn
of  1740  Mr.  Hutchinson  visited  England  as  com-


missioner for  adjusting  the  boundary-line  between
Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,  with  regard  to
which  some  complaint  had  arisen.  After  his  return
in  the  following  year  he  was  again  chosen  repre-
sentative, and  annually  thereafter  until  1749.  In
1746-;'8  he  was  speaker  of  the  house.  By  the  treaty
of  Aix-la-Chapelle  in  1748,  the  stronghold  of
Louisburg,  which  New  England  troops  had  cap-
tured in  1745,  was  restored  to  France,  in  exchange
for  Madras  in  Hindostan.  To  appease  the  indig-
nation of  the  New  England  people  at  this  transfer,
parliament  voted  that  adequate  compensation
should  be  made  for  the  expense  of  the  capture  of
Louisburg.  The  sum  due  to  Massachusetts  in  pur-
suance of  this  vote  was  £138,649,  which  was
nearly  equivalent  to  the  total  amount  of  paper
circulating  in  the  colony  at  its  current  valuation
of  one  eleventh  of  its  face  value.  To  attempt  to
raise  such  a  currency  to  par  was  hopeless.  Hut-
chinson proposed  that  parliament  should  be  asked
to  send  over  the  money  in  Spanish  dollars,  which
should  be  used  to  buy  up  and  cancel  the  paper  at
eleven  for  one.  Whatever  paper  remained  after
this  summary  process  should  be  called  in  and  re-
deemed by  direct  taxation,  and  any  issue  of  paper
currency  in  future  was  to  be  forbidden.  "  This
rather  caused  a  smile,"  says  the  diary,  "  few  appre-
hending that  he  was  in  earnest ;  but  upon  his  ap-
pearing very  serious,  out  of  deference  to  him  as
speaker,  they  appointed  a  committee."  After  a
year  of  hard  work,  Hutchinson's  bill  was  passed,
amid  the  howls  and  curses  of  the  people  of  Boston.
"  Such  was  the  infatuation  that  it  was  common  to
hear  men  wish  the  ship  with  the  silver  on  board
might  sink  in  her  passage."  They  wanted  no
money  but  cheap  paper  money.  At  the  election
in  1749  Hutchinson  was  defeated  by  a  great  ma-
jority, but  was  immediately  chosen  a  member  of
the  council.  People  soon  found,  to  their  amaze-
ment, that  a  good  hard  dollar  had  much  greater
purchasing-power  than  a  scrap  of  dirty  paper  worth
scarcely  more  than  nine  cents ;  and  it  was  further
observed  that,  when  paper  was  once  out  of  the  way,
coin  would  remain  in  circulation.  The  revival  of
trade  was  so  steady  and  so  marked  that  the  tide  of
popular  feeling  turned,  and  Hutchinson  was  as
much  praised  as  he  had  before  been  abused.  His
services  at  this  time  cannot  be  rated  too  highly.
To  his  clear  insight  and  determined  courage  it  was
largely  due  that  Massachusetts  was  financially  able
to  enter  upon  the  Revolutionary  war.  .  In  1774
Massachusetts  was  entirely  out  of  debt,  and  her
prosperity  contrasted  strikingly  with  the  poverty-
stricken  condition  of  Rhode  Island,  which  per-
sisted in  its  issues  of  paper  currency.  In  1749
Mr.  Hutchinson  was  at  the  head  of  the  commis-
sion that  made  peace  with  the  Indians  at  Casco
bay.  He  had  formed  an  intention  to  retire  from
public  business  and  live  in  scholarly  seclusion  at
Milton,  where  he  had  built  a  fine  house,  which  is
still  (1887)  standing.  But  his  plans  were  entirely
changed  in  1753  by  the  sudden  death  of  his  idol-
ized wife,  and  he  sought  distraction  in  public  af-
fairs. He  had  some  time  before  been  appointed
justice  of  common  pleas  for  Suffolk  county.  In
1754  he  was  one  of  the  commissioners  at  the
famous  Albany  congress,  where  he  was  associated
with  Franklin  on  the  committee  for  drawing  up  a
plan  of  union  for  the  thirteen  colonies.  Two  years
afterward,  when  Shirley  was  succeeded  in  the  gov-
ernorship of  Massachusetts  by  Thomas  Pownall,
Mr.  Hutchinson  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor.
In  1760  Pownall  was  succeeded  by  Francis  Ber-
nard, and  soon  afterward,  on  the  death  of  Stephen
Sewall,  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  appointed  chief  justice


HUTCHINSON


HUTCHINSON


333


of  Massachusetts,  while  still  retaining  the  office  of
lieutenant-governor.  During  the  following  year
he  presided  in  the  famous  case  of  the  writs  of  as-
sistance, when  James  Otis  made  the  speech  that
heralded  the  Revolution.  The  enforcement  of  the
navigation  acts  was  now  making  much  trouble  in
Boston,  and  Gov.  Bernard  became  very  unpopular
through  his  zeal  in  promoting  seizures  for  illicit
trade,  he  having  a  share  in  the  forfeitures.

There  is  no  good  evidence  that  Hutchinson
was  concerned  in  these  affairs,  but  sundry  deposi-
tions attested  by  him  as  chief  justice  were  placed
on  file  at  the  Plantation  office  in  London,  and
there  were  seen  by  Briggs  Hallowell,  a  Boston
merchant.  In  these  depositions,  John  Rowe  and
other  merchants  of  Boston  were  named  as  smug-
glers. Reports  of  this  came  to  Boston  in  the  sum-
mer of  1765,  just  as  the  people  were  riotous  over
the  stamp-act.  On  the  night  of  26  Aug.,  Hutchin-
son's house  at  the  North  End  was  sacked  by  a
drunken  mob.  The  money,  plate,  and  wearing-
apparel  were  carried  off,  the  handsome  furniture
was  shattered,  and,  worst  of  all,  the  valuable  li-
brary, with  its  manuscripts  and  priceless  docu-
ments, which  Hutchinson  had  been  thirty  years  in
collecting,  was  almost  completely  destroyed.  To
the  student  of  American  history  the  damage  was  ir-
reparable, as  many  of  the  lost  manuscripts  can  never
be  replaced.  In  town-meeting  next  day  at  Faneuil
Hall  the  riot  was  emphatically  condemned  by  the
people.  Several  of  the  perpetrators  of  the  outrage
were  arrested  and  sent  to  jail,  but  were  rescued  by
a  mob  before  the  day  of  trial.  Mr.  Hutchinson
ultimately  received  indemnification  in  the  sum  of
£3,194  17s.  6d.  As  in  most  instances  of  mob  vio-
lence the  villainy  of  the  assault  upon  the  chief
justice's  house  was  fully  equalled  by  its  stupidity,
for  Hutchinson  had  done  his  best  to  dissuade  the
Grenville  ministry  from  passing  the  obnoxious
stamp-act.  Here,  as  before,  much  trouble  might
have  been  avoided  if  his  advice  had  been  heeded.

In  August,  1769,  Gov.  Bernard  returned  to
England,  leaving  Hutchinson,  as  lieutenant-gov-
ernor, at  the  head  of  affairs.  On  the  occasion  of
the  so-called  "  Boston  massacre,"  5  March,  1770,
he  showed  vigor  and  discretion,  and  but  for  his
prompt  arrest  of  Capt.  Preston  and  his  men  there
would  probably  have  been  much  bloodshed.  In
October,  1770,  he  was  appointed  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  for  the  next  two  years  his  adminis-
tration was  comparatively  quiet.  In  the  summer
of  1772  the  excitement  in  Massachusetts  again
rose  to  fever  heat  over  the  royal  order  that  the
salaries  of  the  judges  should  henceforth  be  paid
by  the  crown.  This  measure,  which  struck  directly
at  the  independence  of  the  judiciary,  led  Samuel
Adams  to  the  revolutionary  step  of  organizing  the
famous  committees  of  correspondence.  In  the
following  January,  Hutchinson  sent  a  message  to
the  legislature,  containing  a  very  learned  and
masterly  statement  of  the  Tory  position,  which  is
well  worth  the  study  of  historians.  It  was  care-
fully and  successfully  answered  by  Samuel  Adams.

In  the  spring  Hutchinson  met  the  governor  of
New  York  at  Hartford,  and  adjusted  the  long-dis-
puted boundary-line  between  New  York  and  Massa-
chusetts to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  the  latter
colony.  On  his  return  he  was  greeted  with  the
furious  excitement  occasioned  by  the  publication
of  the  letters  sent  over  from  England  by  Franklin.
(See  Franklix,  Bexjamin.)  These  letters  created
the  impression  that  Hutchinson  had  advised,  and
was  chiefly  responsible  for,  the  most  odious  meas-
ures of  the  ministry.  The  impression  was  incor-
rect and  unjust  to  Hutchinson,  but  was  natural


enough  at  the  time.  It  led  to  a  petition  from  the
general  court  that  Hutchinson  and  the  lieutenant-
governor,  Oliver,  should  be  removed,  and  it  was
on  the  hearing  of  this  petition  before  the  privy
council  that  Franklin  was  insulted  by  the  rascally
Wedderburn.  The  petition  was  refused.  In  June,
1774,  Hutchinson  was  superseded  by  Gen.  Gage,
and  sailed  for  England,  followed  by  the  execra-
tions of  the  people.  His  house  at  Milton,  with  all
the  rest  of  his  property,  was  confiscated,  and  his
best  coach  was  next  year  carried  over  to  Cambridge
for  the  use  of  Gen.  Washington.  The  town  of
Hutchinson,  in  Worcester  co.,  on  its  incorpora-
tion in  1774,  dropped  the  name  of  the  Tory  gov-
ernor and  took  instead  that  of  Col.  Barre,  who
defended  the  American  cause  in  parliament.  Mr.
Hutchinson  was  received  with  distinguished  favor
by  the  king,  who  offered  him  a  baronetcy,  which
he  refused.  He  cared  little  for  such  honors  or
emoluments  as  England  could  give  him.  Al-
though a  Tory  on  principle,  because  he  could  see
no  alternative  between  anarchy  and  the  universal
supremacy  of  parliament,  he  was  not  the  less  ani-
mated by  an  intense  love  for  New  England.  Un-
til after  Burgoyne's  surrender,  he  cherished  the
hope  of  returning  thither,  and  regarded  his  stay
in  the  mother  country  as  little  better  than  exile.
His  diary  of  events  then  occurring  has  been  re-
cently published  by  his  great-grandson,  Peter
Orlando  Hutchinson,  "  Diarv  and  Letters  of
Thomas  Hutchinson"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1884-'6),
and  has  done  much  to  confirm  historical  students
in  the  more  favorable  view  that  has  recently  been
taken  of  his  character  and  motives.  For  intel-
lectual gifts  and  accomplishments.  Hutchinson
stood  far  above  all  the  other  colonial  governors.
His  "  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  "  (vols,  i.-ii.,
Boston,  1764-'7;  vol.  hi..  London,  1828,  posthu-
mous) is  a  work  of  rare  merit,  alike  for  careful  re-
search, for  philosophic  acuteness,  and  for  literary
charm.  For  thorough  grasp  of  the  subject  of
finance,  he  stands  nearly  on  a  level  with  Hamilton
and  Gallatin.  In  1809  John  Adams  said  of  him  :
•'  He  understood  the  subject  of  coin  and  commerce
better  than  any  man  I  ever  knew  in  this  country.*'
In  his  private  life  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  genial  and
refined ;  in  religion  he  was  a  strict  Puritan,  like  his
great  antagonist,  Samuel  Adams,  whom  he  resem-
bled in  purity,  integrity,  and  unswerving  devotion
to  principle.  His  life  has  never  been  properly  writ-
ten. The  best  accounts  of  its  incidents  are  to  be
found  in  his  own  diary,  and  the  most  intelligent
general  view  is  presented  in  James  K.  Hosmer's
"  Samuel  Adams  "  (Boston,  1885).  The  portrait  on
page  332  is  from  the  painting  by  Copley,  an  ex-
cellent photograph  of  which  is  prefixed  to  the
second  volume  of  the  "  Diary."

HUTCHINSON,  Israel,  soldier,  b.  in  Danvers,
Mass.,  in  1728;  d.  there,  16  March,  1811.  He  par-
ticipated in  the  battles  of  Ticonderoga  and  Lake
George  in  the  French  war  of  1757-'9,  and  led  a  de-
tachment at  the  Plains  of  Abraham.  During  the
Revolution  he  commanded  a  company  at  Lexing-
ton, was  lieutenant-colonel  in  1775,  commanded
the  27th  regiment  at  the  siege  of  Boston  and  in
the  campaign  of  1776,  and  was  with  Washington
in  the  retreat  through  New  Jersev.

HUTCHINSON,  James,  phvsfcian.  b.  in  Wake-
field, Pa.,  29  Jan.,  1752;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
6  Sept.,  1793.  He  received  his  medical  education
in  London,  and,  at  the  prospect  of  the  Revolution,
warmly  espoused  the  patriot  cause.  Returning
home  by  way  of  France,  he  bore  important  de-
I  spatches  from  Benjamin  Franklin  to  congress.  He
|  joined  the  American  army,  and  served  throughout


334


HUTCHINSON


the  Revolution  as  a  physician  and  surgeon.  He
was  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
from  1779  until  his  death,  several  years  secretary
of  the  philosophical  society,  and  professor  of  ma-
teria medica  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
from  1789  till  his  election  in  1791  to  the  chair  of
chemistry.  The.  Philadelphia  college  presented
him  with  a  silver  medal  for  his  proficiency  in  this
branch.  For  many  years  he  was  physician  of  the
port  of  Philadelphia,  and  one  of  the  physicians  to
the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  See  biography  and  por-
trait in  Henry  Simpson's  "Eminent  Philadel-
phians  "  (Philadelphia,  1859).

HUTCHINSON,  Jesse,  farmer,  b.  in  Middle-
ton,  Mass.,  3  Feb.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Milford,  N.  H.,  16
Feb.,  1851.  His  ancestor,  Richard,  came  to  this
country  from  England  in  1634.  acquired  much  land
in  Salem,  Mass.,  and  was  paid  a  premium  by  the
state  for  "  setting  up "  the  first  plough  in  Massa-
chusetts. He  married  Mary  Leavitt,  of  Mount
Vernon,  N.  H.,  in  1800,  and  resided  on  a  farm  in
Milford  for  several  years.  They  occasionally  sang
in  chorus,  taking  parts  in  the  quartets  of  ballads
and  sacred  music,  and  were  the  parents  of  the
"  Hutchinson  family,"  who  achieved  a  reputation
as  popular  singers,  and  were  identified  with  the
anti-slavery  and  temperance  movements.  The  re-
ligious sentiment  of  New  England  was  noticeable
in  their  productions  and  repertory.  The  family
became  abolitionists  when  it  required  courage  to
face  political  prejudice,  and  some  of  them  were
excommunicated  from  the  Baptist  church  on  this
account.  The  children  numbered  sixteen,  three  of
whom  died  in  infancy.  All  inherited  musical  tal-
ent, and  people  came  from  far  and  near  to  hear
them  sing  in  chorus  in  prayer-meetings,  or  at
home.  They  were  often  urged  to  appear  in  public,
and  in  the  summer  of  1841  the  four  youngest  chil-
dren, Judson,  John,  Asa,  and  Abby,  made  a  suc-
cessful concert-tour  in  New  England.  In  1843  the
family  appeared  in  New  York  city,  and  achieved
an  immediate  success.  N.  P.  Willis  spoke  of  them
as  a  "  nest  of  brothers  with  a  sister  in  it."  They  ac-
companied themselves  with  a  violin  and  violoncello,
and  excelled  in  sacred  and  descriptive  songs,  and  in
ballads,  both  humorous  and  pathetic.  Their  own
productions  were  received  with  most  enthusiasm
by  the  popular  taste,  although  their  melodies  were
simple  and  crudely  harmonized.  They  were  co-
workers with  Garrison,  Greeley,  Rogers,  and  other
leaders  of  anti-slavery  reform,  often  aiding  in  mass
conventions,  singing  popular  and  original  songs
with  their  quartet  chorus.  In  1845  they  travelled
in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  met  with  popu-
lar success.  They  travelled  from  the  Atlantic  to
the  Pacific  in  the  political  canvasses  of  1856  and
1860,  forming  several  bands  from  a  third  genera-
tion in  their  family.  During  the  civil  war  some
of  these  bands  visited  recruiting-stations  to  en-
courage volunteer  enlistments,  and  after  the  battle
of  Bull  Run  they  went  to  Virginia,  where  they
were  expelled  from  the  National  lines  by  Gen.
McClellan  because  they  sang  Whittier's  "  Ein
Feste  Burg  "  as  an  anti-slavery  song.  Appeal  was
made  to  President  Lincoln,  who  said,  after  Sec.
Chase  read  the  obnoxious  song  in  a  cabinet-meet-
ing :  "  It  is  just  the  character  of  song  that  I  desire
the  soldiers  to  hear."  By  the  unanimous  consent
of  the  cabinet  and  the  order  of  President  Lincoln,
they  were  re-admitted  to  the  National  camps. —
The  eldest  son,  Jesse,  wrote  many  songs  for  popu-
lar airs,  which  he  sang  with  effect.  The  principal
of  these  were  the  "  Emancipation  Song,"  "  Family
Song,"  "  Old  Granite  State,"  "  Good  Old  Days  of
Yore," "The  Slave  Mother," "The Slave's  Ap-


(X^^^Lv^S


HUTCHISON

peal,"  "  Good  Time  Coming,"  and  "  Uncle  Sam's
Farm."  It  was  he  that  organized  the  company.
— Judson  was  the  humorist,  excelling  in  burlesque
and  political  songs,  some  of  which  were  an  Italian
burlesque,  "  The  Bachelor's  Lament,"  "  Away
Down  East,"  "  The  Modern  Belle,"  "  Anti-Calo-
mel," "Jordan," and  "The  Humbugged  Husband."
— Asa  was  the  basso,  and  the  executive  member  of
the  troupe. — John,  b.  in  Milford,  N.  H.,  4  Jan.,
1821,  possessed  the  most  vocal  talent.  Among  his
songs  and  those  of  his  son  Henry  were  "  Will  the
New  Year  come  To-Night,  Mother?"  "Bhigen  on
the  Rhine,"  "The  Newfoundland  Dog,"  "The
Bridge  of  Sighs,"  "  The  People's  Advent."  and
Russell's  "  Ship  on  Fire." — Abby,  the  contralto,  b.
in  Milford,  N.  H.,  29  Aug.,  1829,  began  at  an  early
age  to  sing  with  her  brothers.  She  was  admired
for  her  simplicity
and  archness,  and
sang  "  Over  the
Mountain  and  over
the  Moor,"  "  The
Slave's  Appeal,"
"  The  Spider  and
the  Fly,"  "  Jamie's
on  the  Stormy
Sea,"  and  "  The
May  Queen."  She
married  Ludlow
Patton,  of  New
York  city,  in  1849,
and  has  since  lived
in  retirement.  Her
brothers  continued
to  appear  in  concerts,  and  from  time  to  time  have
brought  before  the  public  their  own  families  of
young  singers.  They  were  followed  by  many
bands  of  imitators.

HUTCHINSON,  John  Russell,  educator,  b.  in
Columbia  county,  Pa.,  12  Feb.,  1807 ;  d.  24  Feb.,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in
1826,  and,  after  studying  two  years  in"  Princeton
esminary,  preached  in  Rodney,  Miss.,  and  in  Baton
Rouge,  La.,  and  in  1834  became  connected  with
the  College  of  Louisiana  in  Jackson.  He  was  pas-
tor of  a  church  in  Vicksburg  from  1837  till  1842,
and  was  then  professor  of  ancient  languages  in
Oakland  college,  Miss.,  till  1854.  On  the  death  of
Rev.  Jeremiah  Chamberlain  in  1851,  he  served  as

8 resident  of  the  college.  In  1854  he  removed  to
ew  Orleans,  where  he  established  a  classical  school
and  supplied  various  churches.  In  1860  he  re-
moved to  Houston,  Texas,  and  after  the  civil  war
was  occupied  in  missionary  work.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "  Reminiscences,  Sketches,  and  Addresses  "
(Houston,  1874).

HUTCHISON,  Joseph  Chrisman,  physician,
b.  in  Old  Franklin,  Howard  co.,  Mo..  22  Feb.,  1822 ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  16  July,  1887.  He  studied
at  the  University  of  Missouri,  and  was  graduated
in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1848.  He  then  practised  four  years  in  Missouri,
and  in  1852  settled  in  Brooklyn,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  He  was  surgeon  to  the
Brooklyn  city  hospital  from  1857  till  his  death,
for  several  years  was  surgeon-in-chief  to  the  Brook-
lyn orthopaedic  infirmary.  In  1854-'6  he  was
lecturer  on  diseases  of  women  in  the  New  York
university.  During  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1854
he  was  surgeon  to  the  Brooklyn  cholera  hospi-
tal. From  1860  till  1867  he  was  professor  of  op-
erative and  clinical  surgery  in  Long  Island  col-
lege hospital,  and  from  1873  till  1875  he  was  health
commissioner  of  Brooklyn.  He  was  a  delegate
from  the  American  medical  association  to  the  In-


HUTSON


HYATT


335


ternational  medical  congress  at  Paris  in  1867,  was
vice-president  of  the  New  York  academy  of  medi-
cine from  1869  till  he  became  president  in  1871,
a  delegate  to  the  British  medical  association  in
Edinburgh  in  1875,  to  that  held  in  London  in  1881,
and  was  a  member  of  various  medical  associations.
The  University  of  Missouri  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1880.  Among  his  most  important  pub-
lications are  "  History  and  Observations  on  Asiatic
Cholera  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1854 "  (New  York,
1854) ;  "  Dislocation  of  the  Femur  into  the  Ischiatic
Notch  "  ;  "  Treatise  on  Physiology  and  Hygiene "
for  schools  (1870);  "Contributions  to  Orthopaedic
Surgery  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Acupressure."  a  prize  essay
of  the  New  York  state  medical  societv.

HUTSON,  Richard,  jurist,  b.  in'Prince  Will-
iam's parish,  S.  C,  12  June,  1747;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1793.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1765,  and  practised  law  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
till  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Continental  congress  from  South
Carolina  in  1774,  1776,  and  1778,  and  in  the  latter
year,  with  other  patriots,  was  imprisoned  and  sent
to  St.  Augustine  by  the  British  under  Sir  Henry
Clinton.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  during  which
his  considerable  estate  had  been  seriously  impaired,
he  completed  his  financial  ruin  by  taking  payment
in  continental  currency  for  money  that  was  due
him,  hoping,  by  his  example,  to  improve  the  gov-
ernment credit.  He  was  intendant  of  Charleston
under  its  first  charter  in  1783-'8,  became  chancellor
in  1784,  senior  judge  of  the  chancery  court  in  1791,
and  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  ratified
the  Federal  constitution  in  1788.

HUTTEN,  Philip  von,  adventurer,  b.  in  Fran-
conia,  Germany,  near  the  close  of  the  loth  cen-
tury; d.  in  Venezuela  in  1546.  He  joined  the
first  expedition  that  was  sent  out  by  the  Welsers
of  Augsburg  to  form  a  colony  in  South  America.
Charles  V.  made  a  grant  of  the  province  of  Vene-
zuela to  these  bankers  as  a  hereditary  fief  in  re-
turn for  the  enormous  sums  that  he  owed  them.
The  conduct  of  the  German  adventurers  was  even
more  ferocious  than  that  of  the  Spaniards,  but  Ovi-
edo  says  that,  while  Hutten  was  fully  as  brave  and
ambitious  as  his  companions,  he  was  much  less  cruel.
He  landed  at  Coro  in  1531,  and  his  life  afterward
was  full  of  privations,  dangers,  and  misfortunes.  In
one  of  his  expeditions  to  Lake  Maracaibo  he  heard
of  a  country  called  Eldorado.  An  Indian  of  high
rank  gave  him  the  most  positive  details  regarding
this  imaginary  region,  and,  after  acquainting  him
with  the  route  to  it,  offered  to  act  as  his  guide.
After  a  painful  march,  of  eight  days,  in  severe
weather,  the  Indian  escaped.  Several  of  the  party
soon  died  of  hunger  and  fatigue.  They  were  fre-
quently attacked  by  the  Indians,  and,  always  de-
ceived by  false  intelligence,  wandered  for  four
years  from  one  point  to  another.  At  last,  when
their  number  had  been  reduced  from  130  to  39,
they  arrived  near  a  large  and  fine  city,  where  they
were  attacked  by  several  thousand  Indians.  Hut-
ten,  although  he  had  been  severely  wounded,
charged  at  the  head  of  his  band  and  completely
routed  the  enemy.  He  then  set  out  on  his  return
to  Coro,  but  never  reached  his  destination.  The
province  of  Venezuela  had  been  taken  possession
of  by  Carvajal  during  the  absence  of  Hutten.  The
latter,  to  whom  the  government  of  the  province  be-
longed by  right,  was  assassinated  on  the  road  to  Co-
ro, by  order  of  Carvajal.  Hutten  wrote  a  narrative
of  his  campaigns.  The  manuscript  was  brought  to
Germany,  and  lay  so  long  lost  in  a  library  that  it
became  almost  illegible.  It  was  finally  published
in  the  first  volume  of  the  collection  entitled  "  Lit-


erary and  Historical  Magazine,"  by  Meusel  (Bay-
reuth  and  Leipsic,  1785).  It  bears  the  title  "  News
from  the  Indies,"  and  contains  valuable  informa-
tion on  the  events  in  which  the  author  took  part
from  1535  to  1546.  while  giving  graphic  descrip-
tions of  the  countries  through  which  he  passed.

HUTTER,  Edwin  Wilson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Allentown,  Pa.,  12  Sept.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  21  Sept.,  1873.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  his
father  died,  leaving  him  the  editor  and  sole  pro-
prietor of  two  newspapers  in  Allentown,  one  pub-
lished in  English  and  the  other  in  German.  Sub-
sequently he  removed  to  Harrisburg,  where  he
had  charge  of  another  newspaper.  For  some  time
he  resided  in  Lancaster,  after  which  he  was  private
secretary  to  James  Buchanan,  when  the  latter  was
secretary  of  state.  He  then  studied  for  the  ministry
in  Baltimore,  and  was  called  to  St.  Matthew's  Evan-
gelical Lutheran  church.  Philadelphia,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death.  He  was  a  firm  adherent  of
the  government  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  ac-
tively interested  in  the  Northern  home  for  friend-
less children,  of  which  he  was  a  trustee.

HUTTON,  Abraham  Bloodgood,  educator,  b.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec,  1798 ;  d.  in  Stuyvesant
Landing/N.  Y.,  18  July.  1870.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1817,  studied  law  in  Albany
for  one  year,  and  theology  in  Princeton  seminary
in  1819-'21.  He  then  became  interested  in  the  edu-
cation of  deaf-mutes,  and  devoted  his  life  to  this
cause.  He  was  an  assistant  instructor  in  the
Philadelphia  deaf-mute  institution  in  1820-'8.  and
in  1830  became  principal.  Mr.  Hutton  advocated
the  use  of  signs  and  of  writing  rather  than  the
system  of  lip-reading  and  artificial  articulation.
The  year  previous  to  his  death  he  resigned  his
work  in  consequence  of  failure  of  health.

HUTTON,  Laurence,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  8  Aug.,  1843.  He  was  educated  in  New  York,
travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  and  spent  every
summer  in  London  for  twenty  years.  He  early
began  writing  for  the  press,  and  has  contributed
extensively  to  periodicals.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Plays  and  Players  "  (New  York,  1875)  and  "  Liter-
ary Landmarks  of  London"  (London  and  New
York,  1885).  He  has  edited  "  Artists  of  the  Nine-
teenth Centurv,"  with  Clara  Erskine  Clement  (Bos-
ton, 1879) ;  "  The  American  Actor  Series"  (188l-'2) ;
"  Actors  and  Actresses  of  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States,"  with  Brander  Matthews  (New  York
and  London,  1886);  and  "John  Bernard's  Retro-
spection of  America,"  with  Brander  Matthews  (New
York,  1886).  He  has  also  compiled  "  Opening  Ad-
dresses of  the  American  Stage  "  (1886).

HYATT,  A 1  phe us.  naturalist,  b.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  5  April,  1838.  He  was  educated  at  the
Maryland  military  academy,  at  Yale  college,  and  at
the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1862.  Subsequently  he  served
during  the  civil  war  in  the  47th  Massachusetts
volunteers,  and  attained  the  rank  of  captain.  He
then  renewed  his  studies  under  Louis  Agassiz,  and
in  1867  became  a  curator  in  the  Essex  institute.
While  holding  this  office  in  connection  with  Ed-
ward S.  Morse,  Alpheus  S.  Packard,  Frederick  W.
Putnam,  and  the  officers  of  the  Essex  institute,  he
founded  the  Peabody  academy  of  science.  Its
museum  was  planned  by  these  four  naturalists,
together  they  formed  its  first  scientific  staff,  and
in  1869  Mr.  Hyatt  was  made  one  of  its  curators.
He  was  also  associated  with  these  gentlemen  in
establishing  the  "  American  Naturalist,"  and  was
one  of  its  original  editors.  In  1870  he  was  elected
custodian  and  in  1881  curator  of  the  Boston  society
of  natural  history. He  has  also  charge  of  the  fossil


336


HYATT


I1YDE


fiyfc£e.pv0Aty*3ff~~


invertebrates  in  the  Museum  of  comparative  zoology
at  Cambridge,  and  since  1881  has  held  the  profes-
sorship of  zoology  and  paleontology  in  the  Massa-
chusetts institute  of  technology. Prof.  Hyatt  also

has  a  class  in  the
Boston university,
and  in connection
/ <4^Pil^  w'tn  tne  Society  of

/ _ ^^egg^a  natural history is

T^^k ^*tfySW  manager of the

Teachers'  school  of
science,  which  was
founded  in  1870.  A
general  laboratory
of  natural  history
was  founded  at  An-
nisquam,  Mass.,  by
the  Woman's  edu-
cational societv  of
Boston,  and  Prof.
Hyatt  is  also  in
charge  of  this  enterprise,  the  origin  of  which
is  due  to  him.  He  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in  1869,
and  in  1875  was  made  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  science.  The  American  society  of
naturalists  was  organized  in  consequence  of  sug-
gestions that  were  made  by  him,  and  at  the  first
meeting  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  in  1883,  he  was
elected  its  president.  Prof.  Hyatt  has  devoted
special  attention  to  the  lower  forms  of  animal  life.
Among  his  important  researches  are  "  Observations
on  Polyzoa  "  (1866) ; "  Fossil  Cephalopods  of  the  Mu-
seum of  Comparative  Zoology  "  (1872) ;  "  Revision
of  North  American  Peroferae  "  (1875-'7),  which  is  the
only  work  on  North  American  commercial  sponges,
and  is  recognized  throughout  the  world  as  an  au-
thority ;  "  Genesis  of  Tertiary  Species  of  Planorbis
at  Steinheim "  (1880),  giving  the  details  of  his
study  at  Steinheim  of  the  fossils,  which  were  at
that  "time  regarded  in  Europe  as  the  only  positive
demonstration  of  the  theory  of  evolution ;  and
"  Genera  of  Fossil  Cephalopoda  "  (1883).  containing
important  contributions  to  the  theory  of  evolution.
"  Larval  Theory  of  the  Origin  of  Cellular  Tissue  "
(1884)  contains  his  theory  of  the  origin  of  sex.  Be-
sides the  foregoing,  Prof.  Hyatt  has  edited  a  series
of  "Guides  for  Science  Teaching,"  and  is  him-
self the  author  of  several  of  the  series,  includ-
ing "  About .  Pebbles,"  "  Commercial  and  other
Sponges,"  "  Common  Hydroids,  Corals,  and  Echin-
oderrns,"  "  The  Oyster,  Clam,  and  other  Common
Mollusks,"  and  "  Worms  and  Crustaceans."

HYATT,  John  Wesley,  inventor,  b.  in  Starkey,
N.  Y.,  28  Nov.,  1837.  He  received  a  common-
school  education  in  Yates  county,  and  then  spent
one  year  in  the  Eddytown  seminary.  At  the  age
of  sixteen  he  removed  to  Illinois,  where  he  became
a  printer.  Subsequently  he  devoted  his  attention
almost  exclusively  to  inventing,  and  his  first  pat-
ent, received  in  February,  1861,  was  for  a  knife-
grinder  or  sharpener.  His  next  important  inven-
tion was  a  composition  billiard-ball,  the  patent
being  issued  in  October,  1865.  The  Albany  com-
pany controlling  this  invention  with  subsequent
improvements  has  from  that  date  led  the  market
in  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  artificial  billiard
and  pool  balls.  Large  quantities  of  them  are  used
all  over  the  world,  supplying  the  deficiency  caused
by  the  scarcity  of  ivory.  In  1869  Mr.  Hyatt  ob-
tained patents  on  a  new  style  of  domino,  which,
with  subsequent  improvements,  formed  the  basis
of  the  Embossing  company,  of  Albany,  which  is
still  in  profitable  existence."  During  the  same  year
he  first  discovered  the  method  of  dissolving  pyrox-


yline  under  pressure,  and  formed  the  nucleus  to
"the  celluloid  business,  which,  owing  to  his  genius
and  skill  in  producing  ways  and  means  for  nmnu-
i'acturing  and  manipulating  the  so-called  celluloid,
has  become  a  large  and  profitable  industry.  Mr.
Hyatt's  experiments  with  pyroxyline  were  begun
in  Albany ;  but,  unable  to  interest  capital  to  de-
velop the  invention  in  that  city,  he  went  to  New
York,  where  he  obtained  the  requisite  support,  and
established  works  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  which  rapidly
grew  into  a  very  large  business.  In  1875  he  turned
his  attention  to  the  production  of  a  school-slate,
and  succeeded  in  producing  the  finest  slate  ever
put  upon  the  market,  together  with  special  ma-
chinery for  making  it.  This  he  disposed  of  to  the
Embossing  company,  and  afterward  to  another
concern,  which  now  manufactures  the  goods.  Mr.
Hyatt  discovered  in  1878  a  new  compound,  con-
sisting chiefly  of  bone  and  silica,  which  he  called
"  bonsilate."  Subsequently,  by  means  of  patents,
he  perfected  the  manufacture  of  that  substance,
which  is  made  in  Albany,  and  is  used  in  the  manu-
facture of  billiard-balls,  knife-handles,  buttons,  and
similar  articles.  This  material  is  useful  for  the
production  of  many  articles  that  are  now  made  of
celluloid,  and,  as  it  is  also  both  fire-proof  and  wa-
ter-proof, it  is  capable  of  being  employed  in  cases
where  celluloid  would  not  answer.  In  1881  Mr.
Hyatt's  attention  was  called  to  the  necessity  of  an
efficient  method  of  purifying  water.  This  he  found
a  very  large  field,  there  being  no  reliable  system  in
vogue  capable  of  accomplishing  good  results.  His
investigations  in  this  direction  led  to  the  comple-
tion of  a  pure-water  system,  in  which  the  methods
arrived  at  are  said  to  be  in  advance  of  all  other
scientific  and  practical  researches  on  the  subject.
By  it  the  foulest  river,  canal,  and  lake  waters  are
rendered  perfectly  bright,  pure,  and  sparkling.
This  system  is  in  operation  in  more  than  a  thou-
sand places  in  the  United  States,  and  in  1887  he
went  to  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  it
there. He  has  received  nearly  200  patents.

HYDE,  Alvaii,  clergyman,  b.  in  Franklin,
Conn.,  2  Feb.,  1768 ;  d.  in  Lee,  Mass.,  4  Dec,  1833.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1788,  studied
theology,  and  on  6  June,  1792,  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  church  in  Lee,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  For  thirty-one  years  he  was  a  member  of
the  corporation  of  Williams  college,  and  its  vice-
president  from  1812  till  his  death.  The  degree  of
D.  D.  was  given  to  him  by  Dartmouth  in  1812.
Dr.  Hyde  published  "  Sketches  of  the  Life  of  Rev.
Stephen  West "  (1818) ;  an  "  Essay  on  the  State  of
Infants  "  (1830) ;  and  occasional  sermons.  —  His
half-brother,  Lavius,  clergyman,  b.  in  Franklin,
Conn.,  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Vernon,  Conn.,  3  April,  1865,
was  educated  by  his  brother,  and  graduated  at
Williams  in  1813.  He  studied  theology  in  Ando-
ver,  and  in  1818  was  ordained  pastor  in  Salisbury,
Conn.  In  1823  he  was  settled  in  Bolton,  Conn.,
and  subsequently  at  Ellington,  Conn.,  and  Way-
land,  and  Becket,  Mass.,  but  afterward  returned  to
Bolton.  In  1859  he  retired  from  the  ministry  and
spent  the  last  years  of  his  life  in  Vernon.  He
possessed  a  large  and  valuable  library.  He  pub-
lished the  "  Remains  "  of  the  poet  Carlos  Wilcox,
with  a  memoir  (Hartford,  1828) ;  a  memoir  of  his
brother  Alvan  (Boston,  1835) ;  and  a  new  edition  of
Dr.  Nettleton's  "  Village  Hymns  "  (Hartford,  1858).

HYDE,  Edward,  governor  of  North  Carolina,
b.  in  England  about  1650;  d.  in  North  Carolina,  8
Aug.,  1712.  From  1706  till  1712  the  colony  of
North  Carolina  was  in  a  state  of  confusion  from
the  conflicting  claims  of  Anglicans  and  Quakers,
each  party  having  its  governor  and  its  house  of


HYDE


HYNEMAN


337


representatives.  To  restore  order,  Hyde  was  de-
spatched in  1711  to  govern  the  province,  but  he
was  to  receive  his  commission  from  the  governor
of  the  southern  division,  who  had  died  when  he
arrived,  and  he  had  no  evidence  of  his  right  except
private  letters  from  the  proprietaries.  The  legisla-
ture that  he  convened  made  severe  enactments,
which  were  condemned  even  by  its  friends,  and
which  it  had  no  power  to  enforce.  Thomas  Gary,
the  claimant  of  the  Quaker  party,  and  his  friends,
now  took  up  arms.  Fortifying  his  house  against
a  possible  attack,  Cary  armed  two  vessels,  filled
them  with  soldiers,  and  attempted  to  land  in
Chowan  sound,  where  Hyde  and  his  council  were
assembled.  Hyde  called  in  the  aid  of  Gov.  Alex-
ander Spottswood,  of  Virginia,  who  sent  a  party  of
marines  from  the  guard-shigs,  restored  quiet,  and
«xpelled  Cary.  In  September,  1711,  the  Tusca-
rora  Indians,  taking  advantage  of  the  dissensions
among  the  colonists,  massacred  120  white  settlers
along  Roanoke,  Neuse,  and  Pamlico  rivers.  Gov.
Hyde  called  out  the  militia,  and  with  a  force  of
South  Carolinians  and  several  hundred  friendly
Yemassee  Indians,  attacked  the  Tuscaroras  near
New  Berne,  3  Jan.,  1712,  and  defeated  them  with
great  slaughter.  Hostilities  continued  during  the
remainder  of  the  winter  and  spring.  Hyde  died  in
a  yellow-fever  epidemic.

HYDE,  Edward  Wyllys,  engineer,  b.  in  Sagi-
naw, Mich.,  17  Oct.,  1843.  He  was  graduated  as  a
civil  engineer  at  Cornell  in  1872,  and  was  instructor
there  in  1871-'3,  after  which  he  became  a  member
of  the  faculty  of  the  Pennsylvania  military  acade-
my. In  September,  1875,  he  was  elected  professor
■of  mathematics  and  instructor  in  civil  engineering
in  the  University  of  Cincinnati,  which  chair  he
has  since  held.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  so-
cieties and  a  fellow  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science.  Besides  articles
•contributed  to  mathematical  journals,  he  has  pub-
lished  "  Skew  Arches  "  (New  York,  1875).

HYDE,  Frederick,  phvsician,  b.  in  Whitnev's
Point,  N.Y.,  27  Jan.,  1809.'  His  grandfather  and
father  were  patriots  of  the  Revolution.  Frederick
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
•surgeons  at  Fairfield,  N.  Y.,  in  1836,  and  since
that  date  has  practised  medicine  in  Cortland,
N.  Y.,  treating  successfully  dislocation  of  the  hu-
merus of  many  days'  standing  and  other  difficult
surgical  cases.  He  conducted  in  Cortland  a  private
school  of  anatomy.  In  1854  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  midwifery  and  diseases  of  women  and
■children  in  Geneva  medical  college,  and  from  1855
till  1872  he  occupied  the  chair  of  surgery  there.
In  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  to  the  same  chair
in  Syracuse  university,  and  in  1877  was  elected
also  dean  of  that  institution.  He  was  president  of
the  New  York  State  medical  association  in  1865,
since  1876  has  been  president  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees of  the  State  normal  school  at  Cortland,  and  in
that  year  was  a  delegate  to  the  International  medi-
cal congress  at  Philadelphia.  In  1876  he  became
president  of  the  Cortland  savings  bank.  He  has
published  reports  on  the  "Surgery  of  Cortland
County  "  (1851-80) ;  various  papers  in  the  " Trans-
actions "  of  the  New  York  medical  society,  includ-
ing "  Hernia  and  its  Complications  "  (1867) ;  "  Ma-
lignant Tumors  of  the  Abdomen"  (1870);  and
"The  Taxis  in  Strangulated  Hernia"  (1875);  also
•contributions  to  the  Buffalo  "  Medical  Journal "
on  "Psoas  Abscesses"  and  "Traumatic  Arterial
Haemorrhage,"  besides  several  addresses.

HYDE,  James  Nevins,  surgeon,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  21  June,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1861,  began  the  study  of  medicine  in  the  New
vol.  hi. — 22


York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  entered
the  U.  S.  navy  in  1863  as  assistant  surgeon,  and
served  during  the  civil  war  and  afterward  on  the
"  Ticonderoga,"  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,
under  Admiral  Farragut.  In  1869  he  resigned,
was  graduated  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  settled  in  Chica-
go, 111.  He  is  professor  of  dermatology  and  ortho-
paedic surgery  in  the  Chicago  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons,  and  clinical  instructor  in  the  South-
side  dispensary,  associate  editor  of  the  "Chicago
Medical  Journal  and  Examiner,"  a  contributor  to
the  New  York  "  Archives  of  Dermatology,"  and  a
member  of  various  medical  societies.

HYDE,  Nancy  Maria,  educator,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  21  March,  1792;  d.  there,  28  March,  1816.
She  was  for  many  years  a  teacher  in  Norwich,  and
excelled  in  painting  and  embroidery.  Her  writ-
ings, with  a  memoir  by  her  friend  and  neighbor,
Miss  Huntley,  afterward  Mrs.  Lydia  H.  Sigourney,
whose  first  book  had  appeared  the  year  before,  were
published  after  Miss  Hvde's  death"(Norwich,  1816).

HYDE,  William  De  Witt,  educator,  b.  in
Winchendon,  Mass..  23  Sept.,  1858.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1879,  and  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary  in  1882.  In  1883  he  became
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Paterson,
N.  J.,  and  in  1885  was  elected  president  of  Bow-
doin,  and  professor  of  mental  and  moral  philoso-
phy there. He  has  been  a  contributor  to  reviews.

HYER,  Georare,  printer,  b.  in  Covington.  Frank-
lin co.,  N.  Y.,  16  July,  1819;  d.  in  Oshkosh.  Wis.,
20  April,  1872.  He  was  apprenticed  in  the  print-
ing-office of  the  "  St.  Lawrence  Gazette  "  in  Ogdens-
burg,  N.  Y.,  removed  to  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  in  1836,
to  engage  in  the  survey  of  government  lands,  and
contributed  largely  to  "  The  Advertiser,"  the  first
newspaper  that  was  issued  in  that  town.  In  1837
he  was  a  mail-agent,  and  carried  the  first  mail  that
was  ever  sent  west  of  Milwaukee,  consisting  of  a
few  letters  and  papers,  enclosed  in  an  old  way-bill
envelope,  which  he  kept  in  his  pocket.  From  1838
till  1843  he  published  and  printed  two  newspapers
in  Milwaukee  and  two  in  Madison.  Wis.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1846,  1850,  and  1863,
and  in  the  first-mentioned  year  was  a  representa-
tive in  the  State  constitutional  convention.  In
1848  he  published  the  "  Waukesha  Democrat."  and
in  1854  conducted  "  The  Milwaukee  Advertiser."
He  was  register  of  the  land-office  at  Superior.  Wis.,
in  1855.  and  in  1859  edited  the  "  Madison  Patriot."
He  established  the  "  Madison  Democrat "  in  1865,
and  from  1867  till  the  time  of  his  death  was  con-
nected with  "  The  Oshkosh  Times."

HYLAND,  Thomas  Raymond,  archbishop,  b.
in  Dublin,  Ireland,  3  Nov..  1837;  d.  in  Trinidad,
W.  I..  9  Oct.,  1884.  He  entered  the  Dominican  order
in  Tallaght,  Ireland,  in  February.  1856,  and  was  or-
dained priest  in  Rome.  22  Dec,  1864.  He  was  con-
secrated bishop  of  Enrea,  in  parti  bus.  in  Rome,  30
April,  1882,  and  appointed  coadjutor  archbishop
of  Trinidad.  While  attending  on  the  sick  there
he  contracted  a  malignant  fever,  of  which  he  died.

HYNEMAN,  Leon,  editor,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  Pa.,  in  1805;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1879.
He  was  a  Hebrew  and  a  Freemason,  and  founded
the  order  of  Female  Druids.  He  wrote  and  pub-
lished "  Ancient  York  and  London  Grand  Lodges,"
afterward  entitled  "  Hvneman's  Review  " :  edited
the  "  Masonic  Library."  a  collection  of  Masonic
pamphlets  ;  the  "  World's  Masonic  Register "
(Philadelphia,  1860);  and  the  weekly  "Masonic
Mirror  and  Keystone  "  (Philadelphia,  1852-'60).—
His  sister-in-law,  Rebekah,  is  the  author  of  "  The
Leper  and  Other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1853).


338


ibanez


IBERVILLE


IBANEZ,  Adolfo  (e-ban'-yeth),  Chilian  states-
man, b.  in  Santiago,  15  June,  1829.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  law  at  the  university  of  his  native  city,  was
appointed  in  1850  district  attorney  for  the  superior
court  of  Serena,  and  in  1856  judge  of  the  superior
court  of  Ancud.  In  1870  he  was  sent  by  Presi-
dent Perez  as  minister  to  Peru,  and  to  him  was  due
the  satisfactory  arrangement  of  some  differences
that  had  arisen  out  of  the  treaty  of  alliance  which
the  two  republics  had  formed  against  Spain.  He
returned  to  Chili  in  1872  to  take  charge  of  the  port-
folio of  foreign  relations  and  colonization,  and  in
this  office  he  brought  the  question  of  the  boundary
between  his  country  and  Bolivia  to  a  conclusion,
and  began  the  claims  against  the  Argentine  Repub-
lic regarding  the  territory  of  Patagonia.  He  also
fostered  colonization,  and  succeeded  in  attracting
a  steady  current  of  emigration.  He  was  elected
deputy  to  congress  in  1874  for  the  city  of  Santiago,
and  in  1876  to  the  senate  for  the  province  of  that
name.  In  1877  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  London,
and  in  the  next  year  to  Washington,  where  he  suc-
cessfully concluded  a  special  mission.  In  1879  he
returned  to  Chili,  resuming  his  seat  in  the  senate,
where  he  contributed  greatly  to  the  favorable  termi-
nation of  the  war  between  Chili  and  Peru.  In  1882
he  was  called  by  President  Santa  Maria  to  take
charge  again  of  the  portfolio  of  foreign  relations,
but  in  the  same  year  was  elected  senator  for  the
province  of  Santiago  for  the  full  term  of  six  years.

IBARRA,  Andres  (e-bar'-rah),  Venezuelan  sol-
dier, b.  in  Caracas,  17  Aug.,  1807 ;  d.  there,  23  Aug.,
1875.  By  the  advice  of  his  relative,  Simon  Bolivar,
he  was  sent  to  the  United  States,  and  afterward
made  a  tour  through  Europe,  to  finish  his  educa-
tion. He  returned  to  Venezuela  in  1826,  entered
the  military  service  in  1827,  as  adjutant  on  Bolivar's
staff,  and  saved  the  life  of  that  general  on  25  Sept.,
1828  (see  Bolivar,  Simon),  by  defending,  with  a  few
others,  the  doors  of  the  government  palace  against
his  would-be  assassins.  Ibarra  was  wounded  on  this
occasion.  He  accompanied  Bolivar  in  his  cam-
paign against  Peru,  and  also  participated  in  the
pacification  of  the  provinces  of  Pasto  and  Popayan,
which  had  revolted  in  1830.  He  accompanied  Boli-
var in  his  exile,  and  was  at  his  bedside  during  his
last  moments.  Afterward  Ibarra  was  promoted
major  by  the  government  of  Bogota,  served  under
Gen.  Montilla  at  Cartagena,  and,  when  that  city
capitulated,  emigrated  to  the  United  States.  Early
in  1835  he  returned  to  Venezuela,  and  on  8  July  of
that  year  took  part  in  a  revolution  that  had  but  a
short-lived  success.  After  a  brief  exile,  Ibarra  re-
turned, and  retired  to  private  life  till  1848,  when
he  was  called  into  service  by  Gen.  Monagas,  pro-
moted colonel,  and  served  in  several  civil  and  mili-
tary offices.  In  1862  he  was  promoted  general,
and  served  the  different  governments  in  the  sup-
pression of  repeated  revolutionary  movements.  In
1868  he  was  elected  to  the  Federal  senate  for  the
state  of  Aragua.  At  his  decease  he  was  honored
by  a  public  funeral,  and  on  24  Aug.,  1876,  his  body
was  transferred  to  the  National  pantheon.

IBARRA,  Francisco  de,  Spanish  explorer,  b.
in  Spain  in  the  beginning  of  the  16th  century :  d.
in  Chametla,  Mexico,  in  1572.  About  1554  he  came
to  Mexico,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  the
Zacatecas  Indians.  Learning  from  the  natives  of
the  promising  countries  to  the  north,  he  formed  a
party  and  set  out  to  explore  them,  visiting  places
that  he  called  San  Lucas,  San  Martin,  and  Som-


brerete.  The  rich  silver-mines  of  the  latter  place
attracted  his  attention,  and  after  a  long  struggle
with  the  natives,  who  were  at  last  subdued  and
pacified,  Ibarra  founded  the  villages  of  San  .Martin
and  Nombre  de  Dios.  He  was  then  promoted  to  a
captaincy,  and  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he
led  his  company  to  what  is  now  New  Mexico,  dis-
covering the  rich  mines  of  Inde  and  San  Juan,  find
founding  the  cities  of  Durango  and  Santa  Barbara
in  the  territory  that  he  called  Nueva  Viscaya.
From  this  place  he  travelled  northwest.  He
founded  the  cities  of  Cinaloa,  Chametla,  and  San
Sebastian,  and  then,  passed  through  Chihuahua,
Sonora,  part  of  California,  and  New  Mexico,  to  San
Lucas.  On  his  return  to  the  colony  of  Sombrerete
he  rendered  great  service  to  the  Spaniards  by  sub-
duing Indian  revolts.  He  wrote  several  letters  to
the  court,  most  of  which  are  preserved,  and  have
been  published  by  the  government  of  Spain.

IBARRA,  Jose,  Mexican  artist,  b.  in  the  city
of  Mexico  in  1688 ;  d.  there,  22  Nov.,  1756.  He
was  a  pupil  of  Correa,  and  was  specially  famous  for
the  richness  of  his  color,  for  which  he  has  been
called  the  Murillo  of  Mexico.  His  paintings  still
preserve  their  brilliancy  of  color,  his  specialty  be-
ing the  execution  of  religious  subjects,  which  are
noted  for  correctness  of  design  and  perspective,
and  are  found  in  many  parts  of  Mexico ;  the  most
famous  are  two  allegorical  pictures,  in  the  great
hall  of  San  Ildefonso,  a  "  Circumcision,"  hanging
in  the  academy  of  San  Carlos,  and  a  "  Calvary,"  in
private  possession  in  Texcoco,  which  is  considered
his  best  work.  The  academy  possesses  a  collection
of  his  small  pictures,  representing  incidents  in  the
life  of  the  Virgin  and  Christ.

IBERCOURT,  Henry  Louis  d'  (e-bair-koor),
Flemish  traveller,  b.  in  Mons  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Char-
leroi  in  1818.  He  entered  the  Spanish  service  at
the  age  of  sixteen,  and  was  in  garrison  for  several
years  in  Jamaica,  where  he  took  part  in  the  repres-
sion of  the  troubles  of  1791,  but  resigned  soon
afterward  on  inheriting  a  large  estate,  and  indulged
his  taste  for  travel.  He  visited  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,
and  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  was  elected  colonel
by  the  negro  insurgents  in  1797,  but  declined,  and
then  sailed  for  South  America.  He  explored
Brazil  for  six  years,  and  afterward  visited  Para-
guay, the  Argentine  provinces,  Chili,  and  Pata-
gonia, where  he  was  detained  two  years  a  prisoner
by  the  natives,  and,  as  he  says,  refused  their  offer
to  make  him  their  king.  He  went  to  the  United
States  in  1807,  afterward  to  Japan,  and  returned
to  Europe  by  way  of  India  in  1811.  He  published
"  L'Amerique  devoilee,"  in  which  he  predicted  that
the  United  States  would  very  soon  exceed  Europe
in  civilization  and  science  (Charleroi,  1811);  "  Du
nord  a  Test  et  du  sud  a  l'ouest  du  Bresil"  (1812);
"  Voyage  en  Chili  "  (1812) ;  "  Un  voyageur  captif
en  Patagonie,"  a  novel  (1814);  "Nouveau  traite
sur  les  legumineuses  de  PAmerique  du  Sud "
(1815) :  "  La  constitution  des  Etats-Unis,  est-elle
applicable  a  l'Europe  ?  "  a  pamphlet  which  brought
the  author  before  the  Dutch  courts,  and  caused  him
a  condemnation  to  two  months'  imprisonment
(1818) ;  and  several  other  works.

IBERVILLE,  Pierre  le  Moyne,  Sieur  d\
founder  of  Louisiana,  b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  16
July,  1661 ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  9  July,  1706.  He
was  one  of  the  older  sons  of  Charles  le  Moyne
(q.  v.),  and  with  his  brothers,  Serigny,  Bienville
(q.  v.),  and  Chateaugay,  was  prominent  in  the  early


IBERVILLE


ICAZBALCETA


339


Uiyn^U&L^


history  of  Louisiana.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  en-
tered the  French  navy  as  a  midshipman,  and  soon
saw  active  service  in  the  New  World.  He  accompa-
nied De  Troye  on  his  overland  expedition  from
Canada  against  the
English  forts  on  Hud-
son bay,  was  at  the
taking  of  Fort  Mon-
sipi,  and,  having  cap-
tured two  vessels,  re-
duced Fort  Quitchit-
chonen,  and  again  in
1688-'9,  capturing
two  English  vessels
in  that  locality.  In
1690  he  was  one  of
the  leaders  in  the  re-
taliatory expedition
against  Schenectady,
where  he  saved  the
life  of  John  Sanders
Glen,  and  in  Octo-
ber, 1694,  took  Fort  ^Nelson,  on  Hudson  bay,  los-
ing his  brother  Louis  in  the  assault.  Mean-
while, in  1692,  he  had  been  given  command  of
a  frigate.  While  cruising  in  the  Bay  of  Fundy
with  three  vessels,  he  defeated  three  English
ships,  capturing  the  "  Newport "  near  the  mouth
of  the  St.  John's,  then  besieged,  captured,  and
demolished  Fort  Pemaquid,  and  ravaged  New-
foundland, taking  almost  all  the  English  posts.
In  1697  he  went  to  Hudson  bay  with  the  "  Peli-
can," and  after  defeating  three  English  vessels
reduced  Fort  Bourbon.  His  reputation  was  now
at  its  height,  and  he  was  regarded  as  the  most
skilful  naval  officer  in  the  French  service,  and
"the  idol  of  his  countrymen."  He  obtained  a
commission  for  establishing  direct  intercourse  be-
tween France  and  the  Mississippi,  and  on  17  Oct.,
1698,  left  Brest  with  two  frigates,  two  smaller  ves-
sels, and  about  two  hundred  settlers.  After  stop-
Sing  at  Santo  Domingo  and  Pensacola,  he  reached
[obile  bay,  31  Jan.,  1699,  and  anchored  near  Massa-
cre island.  He  erected  huts  on  Ship  island,  and
discovered  the  river  Pascagoula  and  the  tribes  of
the  Biloxi.  He  then  went  with  his  brother  Bien-
ville, in  two  barges,  to  seek  the  mouth  of  the  Mis-
sissippi, and  on  2  March  entered  that  river,  which
they  ascended  to  the  village  of  the  Bayagoulas,
and  probably  reached  the  mouth  of  Red  river.  A
letter  from  Tonti  to  La  Salle,  written  in  1686,  was
given  to  the  party  by  the  Indians,  and  satisfied
them  that  they  were  really  on  the  Mississippi.
Returning  to  his  ships,  Iberville  built  old  Fort
Biloxi,  the  first  post  on  the  Mississippi,  at  the  head
of  Biloxi  bay,  placed  Sauvolle  in  command,  and
made  his  brother  Bienville  king's  lieutenant.  In
May,  1699,  he  sailed  for  France ;  but  in  January  of
the  following  year  he  again  reached  Fort  Biloxi
in  command  of  the  "  Renominee,"  and  soon  after-
ward built  a  new  fort  on  the  Mississippi,  over
which  he  placed  Bienville.  In  April  he  sent
Lesueur  with  a  party  to  establish  a  post  at  the
copper-mines  on  Mankato,  and  in  a  fort  among  the
Iowas  they  passed  a  fruitless  winter.  Iberville
was  again  in  Louisiana  in  December,  1701,  and,
finding  the  colony  reduced  by  disease,  transferred
the  settlement  to  Mobile,  beginning  the  coloniza-
tion of  Alabama,  and  also  occupying  Dauphin,  or
Massacre  island.  His  health  had  become  seriously
undermined  by  fevers,  and  he  was  called  away
from  his  Louisiana  projects  by  the  government,
having  been  made,  in  1702,  captain  of  a  line-of-
battle  ship.  In  1706,  with  his  fleet,  he  captured
the  island  of  Nevis,  and  was  about  to  cruise  off  the


coast  of  North  Carolina,  when  he  was  stricken  with
a  fatal  malady  and  taken  to  Havana.

I  CART,  Pierre  Nicolas  (e'-car'),  French  ad-
venturer, b.  in  Dieppe  in  1594 ;  d.  in  Saint  Chris-
topher, W.  I.,  in  1633.  He  armed  a  privateer  in
1619,  and  cruised  for  some  years  with  great  success
in  West  Indian  waters.  In  1625,  after  a  severe  en-
gagement with  a  Spanish  man-of-war,  his  ship
foundered  at  sea  near  the  Caiman  islands,  and  he
was  picked  up  almost  alone  in  a  small  boat  by
D'Enambuc  (q.  v.),  who  proposed  to  him  to  assist  in
the  foundation  of  a  French  settlement  in  Saint
Christopher.  He  accepted,  and  proved  a  most  useful
lieutenant.  In  1626  Enambuc  went  to  France  for
re-enforcements,  and  left  Icart  in  charge  of  the
new  colony.  Waernard,  the  English  commander
of  the  island,  thought  the  opportunity  a  favorable
one  to  expel  the  French,  and  attacked  the  fortress
of  Saint  Pierre  with  all  his  forces.  Icart  resisted
for  six  months,  when  Enambuc  appeared  with  400
men  and  raised  the  siege.  In  1628  the  English  at-
tacked Icart  again,  during  Enambuc's  renewed  ab-
sence, but  without  success.  Icart  meanwhile  had  be-
come popular  among  the  French  settlers,  and  Enam-
buc thought  it  best  for  his  government  to  part  with
him.  Icart  armed  a  ship,  and,  accompanied  by  150
men,  took  possession  of  the  island  of  Saint  Eu-
stache  in  1629,  on  which  he  established  a  French
colony.  Two  years  later,  Federico  de  Toledo,  who
had  been  repulsed  from  Saint  Christopher,  attacked
Saint  Eustache  with  a  fleet  of  forty  ships.  Icart
defeated  him,  capturing  three  vessels,  and  after-
ward remained  in  undisturbed  possession  of  the
island.  The  hostilities  between  the  French  and
English  were  renewed  in  Saint  Christopher  in  1633,
and  Enambuc,  through  the  treason  of  one  of  his
lieutenants,  was  on  the  verge  of  ruin,  when  Icart
went  to  his  assistance  and  defeated  the  English,
but  received  during  the  battle  a  mortal  wound.

ICAZBALCETA,  Joaquin  Garcia  (e-cath-bal-
thay-'tah),  Mexican  author,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,
25  Aug.,  1825.  He  gave  his  time  from  youth  to
the  collection  and  study  of  antiquities  and  books
concerning  the  history  of  Mexico.  His  collection
of  manuscripts  is  one  of  the  best  known  in  Mexico,
and  by  continuous  study  he  has  become  an  au-
thority in  the  ancient  history  of  his  country.  About
1855  he  was  a  collaborator  on  the  "  Diccionario
Universal  de  Historia  y  Geografia,"  published  by
Jose  M.  Andrade  (1852-'6).  Later,  three  supple-
mentary volumes  of  this  dictionary  have  been  pub-
lished, containing  original  articles  on  Mexico,
among  which  those  of  Icazbalceta  are  distinguished,
and  specially  his  treatise  on  the  history  of  the  first
attempts  at  printing  in  Mexico.  His  name  was
known  earlier  by  foreign  authors  than  by  those  of
Mexico,  and  he  soon  became  a  correspondent  of
William  H.  Prescott ;  Gonzalez  de  Vera,  of  Madrid  ;
Triibner,  of  London  ;  and  Brunet,  of  Paris.  In  the
first  years  of  his  literary  activity  he  published  in
Spanish  a  translation  of  Prescott's  "  Conquest  of
Peru,"  with  a  historical  supplement  up  to  the  con-
clusion of  the  conquest.  He  afterward  issued  from
his  own  printing-house  the  gothie  edition  of  an  un-
published letter  of  II ernan  Cortes  to  the  Spanish
emperor,  imitating  the  original  in  style  and  letters.
The  text  of  the  letter  was  reprinted  afterward  in  the
first  volume  of  his  "  Coleccion  de  documentos  para
la  historia  de  Mexico,"  the  preparation  of  which
occupied  seven  years  (2  vols.,  Mexico.  1858-'66).
Both  volumes  refer  to  the  history  of  the  first  cen-
tury of  the  Spanish  rule  in  New  Spain,  and  contain
much  valuable  material  that  had  been  hitherto  in-
accessible. His  "  Apuntes  para  un  Catalogo  de
escritores  en  lenguas  indigenas  de  America  "  (Mexi-


340


IDDINGS


co,  1866)  contains  the  description  of  175  rare  books
and  is  accompanied  by  important  notes.  He  has
recently  published  "  Historia  eclesiastica  indiana,
obra  escrita  a  fines  del  Siglo  xvi.  por  Fr.  Geronimo
Mendieta  de  la  orden  de  San  Francisco  "  (Mexico,
1870).  This  manuscript,  supposed  to  be  lost,  Icaz-
balceta  brought  from  Spain.

IDDINGS,  Joseph  Paxton,  geologist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  21  Jan.,  1857.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale  in  1877,
and  subsequently  studied  analytical  chemistry
there,  while  serving  as  assistant  in  mechanical
drawing  and  surveying.  Subsequently  he  studied
geology  under  Prof.  John  S.  Newberry,  at  Colum-
bia, and  spent  the  winter  of  1879-80  in  Heidel-
berg, working  in  microscopic  petrography.  In
July,  1880,  he  was  appointed  assistant  geologist  on
the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  under  Arnold  Hague.
His  scientific  papers,  published  in  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science  "  and  the  "  Bulletin H  of  the
United  States  geological  survey,  include  "  Notes  on
the  Volcanoes  of  Northern  California,  Oregon,  and
Washington  Territory  "  with  Arnold  Hague  (1883) ;
"  The  Columnar  Structure  in  the  Igneous  Rock  on
Orange  Mountain,  New  Jersey  "  (1886) ;  and  "  The
Nature  and  Origin  of  Lithophysae  and  the  Lamina-
tion of  Acid  Lavas  "  (1887).

IDE,  George  Barton,  clergyman,  b.  in  Coven-
try, Vt.,  in  1804 :  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  16  April,
1872.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Baptist  minister,  but
held  skeptical  opinions  in  his  youth,  until  during
a  revival  in  Coventry  he  received  religious  impres-
sions. He  thereupon  abandoned  the  study  of  law,
which  he  had  pursued  at  Brandon,  and  entered
Middlebury  college  to  prepare  himself  for  the
ministry.  He  was  ordained  soon  after  his  gradu-
ation in  1830,  and  was  pastor  in  several  places,  be-
coming known  throughout  northern  Vermont  as
an  eloquent  revivalist.  In  1834  he  removed  to
Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1835  to  Boston,  Mass.,  and
after  a  three  years'  pastorate  took  charge  of  the
1st  Baptist  church  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  where  he
remained  fourteen  years.  The  last  twenty  years
of  his  life  were  spent  as  pastor  in  Springfield.  He
published  "  Green  Hollow  "  (Philadelphia,  1852) ;
"  Battle  Echoes,  or  Lessons  from  the  War,"  a  series
of  sermons  preached  during  the  civil  war  (Boston,
1866) ;  "  Bible  Pictures,"  describing  the  lives  and
deeds  of  Christ  and  his  apostles  (1867) ;  and  vari-
ous polemical  works  and  Sunday-school  books.

IDIAQUEZ,  Lope  de  (e-de'-ah-keth),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th  century ;
d.  in  Chili  about  1550.  He  participated  in  the
conquest  of  Cuba  under  Diego  Velasquez,  and  in
1519  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  served  under  Pedro
de  Alvarado  till  the  subjugation  of  the  Mexicans.
Afterward  he  accompanied  Alvarado  to  Guatema-
la, subsequently  was  with  Pizarro  in  his  enterprise,
and  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  reconcile  him
with  Almagro.  He  prepared  the  conferences  of
Mara  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Las  Salinas,
6  April,  1538,  where  Almagro  was  defeated.  It  is
believed  that  in  1541  he  went  to  Spain.  In  1542
he  was  commissioned  by  Diego  de  Almagro,  the
son,  to  make  an  agreement  with  the  governor,  Vaca
de  Castro,  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Chupas,  and,
though  he  was  not  well  received  by  De  Castro,  on
his  return  to  Almagro  he  was  regarded  as  a  traitor.
Offended  by  this  treatment,  he  joined  the  forces  of
De  Castro,  but  after  Almagro's  defeat  exerted  his
influence  in  the  latter's  favor.  Then  Idiaquez  re-
tired to  Lima,  but  in  1549  went  with  Valdivia  in
his  second  expedition  to  Chili  and  in  the  campaign-
ing of  the  south.  He  is  supposed  to  have  perished  in
the  campaign  against  the  Araucanians  about  1550.


IGLESIAS

IETERSDORFKLASTEN,  Gustav von (e-

ters-dorf),  German  explorer,  b.  in  Neu  Breisach  in
1609;  d.  in  Cologne  in  1669.  He  was  descended
from  an  ancient  family  of  the  Palatinate  and
served  in  the  Bavarian  army  till  1634,  when  he  be-
came a  Dominican  monk,  and  was  attached  in  the
following  year  to  the  South  American  missions.
He  resided  for  twenty  years  in  Hispaniola,  Cuba,
and  other  West  Indian  islands,  was  elected  pro-
vincial of  his  order  for  the  West  Indian  missions
in  1649,  and  founded  several  colleges  in  Hispanio-
la.  He  went  also  to  Guatemala  as  provincial  in
1653,  but  was  compelled  three  years  later  to  return
to  Europe  in  broken  health.  After  a  few  months
he  prepared  to  sail  for  America  again,  but  his  fami-
ly opposed  his  departure,  and  he  settled  in  Cologne,
where  he  became  a  canon  in  the  cathedral  and  de-
voted the  remainder  of  his  life  to  arranging  his  notes
on  America.  He  published  "  Lexicon  Lingua?  Ca-
ralbae  "  (Cologne,  1659) ;  "  Grammatica  Lingua?  Ca-
raiba?"  (1661);  "  Gebrauche,  Sitten  und  Producte
von  Cuba,  Hispaniola  und  einiger  anderer  West-
indischer  Inseln,"  the  original  edition  of  which  is
very  rare,  one  copy  having  brought  at  Didot's  sale
in  Paris  in  1853,  $6,720  (1665) ;  and  "  Relatio  Ges-
torum  a  primis  ordinis  Praedicatorum  missiona-
riis  in  insulis  Americanis,  praasertim  apud  Indige-
nos  quos  Caralbes  vulgo  dicunt,  ab  anno  1635,  ad
annum  1653  "  (3  vols.,  1768).  The  dictionary  and
the  grammar  of  the  idiom  of  the  Caribs  are  yet  con-
sidered as  the  most  complete  documents  on  the
language  of  those  people.

IFF,  Simon  van,  Dutch  physician,  b.  in  Ypres
in  1605 ;  d.  in  Amsterdam  in  1651.  He  practised
medicine  in  Tobago  and  Surinam,  and  was  ap-

Sointed  in  1637  physician  to  Count  Maurice  of
fassau,  governor-general  of  the  Dutch  possessions
in  South  America.  Owing  to  the  protection  of
that  prince,  he  explored,  in  company  with  George
Marggraff,  the  countries  that  are  now  known  as
Guiana  and  Brazil,  advancing  as  far  south  as  Per-
nambuco,  and  thence  returned  to  Surinam.  He
discovered  the  properties  of  the  ipecacuanha-bark,
and  imported  some  seeds  of  the  tree  into  Europe.
The  name  of  Iff  has  been  given  to  a  plant  of  the
family  of  Rhinantoceae  that  grows  in  Brazil.  He
published  "  De  Medicina  Brasiliensis,"  which  was
a  standard  book  on  the  continent  for  about  a  cen-
tury (Leyden,  1648) ;  "  Les  longs  tracas  et  tour-
noiements  d'un  voyageur  en  Guyane  et  au  Bresil,
avec  les  moeurs  des  habitants,  leurs  usages,  les  pro-
ductions du  pays,  suivi  d'un  traite  sur  les  plantes
medicinales  propres  a  ces  regions"  (Amsterdam,
1650);  ';  Verhandelinge  over  de  Taback"  (1649);
"  De  plantibus  Brasiliensis  " ;  and  other  books.

IGLESIAS,  Angel  (e-glayj-syas),  Mexican  physi-
cian, b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  2  Oct.,  1829 ;  d.  there,
10  May,  1870.  He  studied  at  the  College  of  San
Gregorio,  afterward,  while  a  student  at  the  College
of  medicine  during  the  American  invasion  in  1847,
enlisted  in  a  battalion  of  volunteers,  but  was  soon
ordered  to  duty  as  assistant  of  Dr.  Pedro  Van  der
Linden  in  the  hospital  of  San  Sebastian.  He  also
studied  French,  English,  and  natural  history  in
the  mining  college,  and  in  1853  was  graduated  as
doctor  in  medicine  and  surgery,  afterward  occupy-
ing for  some  time  in  the  college  the  chair  of  phys-
ics and  operative  medicine.  He  went  to  Europe  in
1854  to  perfect  his  studies,  and  on  his  return  to
Mexico  introduced  the  ophthalmoscope  and  pub-
lished several  articles  about  it  in  "  La  union  medi-
ca."  After  a  second  visit  to  Europe  he  introduced
"  cow-pox  "  virus  taken  from  the  German  govern-
ment farm,  and  established  near  Mexico  a  farm  for
its  propagation,  thus  superseding  the  use  of  old  and


IGLESIAS

sometimes  injurious  lymph.  For  many  years  he
was  chief  physician  of  the  Jesus  hospital,  and  by
his  assistance  of  the  poor  soon  became  popular.
During  the  French  intervention  and  the  empire
he  was  forced  against  his  inclination  to  accept
some  public  offices,  but  soon  resigned,  retaining
only  the  honorary  title  of  physician  to  the  em-
peror. Notwithstanding,  on  the  return  of  the  re-
publican government  in  1867  he  was  persecuted,
and  emigrated  to  Paris,  where  he  received,  on  23
Dec,  1867,  from  the  minister  of  public  instruction,
his  title  as  doctor  of  medicine  for  France  and  its
colonies.  In  1869  he  went  to  Spain  to  pass  an  ex-
amination, with  a  view  of  establishing  himself  in
that  country,  but,  hearing  that  the  political  ani-
mosities in  Mexico  were  gradually  abating,  he  re-
turned to  his  country,  where  he  died.  He  wrote,
in  both  French  and  Spanish,  "Tratado  sobre  el
laringoscopio  "  (Paris.  1868).

IGLESIAS,  Jos§  Maria.  Mexican  statesman,
b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1823.  He  studied  law
in  the  university  of  his  native  city,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1844,  and  appointed  professor  of  ju-
risprudence. He  be-
gan his  political  ca-
reer in  1847  as  mem-
ber of  the  municipal
council  of  Mexico,
and  during  the
American  invasion
of  that  year  was  ap-
pointed member  of
the  supreme  military
tribunal,  following
the  Army  of  the
East  as  auditor.  Af-
ter the  peace  of
Guadalupe  -  Hidalgo
in  1848,  the  govern-
ment made  him
chief  of  a  section  of
the  treasury,  and  in
1850  promoted  him  to  membership  in  the  court  of
appropriations  of  the  same  department.  In  1852
he  was  elected  to  congress,  where  he  soon  became
known  for  eloquence  and  thorough  knowledge  of
constitutional  law.  He  opposed  the  nomination  of
Gen.  Lombardini  and  the  recall  of  Santa-Anna.  In
1856,  under  President  Comonfort,  Lerdo  de  Tejada
made  Iglesias  chief  clerk  of  the  treasury,  and  as
such  he  prepared  the  law  forbidding  the  church  to
hold  landed  estate.  From  January  till  May,  1857,
he  was  secretary  of  justice,  from  May  till  Septem-
ber secretary  of  the  treasury,  being  elected  on
16  Sept.,  by  popular  vote,  judge  of  the  supreme
court.  He  also  served  several  times  in  the  general
administration  of  taxes  and  in  the  custom-house  of
Mexico.  During  the  French  invasion  he  was  a
firm  supporter  of  the  constitutional  government,
and  when  after  the  fall  of  Puebla,  17  May,  1863,
Juarez  with  his  government  abandoned  the  capital
on  31  May,  retiring  to  San  Luis  Potosi,  Iglesias  ac-
companied him,  and  was  appointed  by  him  in  Sep-
tember secretary  of  justice,  which  post  he  held  un-
til the  return  of  the  Republican  government  to
Mexico  in  July,  1867.  He  accompanied  Juarez  in
all  his  movements  before  the  advancing  French
forces,  and  while  in  Saltillo  held  provisionally
from  January  till  May,  1864,  the  portfolio  of  the
treasury.  After  the  return  of  the  Republican  au-
thorities, Iglesias  was  elected  to  congress,  from  Sep-
tember, 1868,  till  October,  1869,  was  secretary  of
the  interior,  and  in  that  month  was  called  again  to
take  charge  of  the  portfolio  of  justice.  He  retired
to  private  life  in  1871  to  restore  his  health,  but  in


IGLESIAS


341


<^>.^U?.  ^^^*^


1872  accepted  the  collectorship  of  customs  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  In  July,  1873,  he  was  elected
president  of  the  supreme  court,  and  as  such,  when
the  president  of  congress  declared  Lerdo  de  Teja-
da re-elected,  on  26  Sept.,  he  issued  the  next  day  a
manifesto  declaring  the  election  illegal  and  the
constitutional  order  interrupted,  claiming  in  con-
sequence,  according  to  the  constitution,  the  pro-
visional presidency.  As  some  of  the  judges  who
had  declared  in  his  favor  were  imprisoned  by  order
of  Lerdo,  Iglesias  left  Mexico  secretly  for  Guana-
juato, where  he  was  recognized  as  president  of  the
republic  by  Gov.  Antillon,  Gen.  Garcia  de  la  Ca-
dena,  and  the  military  commander  of  Jalisco,  Gen.
Ceballos,  and  he  issued  a  manifesto  from  Sala-
manca announcing  his  assumption  of  the  execu-
tive and  organized  a  cabinet.  When,  after  the
battle  of  Tecoac,  16  Nov.,  Lerdo  with  his  cabinet
abandoned  the  capital,  Gen.  Diaz  began  negotia-
tions with  Iglesias  for  a  peaceful  agreement,  but,
the  latter  having  refused  to  recognize  the  "  Plan
de  Tuxtepec,"  Diaz  marched  against  him.  After
a  fruitless  interview  of  the  two  chiefs  in  the  estate
of  Capilla,  Iglesias  fled  to  Guadalajara,  where  he
installed  his  government  on  2  Jan.,  1877.  His
forces  under  Antillon  being  defeated  at  Los  Adobes,
he  fled  with  his  cabinet  and  Gen.  Ceballos  to  Man-
zanillo,  and  on  17  January  sailed  for  the  United
States.  He  returned  to  Mexico  in  1878,  but  has
since  lived  in  retirement,  devoting  himself  to  lit-
erary work.  He  has  been  editor-in-chief  of  vari-
ous journals,  and  has  published  "Apuntes  para
la  Historia  de  la  guerra  entre  Mejico  y  los  Estados
Unidos  "  (Mexico,  1852),  and  "  Revistas  Historicas
sobre  la  Intervencion  Francesa  "  (1870).

IGLESIAS,  Miguel,  Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in
Cajamarca,  18  Aug.,  1822.  He  studied  law  and
was  graduated  in  the  University  of  San  Carlos  at
Lima,  but  did  not  practise  at  the  bar,  having  to
assist  his  father  in  the  management  of  his  landed
property  in  Cajamarca.  Although  he  was  several
times  president  of  the  department  council  of  Caja-
marca, he  did  not  enter  into  general  politics  until
he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  Federal  congress  in
1861.  From  that  date  till  1876  he  was  several
times  elected  to  the  Federal  senate,  and  in  1879,
when  Chili  declared  war  against  Peru  and  Bolivia,
he  formed  and  equipped  a  battalion  at  his  own  ex-
pense, and  at  its  head,  accompanied  by  his  three
sons,  he  appeared  at  Lima  and  offered  his  services
to  the  government.  The  president.  Gen.  Prado,
appointed  him  colonel  in  the  National  guard  and
chief  of  the  battalion  which  he  had  raised.  When
Pierola  assumed  the  direction  of  the  nation  on  22
Dec,  1879,  after  President  Prado's  flight,  he  called
Iglesias  to  be  secretary  of  war,  and  in  that  capacity
the  latter  did  excellent  service  in  putting  the  na-
tion in  a  state  of  defence  and  forwarding  new  lev-
ies to  the  seat  of  war.  Col.  Iglesias  took  part  with
his  force  in  the  battle  of  Los  Angeles,  22  March,

1880,  and  in  that  of  Tacna  on  26  May.  After  the
defeat  of  Tacna  he  again  assumed  the  portfolio  of
war,  and  displayed  much  activity  in  preparing  the
fortifications  of  the  lines  of  Chorrillos,  San  Juan,
and  Miraflores,  against  the  expected  Chilian  in-
vasion. Shortly  afterward,  as  commander  of  the
lines  of  Morro-§olar,  he  offered  a  heroic  resistance
to  the  Chilian  forces,  but  surrendered  on  13  Jan.,

1881,  when  his  army  had  been  totally  surrounded.
After  the  battle  of  Miraflores,  15  Jan.," the  independ-
ent congress  of  notables,  who  had  not  submitted  to
the  Chilians,  gave  him  the  rank  of  general,  and
he  continued  to  resist  the  invaders  in  the  moun-
tains of  his  native  department,  defeating  a  strong
Chilian  force  at  San  Pablo  in  1882. After  the  gov-


342


IGNACIO


IGUAIN


ernment  of  the  provisional  president,  Garcia-Cal-
deron,  had  been  terminated  by  his  imprisonment
on  28  Sept.,  1881,  and  the  constitutional  vice-presi-
dent, Montero,  refused  to  treat  with  the  invaders,
Gen.  Iglesias  was  elected  to  the  presidency  early  in
1883.  A  few  months  afterward  he  concluded  a
treaty  of  peace  with  Chili,  and  at  the  same  time
took  energetic  measures  to  suppress  the  revolution-
ary movements  of  those  who  considered  the  treaty
derogatory  to  the  national  honor.  Afterward  his
administration  was  fairly  prosperous.  He  twice
put  down  the  revolutionary  movements  of  Gen.
Caceres  and  dismissed  a  great  part  of  the  standing
army,  introducing  great  economy  in  the  govern-
ment expenditures.  On  6  Sept.,  1885,  a  new  expe-
dition of  Gen.  Caceres  was  directed  against  Gen.
Iglesias  in  Lima,  and,  after  a  valiant  personal  de-
fence of  the  government  palace,  he  surrendered  to
the  leader  of  the  revolutionary  forces  and  retired
to  Spain,  where  he  has  since  lived  in  retirement.

IGNACIO,  Jos6  de  Jesu  Maria  (ig-nath'-yo),
German  missionary,  b.  in  Paderborn  in  1721 ;  d.
in  Bartenstein  in  1780.  His  real  name  was  Her-
man Loessing.  He  became  a  Jesuit  and  went  to
New  Spain  in  1746,  and  for  several  years  taught
rhetoric  and  philosophy  in  the  College  of  Mexico,
but,  having  found  in  a  journey  some  old  stones
covered  with  hieroglyphs,  took  such  an  interest  in
them  that  he  obtained  from  his  superiors  permis-
sion to  devote  his  time  to  the  study  of  hierology.
He  left  Mexico  in  1753,  and  for  nine  years  ex-
plored the  country  in  its  remotest  parts,  buying
Aztec  antiquities  at  any  price.  On  his  return  to
Germany  he  was  appointed  librarian  of  the  Arch-
bishop of  Cologne  in  1 768,  and  began  to  work  on
the  materials  that  he  had  collected.  He  published
"  De  Arte  Hieroglyphum  Mexicanorum,"  a  key  to
the  Mexican  hieroglyphs,  which,  although  incom-
plete and  incorrect  in  many  ways,  has  nevertheless
enabled  the  scientists  to  decipher  some  old  inscrip-
tions (Cologne,  1774) ;  "  Historia  Novae  Hispaniae  "
(1777) ;  '•  Reisen  in  Neu  Spanien  "  (1778) ;  "  Historia
regni  Aztecorum  "  (1780) ;  "  Cosmographia  "  (3  vols.,
with  charts,  1780).  Father  Ignacio  had  not  made  use
of  all  his  notes  when  he  became  blind.  He  then  went
to  live  in  Bartenstein  with  a  brother  who  was  cham-
berlain of  the  Prince  of  Hohenlohe.  His  notes
were  afterward  utilized  by  Chastelard,  who  pub-
lished "  De  la  civilisation  Azteque  demontree  par
les  monuments  "  (2  vols.,  Rouen,  1809) ;  "  Superi-
ority des  Azteques  sur  leurs  conquerants"  (1811) ;
and  several  other  works.

IGNE-CHIVRE,  Barthelemy  d'  (een-yay-
shee-vray),  Spanish  explorer,  b.  in  Bruges  in  1677 ;
d.  in  Saint  Acheul  in  1746.  He  became  a  Jesuit
in  1699,  and  was  attached  to  the  South  American
missions  in  1703.  After  studying  the  Guarani
idiom  in  Buenos  Ayres,  he  was  in  1714  sent  by  the
provincial  to  make  a  thorough  survey  of  the  coun-
tries that  border  on  Paraguay  river,  and  find  a
shorter  way  from  Buenos  Ayres  to  the  missions  of
the  Chiquitos.  Accompanied  by  two  other  Jesuits,
he  left  that  city,  20  Jan.,  1715,  and  ascended  the
Paraguay  in  a  canoe  for  500  miles,  when  he  met  a
party  of  Layaguas  Indians,  who  killed  his  com-
panions and  took  him  prisoner.  He  remained  with
them  twelve  years,  but  managed  to  win  their  affec-
tion, and  civilized  them.  The  hostile  Indians,
that  were  formerly  the  terror  of  the  Spaniards,
submitted  to  the  missionary,  and  he  organized  the
missions  of  San  Bias,  which  soon  became  the  most
prosperous  of  that  region.  He  returned  to  Buenos
Ayres  in  1727,  and  was  elected  provincial  of  his  or-
der. In  that  capacity  he  greatly  extended  the  influ-
ence of  the  Jesuits,  and  devoted  his  time  to  the  bene-


fit of  the  Indians ;  but  his  exertions  in  their  behalf
made  him  obnoxious  to  the  authorities,  who  ordered
him  to  leave  the  country  in  1731.  Returning  to  his
native  land,  he  became  rector  of  the  College  of  Saint
Acheul  in  1734,  but  resigned  to  devote  his  time  to
the  arrangement  of  his  notes,  and  published  "  De
arte  Lingua  Layagua,"  which  is  the  only  monu-
ment left  of  the  language  of  that  extinct  nation
(Mechelen,  1737) ;  '•  Douze  ans  de  captivite  chez  les
Indiens  du  Paraguay,  avec  une  description  de  leur
pays,  les  moeurs  et  coutumes  de  ces  peuples "  (2
vols.,  with  charts,  Mechelen,  1742) ;  and  "  Historia
General  de  las  misiones  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus
en  America,"  the  best  authority  on  the  Jesuit  mis-
sions in  South  America  (6  vols.,  Brussels,  1745).

1GOLINO,  Giuseppe  (e-go-le'-no),  Italian  bot-
anist, b.  in  Florence  in  1759;  d.  there  in  1833.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1803  on  a  scien-
tific mission,  and  remained  till  1807  as  Italian
vice-consul  in  North  Carolina.  He  sent  to  Europe
several  cases  of  seeds,  and  discovered  some  new
gramineals,  which  he  described  afterward  in  his
"  Agrostographia  "  (Florence,  1824).  He  was  re-
lieved from  his  consular  duties  in  1807,  but  two
years  later  was  appointed  consul  at  Buenos  Ayres.
During  his  stay  in  the  United  States  his  attention
was  called  to  the  Mexican  hieroglyphs,  which  had
already  occupied  the  attention  of  many  distin-
guished men  of  science,  and  it  is  asserted  that  he
found  a  key  to  them,  but  lost  the  manuscript
among  others  when  he  was  shipwrecked  in  the
Straits  of  Bonifacio  on  his  return  to  Genoa  in
1808.  He  was  the  first  European  to  study  the  an-
thropology of  America,  and  thus  led  the  way  to
the  work  of  Darwin,  Boyer.  De  Quatrefages,  and
Brasseur  de  Bourbourg.  During  his  stay  in  South
America  in  1809-19,  Igolino  formed  a  rich  collec-
tion of  plants  and  engravings  of  animals  and  in-
sects peculiar  to  those  latitudes,  studying  also  the
cryptogamic  plants  of  Brazil.  He  published
"Plantas  cryptogamae  Brasilia?"  (Florence,  1829),
and  read  several  papers  before  the  Academy  of
Florence  on  the  "Effects  of  the  Colored  Upas,"
and  on  the  several  species  of  strychnia  peculiar  to
South  America.  See  "  Vita  illustrissimi  Giuseppe
Igolino  "  (Florence,  1841).

IGUAIN,  Jos6  Felix  (e-guah-een'),  Peruvian
soldier,  b.  in  Huanta,  20  March,  1800 :  d.  in  Chili
in  September,  1851.  He  lost  his  parents  in  youth,
but  by  his  own  efforts  acquired  a  good  education.
During  the  latter  part  of  the  struggle  for  independ-
ence in  his  country  he  began  to  appear  in  public.
He  was  one  of  the  bitterest  opponents  of  the  pro-
posed life  dictatorship  of  Simon  Bolivar  in  1826,
afterward  continued  to  oppose  the  conservative
authorities,  and  suffered  persecution,  but  the  Lib-
eral party  elected  him  in  1828  to  congress,  where
he  distinguished  himself  by  his  eloquence,  and
contributed  to  prevent  war  between  his  country
and  Bolivia.  In  1833  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  revolution  of  Nieto  against  Gen.  Gamarra,  and
the  unfortunate  result  of  this  enterprise  obliged
him  to  emigrate  to  Chili.  After  Orbegozo's  elec-
tion he  returned,  and  when  the  latter  sought  the
aid  of  the  president  of  Bolivia,  Gen.  Santa  Cruz,
Iguain  attacked  foreign  intervention  in  the  press,
and  soon  afterward  joined  the  army  of  Gen.  Sala-
verry  as  lieutenant-colonel.  The  campaign  for
some  time  was  fortunate,  but  at  last  Salaverry  was
defeated  at  Socabaya  in  1835,  and  Iguain  fled  to
Chili.  While  in  that  country  he  busied  himself  in
writing  his  "Biografias  Peruanas  Contemporaneas  "
(Santiago,  1838).  When  at  last  Chili  interfered  in
the  Peruvian  troubles,  Iguain  returned  to  his
country  as  colonel  of  the  invading  army  of  Gen.


IHERING


ILLIGEN


343


Bulnes  and  fought  under  him  in  the  battle  of  Yun-

fay.  20  Jan.,  1839,  which  put  an  end  to  the  Peru-
lolivian  confederation.  In  1841  the  Bolivian  gen-
eral, Ballivian,  invaded  Peru  again,  and  Iguain
marched  against  him  in  command  of  a  brigade
under  Gen.  Gamarra,  who  was  defeated  at  Ingavi
on  18  Nov.  Iguain  was  then  promoted  general  and
retired  to  private  life,  but  took  part  in  the  revolu-
tion against  the  dictator  Vivanco  in  1843,  and
after  his  defeat  was  banished  to  Chili.

IHERING,  Mauritius  van  (e-air'-ing),  Dutch
mariner,  b.  in  Minden  in  1580 :  d.  in  Amsterdam
in  1635.  He  served  under  Le  Maire  when  that
navigator  discovered  in  1616  the  strait  that  bears
his  name,  and  afterward  commanded  several  expe-
ditions to  the  South  American  coast.  The  Span-
ish government  was  meanwhile  greatly  disturbed
by  the  discovery  of  Le  Maire,  which  enabled  the
Dutch  to  reach  the  Pacific  ocean  in  a  few  days.
Philip  III.  suggested  the  possibility  of  erecting
fortifications  on  the  banks  of  the  strait,  and  so
closing  the  passage,  and  he  sent  in  1618  an  expe-
dition commanded  by  Alfonso  and  Estevan  Nodal,
with  orders  to  make  a  thorough  exploration  of  the
strait.  When  the  navigators  returned  to  Europe
in  1620,  the  supreme  council  of  the  Netherlands
determined  to  protect  Dutch  interests.  Ihering
was  given  four  ships  and  ordered  to  take  possession
of  the  shores  of  the  strait  and  build  a  fortress,  if
he  thought  it  necessary.  He  sailed  from  Amster-
dam in  September,  1626,  and  on  27  Dec.  discov-
ered the  Los  Reyes  islands,  where  he  encountered
dangerous  rocks,  and  ascertained  their  exact  posi-
tion, although  he  had  only  defective  instruments.
He  then  entered  the  Strait  of  Le  Maire,  discovered
the  Bay  of  Mauritius,  and  again,  in  lat.  56°  9'  S.,
found  some  rocks  and  seven  small  islands,  which
he  named  the  Stattsonder  islands.  He  landed  af-
terward on  the  western  coast  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,
and  then  sailed  around  that  island.  On  returning
he  made  soundings,  ascertaining  that  the  depth  of
the  Strait  of  Le  Maire  was  on  an  average  fifty-two
fathoms,  and,  continuing  till  he  was  125  miles  from
the  South  American  coast,  he  discovered  that  the
ocean  increased  in  depth.  He  reached  Amsterdam
in  December,  1627,  and  published  his  journal,
"  Relation  de  Texpedition  envoyee  au  detroit  de
Le  Maire  par  Messeigneurs  des  Etats  sous  la  con-
duite  du  Capitaine  Maurice  d'lhering,  de  Septem-
bre,  1626,  a  Decembre,  1627"  (2  vols..  Amsterdam).

ILES,  Malvern  Wells,  metallurgist,  b.  in  Mid-
way, Ky.,  7  Aug.,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  school  of  mines  in  1875,  and  became  a
fellow  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  university,  where  he
spent  two  years  in  researches  on  the  sulphuric  acids
of  xylol.  Subsequently  he  was  chemist  and  assayer
to  the  Utica  mining  and  milling  company,  and
later  metallurgist  to  the  Omaha  and  Grant  smelt-
ing company,  and  superintendent  and  metallurgist
to  the  Holden  smelting  company  in  Denver,  Col.
He  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Columbia  in
1876,  and  his  researches,  originally  in  pure  chemis-
try, have  gradually  extended  to  improvements  in
the  smelting  of  lead  and  silver,  in  which  branch
he  is  an  accepted  authority.  His  scientific  papers.
nearly  fifty  in  number,  have  been  contributed  to
the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  "  The  Ameri-
can Chemical  Journal,"  and  other  like  periodicals.
Dr.  lies  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies  both  in
the  United  States  and  Europe.

ILL  ATOP  A,  or  ILLA  TUPAC  (eel-yah-to'-pa),
Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century;  d.  in  1542.  He  was  a  relative  of  the  Inca
Huaina  Capac,  and  a  councillor  at  his  court.  In
early  life  he  entered  the  army  and  accompanied


the  Inca  in  his  conquests.  In  his  travels  through
the  country  he  became  acquainted  with  the  princi-
pal chiefs  of  the  army,  and  acquired  a  perfect
knowledge  of  the  position  of  places  and  ways  of
communication  between  the  provinces  of  the  em-
pire. After  the  death  of  Huaina  Capac,  Illa-
topa  followed  the  party  of  Atahualpa,  and  served
as  an  officer  in  the  battles  of  Quito  and  Tumbez,
and,  when  the  Inca  was  made  a  prisoner  and  at  last
put  to  death  by  the  Spaniards,  he  joined  Manco
Inca  Iupanqui,  brother  of  Atahualpa,  and  per-
suaded him  to  claim  the  crown  and  proclaim  him-
self king.  Illatopa  was  active  in  promoting  the
desire  of  the  Peruvians  for  independence,  and
raised  a  respectable  army.  Toward  the  east  he  oc-
cupied the  provinces  of  Ruparupa  and  Huanuco,
whence  he  carried  on  the  war  against  the  conquer-
ors. Alonzo  de  Alvarado  was  sent  by  the  govern-
ment of  Lima  to  repress  the  rebellion  of  the  In-
dians, but  was  defeated,  and  the  government,  in  the
greatest  alarm,  sent  Gomez  de  Alvarado,  but  he
was  also  defeated  in  Chachapoyas.  The  Indians
then  believed  that  Illatopa  could  lead  them  to  vic-
tory against  the  Spaniards,  and  accordingly  rose  in
a  general  revolution.  The  Spaniards  were  in  great
danger,  but  the  governor,  Yaea  de  Castro,  offered
a  price  for  the  head  of  Illatopa,  and  the  Spanish
captain  Juan  de  Vargas  proposed  to  procure  it.
Accordingly  he  went  to  the  Peruvians  pretending
to  be  a  persecuted  man,  and.  being  received  with
hospitality,  in  a  short  time  found  an  opportunity
for  murdering  the  chief.

ILLIERS,  Henry  Louis,  Comte  d'  (eel-yay'),
French  soldier,  b.  in  the  principality  of  Ligne,  Lux-
embourg, in  1750;  d.  in  Paris  in  1794.  He  entered
the  French  army,  served  in  the  war  of  American
independence,  and  saved,  at  Brandywine,  his  friend
Pulaski,  who  had  been  dangerously  wounded  dur-
ing the  battle.  He  acted  for  awhile  in  1778  as
ordnance  officer  of  Lafayette,  and,  when  peace  was
signed,  became  a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cin-
cinnati. He  went  to  Jamaica  in  178(5.  and  was  ap-
pointed by  Charles  III.  chief  of  police  of  that  isl-
and, but  had  some  difficulty  with  the  governor-
general,  and,  being  ordered  to  leave,  took  refuge  in
Guadeloupe,  where  in  1787.  through  the  recommen-
dation of  the  Count  of  Bouille.  he  was  made  lieu-
tenant of  the  king  in  Pointe  a  Pitre.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  French  revolution  he  asked  to  serve
in  France,  and,  receiving  the  brevet  of  colonel,  was
attached  in  that  capacity  to  the  army  of  Custine,
who  surrendered  on  23  July,  1793,  in  Mayence  to
the  Prussian  forces.  Custine,  together  with  Illiers
and  other  officers  of  his  army,  was  tried  by  a  court-
martial  and  condemned  to  death.  Count  d'llliers
is  the  author  of  "  Histoire  de  la  guerre  d'Ame-
rique  "  (2  vols.,  Pointe  a  Pitre,  1790),  and  "  Histoire
de  la  domination  Espagnole  dans  les  iles  de  l'Ame-
rique  appelees  Antilles"  (2  vols.,  1789).

ILLIGEN.  Andre  (eel-le-zahn'),  French  bucca-
neer, b.  in  Ixelles.  near  Brussels,  in  1638 ;  d.  in  Pana-
ma in  1670.  He  served  as  a  petty  officer  on  a  Dutch
merchant-vessel,  which  was  captured  in  Jamaica
waters  by  a  Spanish  man-of-war  in  1664.  and  was
sentenced  to  death  as  a  rebel,  but  was  delivered  by
the  buccaneer  Montbars.  Illigen  then  enlisted
under  Montbars,  and  soon  became  famous  among
the  buccaneers  for  his  courage.  He  was  elected  a
chief  in  1665.  pillaged  and  sacked  the  cities  of  Pu-
erto Cabello,  San  Antonio  de  Gibraltar,  and  others
in  1665-'7,  and  otherwise  caused  the  Spaniards
such  losses  that  the  government  offered  a  reward
of  3.000  piastres  for  his  head.  Illigen  now  swore
to  be  revenged,  and.  having  joined  Sir  Henry  Mor-
gan the  same  year,  took  Aux  Cayes  and  devastated


344


ILLOWY


IMIIOFFER


the  southern  coasts  of  Cuba.  Sailing  thence  for
Puerto  del  Principe  in  1667  with  twelve  ships  car-
rying only  1,700  men,  they  defeated  an  army  of
4,000  Spanish,  and  for  six  days  pillaged  and  burned
the  city.  The  booty  amounted  to  over  400,000  pi-
astres. In  the  following  year  Illigen,  with  Michel
Le  Basque,  besieged  Maracaibo,  and  imposed  a  ran-
som of  700,000  piastres.  Morgan  united  his  forces
in  1669  with  those  of  Illigen,  and  together  they  at-
tacked Maracaibo  again  with  900  men.  The  city,
defended  by  a  garrison  of  3,000  men  and  protected
by  three  forts,  resisted  for  one  month  and  then
surrendered.  The  victors  imposed  an  enormous
contribution,  and  Illigen  remained  to  collect  it,
while  Morgan  ransacked  San  Antonio  de  Gibraltar.
They  left  Maracaibo  two  months  later,  and,  on
sailing,  destroyed  the  fleet  of  Admiral  Espinosa,
which  blockaded  the  bay.  In  December  of  the
same  year,  Illigen  joined  Morgan  again  at  Cape
Tiburon,  Santo  Domingo,  and,  heading  the  first
division  of  the  fleet,  landed  on  the  isthmus  and  es-
tablished himself  in  Fort  San  Lorenzo  on  the  river
Chagres,  after  defeating  a  Spanish  army  of  2,000
men ;  but  he  died  there  of  a  fever  a  few  days  later.

ILLOWY,  Bernhardt,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kolin,
Bohemia,  in  1814;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  22  June,
1871.  After  studying  at  Pressburg  and  Pesth  he
was  called  to  Hesse-Cassel  as  a  rabbinical  candi-
date, but,  the  reactionary  ministry  of  the  interior
not  favoring  his  appointment,  he  came  to  the
United  States  and  officiated  as  rabbi  in  New  York,
St.  Louis,  Syracuse,  Baltimore,  New  Orleans,  and
Cincinnati.  He  was  a  Talmudist  of  distinction,
and  well  known  for  his  conservative  views,  an  ac-
complished linguist,  and  an  orator  of  power.  His
command  of  Hebrew  was  notable.

IMECOURT,  Antoine  d'  (e-may-koor),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Moirans,  Franche-Comte,  in  1503 ;  d.
in  Patagonia  in  1550.  He  commanded  the  "  Espi-
ritu  Santo "  in  Admiral  Camargo's  expedition
to  the  Straits  of  Magellan  in  1539,  and  acted  as
chief -of-staff  of  the  expedition.  They  sailed  from
San  Lucar  de  Barrameda  in  August,  1539,  and
anchored  on  20  Jan.,  1540,  near  the  Cape  of  the  Vir-
gins. A  few  days  later  they  crossed  the  bar,  sig-
nalled the  Indians  that  had  been  left  in  those
countries  by  Magellan,  and  had  already  arrived  in
sight  of  Port  Famine  when  two  vessels  foundered
in  a  storm,  among  *  them  the  "  Espiritu  Santo."
Imecourt  managed  to  reach  the  coast  in  a  small
boat  with  a  few  men,  and  they  waited  anxiously
for  the  return  of  the  admiral ;  but  the  latter,  driven
by  gales,  was  only  too  glad  to  enter  Islay,  the  port
of  Arequipa,  Peru,  after  one  of  the  most  perilous
voyages  on  record.  Imecourt  understood,  after  a
few  days  of  vain  expectation,  that  all  hopes  of  re-
lief were  gone  for  the  present,  and  he  resolved  to
establish  a  Spanish  colony.  He  left  the  coast,  and,
advancing  as  far  as  ninety  miles  inland,  built  Fort
San  Tomas  on  the  banks  of  a  stream ;  but  his  re-
sources were  few,  and  he  could  rely  only  on  hunt-
ing and  fishing  for  subsistence.  Little  by  little
discouragement  spread  in  the  colony  and  no  relief
came,  as  the  navigators  who  heard  from  Indians  of
the  existence  of  a  European  settlement  near  by
disbelieved  the  information.  In  1550  Imecourt
died  of  exhaustion,  and  after  his  death  the  colony
dissolved.  The  survivors  mingled  with  the  Indi-
ans and  forgot  civilized  life.  A  few  of  them,  after
a  tedious  journey,  reached  the  Spanish  possessions
in  Chili,  and  in  Santiago  told  of  their  sufferings
and  of  the  destruction  of  the  colony.  They  were
at  first  considered  impostors,  but  the  truth  was  as-
certained afterward.  Considering  that  Imecourt
and  his  companions  had  neither  tools,  arms,  nor


provisions,  their  energy  in  founding  a  colony  that
lasted  ten  vears  is  unparalleled  in  history.

IMFREVILLE-BAUDRY,  Louis, '  Comte  d'
(am-fray-veel'),  French  administrator,  b.  in  Fort
Royal,  Martinique,  in  1731 ;  d.  there  in  1780.  He
entered  the  colonial  administration  in  1750,  held
several  offices  in  Santo  Domingo,  Guadeloupe,  and
Martinique,  and  in  1762  was  appointed  lieutenant
of  the  king  at  Fort  Royal.  After  the  treaty  of
Paris  in  1763.  the  French  government  resolved  to
compensate  the  loss  of  Canada  by  improving  the
colonies  of  Guiana  and  the  West  Indies.  Count
d'Imfreville  was  asked  to  report  on  the  best  means
to  promote  emigration  from  France  to  those
countries,  and  was  appointed  commissioner  and
charged  with  the  establishment  in  Guiana  of  7,000
colonists,  principally  from  Alsace.  But  the  scheme
of  the  colonial  administration  was  not  a  practica-
ble one,  and  the  commissioner  demanded  permis-
sion to  deal  with  the  emigrants  as  he  thought  fit.
This  was  denied,  and  he  resigned,  returning  to
Fort  de  France  to  resume  his  old  office  in  1764.
The  new  "  France  equinoxiale  "  in  Cayenne  proved
a  failure,  the  greater  part  of  the  emigrants  re-
turned home,  but  a  few  went  to  Martinique  under
the  direction  of  Count  d'Imfreville,  where  they
settled  and  contributed  to  the  prosperity  of  the
colony.  Imfreville  built  a  magnificent  court-house
in  Fort  de  France,  and  devoted  his  great  wealth  to
the  benefit  of  the  people,  establishing,  at  his  own
expense,  a  botanical  garden  and  founding  a  hospi-
tal for  disabled  sailors.  He  published  many  works
on  agriculture  and  history,  including  "  Memoire  k
sa  majeste  tres  Chretienne  sur  la  colonisation  de
la  Guyane  "  (1763) ;  "  Du  regime  interieur  des  es-
claves  aux  Antilles  francaises  "  (Fort  de  France,
1767);  "Statistique  historique  de  la  Martinique"
(3  vols.,  1769) ;  and  "  De  la  fabrication  du  sucre  aux
colonies"  (1776),  which  is  yet  a  guide  of  the  agri-
culturist in  French  West  Indies.

IMHOFFER,  Gtustav  Melchior,  Brazilian  ex-
plorer, b.  near  Graetz,  Styria,  in  1593;  d.  in
Bahia  de  Todos  os  Santos  in  1651.  He  became
a  Jesuit,  and  was  attached  in  1624  to  the  mis-
sions of  South  America.  He  resided  many  years
in  Peru,  crossed  the  Andes  to  the  headwaters  of
the  Amazon .  in  1636,  and  descended  that  river
from  the  Napo  to  its  mouth  in  1637,  two  years  be-
fore the  expedition  of  Texeira.  He  arranged  his
notes  in  Para,  prior  to  his  leaving  for  Spain  when
the  expedition  of  Texeira  arrived  in  that  city,  1639,
and.  hearing  that  Acunha,  who  had  accompanied
Texeira,  proposed  to  go  to  Madrid  and  present  the
council  of  the  Indies  with  a  relation  of  the  expe-
dition, he  asked  leave  from  his  superiors  to  sail  in
advance  of  Acunha,  arriving  in  Madrid  in  Novem-
ber, 1639,  and  published  immediately  the  relation
of  his  own  journey,  "  Descubrimiento  del  Rio  de
las  Amazonas  "  (2  vols.,  with  charts,  Madrid,  royal
printing-office,  1640).  In  an  introduction  the  au-
thor urged  the  king  of  Spain  to  conquer  and  civil-
ize the  vast  country  that  he  had  explored.  Acunha,
who  had  arrived  in  Madrid  in  the  mean  while,
published  his  own  narrative,  trying  to  cast  dis-
credit upon  that  of  Imhoffer,  and  succeeded  so  well
that,  although  the  latter's  narrative  is  better  and
more  complete  than  that  of  Acunha,  his  name  is
scarcely  known,  and  many  historians  have  for-
gotten that  he  was  the  first  European  to  describe
the  Amazon.  Gomberville,  who  gave  a  French
version  of  Acunha's  voyage  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1682),
published  also  a  version  of  Imhoffer's  narrative
(3  vols.,  Paris,  1687),  and  the  latter  was  also  trans-
lated into  English  under  the  title  "  A  Relation  of  a
Journey  along  the  River  Amazon  "  (London,  1689).


IMLAY


INFANTE


345


Imhoffer  returned  afterward  to  Bahia,  and  was
rector  of  the  College  of  the  Jesuits.  He  is  also  the
author  of  a  "  Dictionaries  linguae  Amazoniae,"
"  Peru  viae  Societatis  historia,"  and  "  Vitae  illus-
trium  missionarium  qui  in  Peruvia  vixerunt."
published  in  the  "  Bibliotheca  Nova  Societatis  Jesu."
edited  by  Father  Bernard,  of  Bologna  (1771).

IMLAY,  Gilbert,  author,  b.  in  New  Jersey
about  1750.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  American
array  during  the  Revolutionary  war.  and  after  its
termination  emigrated  to  Kentucky,  where  he  was
appointed  a  deputy  surveyor  under  George  May,  at
Louisville.  Subsequently  he  went  to  Europe,  and
while  in  Paris  lived  unmarried,  in  mutual  pledges
of  constancy,  with  Mary  Wollstonecraft,  the  Eng-
lish author.  Shortly  before  the  birth  of  a  child,
Imlay  deserted  her,  under  pretext  of  being  called
to  a  distant  country.  Her  plaintive  letters  to  him
were  answered  evasively,  and,  after  an  attempt  at
suicide,  she  turned  again  to  literature  for  support,
writing  her  "  Letters  from  Sweden,  Norway,  and
Denmark  "  (1796).  She  afterward  married  William
Godwin,  and  a  daughter,  the  fruit  of  this  union,
became  the  wife  of  Shelley,  the  poet.  During  his
stay  in  Kentucky,  Imlay  wrote  glowing  descrip-
tions of  the  country  in  a  series  of  letters  to  a  friend
in  England.  These  were  revised  and  embodied  in
a  volume  styled  "  A  Topographical  Description  of
the  Western  Territory  of  North  America  "  (Lon-
don, 1792 ;  enlarged  ed.,  1795  ;  with  supplement  by
John  Filson,  2  vols.,  New  York,  1793  :  2d  enlarged
ed.,  London,  1797).  Imlay  was  also  the  author  of
"The  Emigrants,  or  the  History  of  an  Exiled
Family,"  a  novel  (3  vols..  London,  1793).

INAMA,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Vienna,
Austria,  4  May,  1719 ;  d.  there  toward  the  end  of
the  18th  century.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus
at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and  after  completing  his
theological  course  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to
Mexico.  He  was  afterward  principally  employed
in  converting  the  Indians  of  California.  After
the  suppression  of  his  order  in  Spanish  America,  he
returned  to  Germany.  He  wrote  an  account  of  the
California  mission,  which  was  published  in  the
"  Weltbote,"  edited  by  Father  Stocklein.

INDARTE,  Jose"  Rivera  (in-dar-tay),  Argen-
tine journalist,  b.  in  Cordova,  Argentine  Confed-
eration, in  1810;  d.  in  Desterro,  Brazil,  in  1845.
He  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  Rosas,  governor
and  captain-general  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  was  at
first  his  supporter,  but  afterward  became  one  of
the  most  formidable  of  his  opponents.  The  object
of  his  first  work,  "  Yoto  de  America "  (Buenos
Ayres,  1835),  was  to  advocate  the  formation  of
diplomatic  and  commercial  relations  with  Spain.
The  author  was  bitterly  attacked  by  extremists  of
the  popular  party,  and  replied  to  his  antagonists  in
"  Defensa  del  voto  de  America  "  (1835).  He  was
imprisoned  on  account  of  the  violence  of  his  lan-
guage, and  on  his  release  embarked  for  the  United
States,  where  he  studied  English  and  Italian,  and
devoted  himself  ardently  to  history  and  political
economy.  He  discussed  several  important  ques-
tions in  the  American  journals,  among  others  the
annexation  of  Texas,  and  some  of  his  essays  were
collected  and  published  in  Madrid  by  order  of  the
Spanish  government.  He  returned  to  La  Plata  in
1839,  and  assumed  the  direction  of  "  El  Nacional,"
which  he  conducted  unahded  with  much  ability,  at
the  same  time  acting  as  the  correspondent  of  the
"Commereio,''  a  Brazilian  journal.  He  also  issued
weekly  from  the  presses  of  "  El  Nacional "  a  series
of  poems  under  the  title  "  Tirteo,"  attacking  the
dictator,  Rosas.  His  next  work,  "  Rosas  y  sus
opositores  "  (Montevideo,  1843),  ends  with  a  list  of


the  tyrant's  victims  entitled  "  Tablas  de  sangre."
The  details  given  in  this  chapter  greatly  excited
the  anger  of  Rosas,  and  it  is  said  that  he  was  often
heard  to  say,  "  Will  no  one  free  me  from  this
man  ?  "  Indarte  added  an  appendix  to  this  work,
written  with  his  customary  violence,  "  Es  accion
santa  matar  a  Rosas."  He  afterward  retired  to
Brazil,  where  he  died  of  a  disease  of  the  lungs,  or,
as  some  say,  of  poison  administered  by  the  agents
of  Rosas.  His  other  works  include  "  Demostracion
de  la  legitimidad  de  la  independencia  de  la  repub-
lica  del  Uruguay  "  (Montevideo,  1842),  and  *'  La  In-
tervention Anglo-francesa  en  el  Rio  de  la  Plata "
(1844).  See  "  Estudios  sobre  el  Rio  de  la  Plata,"
by  Magarifios  Cervantes  (Paris,  1856).

"  INFANTE,  Hernienegrildo  (in-fan'-tay),  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  according  to  some  authorities
in  Merida,  according  to  others  in  Havana,  and
according  to  others  in  Spain ;  d.  before  1692.  In
1646  he  was  a  friar  in  the  Franciscan  convent  of
Campeche,  when  an  expedition  for  the  conquest  of
the  Itzas  and  Lacandones  was  fitting  out.  Father
Infante,  desiring  that  the  cross  should  precede
the  sword,  proceeded  in  February,  1646,  from
Campeche  to  Usumacinta,  the  most  advanced
Christian  settlement  of  Yucatan,  accompanied  by
Father  Villasis.  It  was  evident  that  they  were  not
welcome  among  the  Indians,  and.  not  receiving  any
tidings  from  Campeche  and  Merida,  Villasis  re-
turned to  Merida.  Friar  Bartolome  de  Gabalda
was  sent  to  assist  Infante  in  his  dangerous  position,
but  well-nigh  perished  on  the  road  before  he  reached
his  destination.  The  Spanish  forces  arrived  at
Usumacinta  about  the  beginning  of  1647,  but  there
was  no  order  among  them.  Instead  of  proceeding
to  Nohua,  as  Infante,  who  had  joined  them,  urged
them  to  do,  they  tarried  day  after  day  at  Usuma-
cinta till  their  followers,  seeing  no  hope  of  success,
gradually  abandoned  them.  At  last,  with  the  rem-
nant of  their  former  force,  they  moved  on  to  Nohua,
where  they  arrived  in  July.  The  Indians,  having
previously  ill  treated  the  friar,  had  fled  to  the
mountains,  but  their  cacique  had  already  made  his
peace  with  the  chief  of  the  Spaniards,  and  Father
Infante  was  now  despatched  to  Guatemala  to  obtain
pecuniary  assistance,  as  the  adelantado  was  desti-
tute of  funds.  At  Palenque,  however,  he  received
a  letter  from  the  former  advising  him  of  his  illness.
Infante  hastened  to  return,  but  found  that  in  his
absence  the  Indians  had  set  fire  to  the  town,  and
the  adelantado  with  his  followers  had  escaped  to
Petenecte,  where  Ordonez  died  in  April,  1648.  The
remaining  Spaniards  and  Father  Infante  returned
to  Merida.  and  this  expedition  was  not  followed  by
any  other  for  several  years,  but  Infante,  who  had
studied  thoroughly  the  country,  exerted  every  in-
fluence for  calling  the  attention  of  the  authorities
to  the  project.  When  in  1692  the  government  of
Yucatan  and  Guatemala  undertook  the  conquest  of
the  Itzas,  Lacandones,  and  Choes,  they  had  in
mind  and  studied  the  notes  of  Father  Infante.

INFANTE,  Jos§  Miguel  (in-fan'-tay),  Chilian
statesman,  b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  March,  1778;
d.  there,  9  April,  1844.  He  studied  law  in  the
College  of  San  Carlos,  and  was  admitted  to  practice
in  1801.  When  the  first  symptoms  of  the  revolu-
tionary movement  showed  themselves,  he  was  one
of  the  earliest  to  accept  the  idea  with  enthusiasm,
and  as  corporation  counsellor  of  the  municipality
of  Santiago  contributed  to  the  formation  of  the
first  independent  junta,  which  met  on  18  Sept.,
1810.  In  the  first  meeting  he  asked  for  the  convo-
cation of  a  popular  congress  to  declare  the  inde-
pendence of  the  nation,  and,  notwithstanding
strong  opposition,  carried  his  point. The  congress


346


INGALLS


that  met  4  July,  1811,  may  be  said  to  be  princi-

5 ally  the  work  of  Infante.  When  the  first  presi-
ent  of  the  independent  government,  Carrera,  was
elected  commander  -  in  -  chief  of  the  forces  that
marched  to  repel  the  invasion  of  Gen.  Pareja,
Infante  was  elected  regent  of  the  governing  junta.
During  his  term  the  junta  adopted  the  national
flag,  and  founded  the  National  institute  of  science
and  numerous  primary  schools  throughout  the
counti'y.  In  1814  Infante  was  sent  as  diplomatic
agent  to  the  revolutionary  government  of  Buenos
Ayres,  where  he  remained  for  some  time,  but
after  the  battle  of  Chacabuco,  12  Feb.,  1817,  he  re-
turned to  his  country,  and  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  treasury  by  the  director  0  Higgins  in  1818.
He  introduced  many  improvements  during  his
short  term  of  office,  and,  not  being  in  accord  with
the  director,  he  soon  resigned.  On  28  Jan.,  1823,
with  other  citizens,  he  convened  a  public  meeting,
and  defended  the  liberty  of  the  nation.  O'Hig-
gins  in  consequence  resigned  the  executive.  In  the
same  year  Gen.  Freire  was  elected  president  of  the
republic,  and  offered  Infante  a  seat  in  the  superior
court,  which  he  at  first  declined,  but  afterward  ac-
cepted. His  first  measure  was  the  abolition  of
slavery  in  the  territory  of  Chili,  which  in  later
years  he  counted  his  principal  glory.  He  desired
that  the  only  inscription  on  his  tomb  should  be
"  The  author  of  the  law  of  abolition."  When  Gen.
Freire  marched  for  the  second  time  against  the
Spanish  forces  in  the  archipelago  of  Chiloe  in  1824,
he  instituted  a  council  of  regency,  of  which  Infante
was  president,  and  one  of  his  principal  measures
was  the  banishment  of  the  bishop  Zorrilla,  whose
intrigues  were  threatening  the  public  security.
Infante  was  an  admirer  of  the  United  States,  and
in  1826  as  senator  laid  before  congress  a  proposi-
tion to  form  a  federal  republic.  As  his  ideas  were
not  generally  accepted,  he  supported  them  by
founding  in  1827  "  El  Valdiviano  Federal."  of
which  he  was  the  editor,  and  till  his  death  he  con-
tinued to  write  all  the  leading  articles  for  this  pa-
per. In  1830  Infante  was  elected  to  congress,  but
soon  resigned.  In  1843  his  eminent  services  were
acknowledged  by  the  appointment  of  first  judge
of  the  supreme  court  and  member  of  the  faculty
of  law  of  the  University  of  Chili,  but  he  refused
both  places.  Recently  congress  erected  a  statue  in
his  honor  in  the  Alameda  of  Santiago.

INGALLS,  John  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Mid-
dleton,  Mass.,  29  Dec,  1833.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1855,  studied  law,  and  was"  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1857.  He  removed  to  Atchison,  Kan.,
in  1858,  and  practised  his  profession,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Wyandotte  convention  of  1859,  secretary
of  the  territorial  council  in  1860,  and  of  the  state
senate  in  1861,  and  a  member  of  the  latter  body  in
1862.  In  the  same  year  he  was  an  unsuccessful
candidate  for  lieutenant-governor.  After  his  de-
feat he  accepted  the  editorship  of  the  Atchison
"  Champion,"  which  he  retained  for  three  years.  He
was  again  defeated  for  the  lieutenant-governorship
in  1864,  but  was  elected  to  the  United  States
senate  for  the  term  beginning  in  1873,  and  was
twice  re-elected,  and  in  1887  was  president  pro
tempore  of  the  senate. He  is  an  able  debater.

INGALLS,  Rufus,  soldier,  b.  in  Denmark,  Me.,
23  Aug.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1843,  and  joined  the  rifle-
corps,  but  was  transferred  to  the  1st  dragoons  in
1845.  He  was  in  the  battles  of  Embudo  and  Taos,
New  Mexico,  in  1847,  became  1st  lieutenant,  16
Feb.,  1847,  and  was  made  assistant  quartermaster,
with  the  rank  of  captain,  12  Jan.,  1848.  He  then
served  in  California  and  in  Oregon,  was  in  Col.


1NGENHOUS

Edward  J.  Steptoe's  expedition  across  the  conti-
nenl,  and  from  1856  till  1860  was  stationed  at  Fort
Vancouver,  being  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Harney  at
the  time  of  the  San  Juan  affair.  In  April,  1861,
he  was  sent  to  re-enforce  Fort  Pickens,  and  in
July  was  ordered  to  duty  with  the  Army  of  the
Potomac.  He  was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
McClellan,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  on

28  Sept.,  major  in  the  quartermaster's  department,
12  Jan..  1862,  and  was  chief  quartermaster  in  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  from  1862  till  1865.  He  be-
came brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  23  May,  1863,
and  colonel  and  assistant  quartermaster-general,

29  July,  1866.  He  was  present  at  the  battles  of
South  Mountain,  Antietam,  Fredericksburg,  Chan-
cellorsville,  Gettysburg,  and  the  subsequent  battles,
till  the  surrender  of  Lee.  He  received  the  brevet
of  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  in  1864,
and  that  of  major-general,  for  meritorious  services
during  the  war,  on  13  March,  1865,  was  mustered
out  of  volunteer  service,  1  Sept.,  1866.  and  was
stationed  as  chief  quartermaster  at  New  York  city
from  April,  1867,  to  31  July,  1876.  He  was  re-
assigned to  New  York  city,  1  March,  1881,  and  re-
lieved 14  March,  1882,  to  become  quartermaster-
general  of  the  army.  Gen.  Ingalls  was  retired  from
the  service  at  his  own  request  on  1  July,  1883.

INGALLS,  William,  physician,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  3  May,  1769;  d.  in  Wrentham,
Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1851.  His  ancestor,  Edmund,  of
Lynn,  came  from  Lincolnshire.  England,  in  1629.
William  was  graduated  in  1790  at  Harvard,  where
he  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1801.  From  1811
till  1823  he  was  professor  of  anatomy  and  surgery  at
Brown. He  published  "  Malignant  Fevers  "  (1847).

INGE,  Samuel  W.,  lawyer,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal..  in  1867.  He  re-
moved to  Greene  county,  Ala.,  when  young,  stud-
ied law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to
practise  in  Livingston  county.  In  1844-'5  he  was
a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives,
and  from  1847  till  1851  a  representative  to  con-
gress, having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  During
this  time  he  fought  a  duel  in  Bladensburg  with
Edward  Stanley,  of  North  Carolina.  He  then  re-
sumed his  practice,  and  was  afterward  appointed
by  President  Pierce  U.  S.  attorney  for  California.

INGENHOUS,  Jean  Simon  (ing-en-hows),
Dutch  explorer,  b.  in  Maestrich  in  1701  ;  d.  in
Rotterdam  in  1769.  His  father  was  a  famous  sur-
geon, and  the  son  was  also  graduated  in  surgery,
obtaining  an  appointment  in  1723  on  a  ship  that
belonged  to  the  Indian  company.  On  returning
to  Amsterdam  the  vessel  foundered  at  sea,  and  the
crew,  after  several  days  of  suffering  in  an  open
boat,  was  rescued  by  a  passing  Spanish  man-of-war
that  was  bound  for  Buenos  Ayres.  In  that  city
Ingenhous  was  taken  sick  with  fever  and  brought
to  the  hospital  of  the  Jesuits,  who  saw  at  once  the
opportunity  of  attaching  to  their  order  a  physician
of  repute.  They  nursed  him  with  the  best  care,
and  when  he  was  convalescent  took  him  to  a  villa
in  the  country.  Ingenhous  at  last  succumbed  to
their  suggestions,  and  having  abjured  the  Reformed
church  in  1725,  became  a  Jesuit  in  1728.  In  the
following  years  he  was  attached  to  the  missions  of
the  Para,  and  resided  several  years  on  the  borders
of  the  river  Tocantin.  In  1742  he  was  elected
provincial  of  the  Uruguay  missions,  and  greatly
benefited  the  condition  of  the  Indians  in  those
countries,  altogether  increasing  the  influence  of
the  order.  But  he  had  retained  doubts  regarding
his  change  of  religion,  and,  on  the  expulsion  of  the
Jesuits  from  South  America  in  1767,  returned  to
Amsterdam,  where  he  abjured  the  Roman  Catholic


INGERSOLL


INGERSOLL


347


faith  and  was  appointed  librarian  of  the  museum
of  Rotterdam.  He  held  that  office  till  his  death,
and  published  "  De  la  naturaleza  y  virtudes  de  los
arboles,  plantas  y  animales  de  la  America,  de  que
se  aprovecha  la  medicina "  (Rotterdam,  1761):
"Rerum  medicinalium  Novi  Orbis  thesaurus"  (3
vols..  1763);  "Lehrbuch  der  amerikanischen  Geo-
graphic" (1764);  and  "Description  geographique
et  statistique  des  missions  des  Jesuites  du  Para  et
de  l' Uruguay"  (1765).

INGERSOLL,  Ernest,  naturalist,  b.  in  Monroe,
Mich.,  13  March,  1852.  His  grandfather  was  one
of  the  earliest  emigrants  to  the  Western  Reserve
of  Ohio.  He  spent  his  youth  in  ranging  the  fields
and  marshes  in  search  of  natural-history  objects,
pursued  an  irregular  course  in  Oberlin  college,
chiefly  devoting  himself  to  science,  and  was  made
curator  of  the  college  museum.  He  afterward  be-
came a  special  student  in  the  Harvard  museum  of
comparative  zoology,  devoting  himself  to  the  study
of  birds.  He  spent  the  summer  of  1873  with  Louis
Agassiz  in  his  seaside  school  on  Penikese,  and  after
the  death  of  Agassiz  served  as  naturalist  and  col-
lector with  the  Hayden  survey  in  the  west,  and
during  1874  contributed  scientific  articles  and
sketches  of  travel  to  the  New  York  "  Tribune."  He
made  a  second  trip  to  the  west  in  1877,  correspond-
ing with  the  "  New  York  Herald."  He  became  a
member  of  the  U.  S.  fish  commission,  and  a  special
agent  of  the  tenth  census  in  1880,  for  the  investi-
gation of  the  American  oyster  industries,  and  in
1883  he  was  sent  to  California  to  prepare  articles
for  "  Harper's  Magazine."  Mr.  Ingersoll  is  now
(1887)  editor  of  the  publications  of  the  Canadian
Pacific  railway,  residing  in  Montreal.  He  has  made
investigations  in  conchology  and  other  branches  of
natural  history,  and  is  the  author  of  "  A  Natural
History  of  the  Nests  and  Eggs  of  American  Birds"
(seven  parts,  Salem,  1879) ;  "  Birds'  Nesting  "  (1881) :
a  report  on  the  "  History  and  Present  Condition
of  the  Oyster  Industries  of  the  United  States "
(Washington,  1881);  "Friends  Worth  Knowing:
Glimpses  of  American  Natural  History"  (New
York.  1881):  "Knocking  'Round  the  Rockies"
(1882) :  "  The  Crest  of  the  Continent  "  (1883) ;  "  Old
Ocean  "  (Boston,  1883) ;  "  Countrv  Cousins  "  (New
York,  1884) ;  "  The  Ice  Queen  "  "(1885) :  "  To  the
Shenandoah  and  Beyond"  (1885);  "The  Strange
Ventures  of  a  Stowaway"  (Philadelphia,  1886):
"Down  East  Latch-Strings"  (Boston.  1887);  sev-
eral pamphlets :  and  a  series  of  books  on  natural
historv  for  the  young.

INGERSOLL,  Jared,  stamp-agent,  b.  in  Mil-
ford,  Conn.,  in  1722  :  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in
August,  1781.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1742,
and  in  1765  arrived  in  Boston  from  England
charged  with  the  commission  of  stamp-agent  for
Connecticut,  which  Benjamin  Franklin  had  ad-
vised him  to  accept.  After  the  demonstrations
against  the  obnoxious  act  in  various  parts  of  the
colonies,  Ingersoll,  assured  of  the  governor's  protec-
tion, tried  to  reason  the  people  of  New  Haven
into  forbearance.  Surrounding  his  house,  they  de-
manded him  to  resign.  "  I  know  not  if  I  have  the
power  to  resign,"  he  replied.  He  promised,  how-
ever, that  he  would  re-ship  any  stamps  that  he  re-
ceived or  leave  the  matter  to  their  decision.  He
was  finally  compelled  to  offer  his  resignation,
which  was  not  satisfactory  to  the  people  of  other
sections,  and,  in  order  to  save  his  house  from  an
attack,  he  rode  from  New  Haven,  resolving  to  place
himself  under  the  protection  of  the  legislature  in
Hartford.  Several  mfies  below  Wethersfield  he
met  a  body  of  500  men  on  horseback,  preceded  by
three  trumpeters  and  two  militia  officers. They


received  him  and  rode  with  him  to  Wethersfield,
where  they  compelled  him  to  resign  his  office.  En-
tering a  house  for  safety,  he  sent  word  of  his  situa-
tion to  the  governor  and  the  assembly.  After  wait-
ing for  three  hours  the  people  entered  the  house.
Ingersoll  said  :  "  The  cause  is  not  worth  dying  for,"
and  made  a  written  declaration  that  his  resignation
was  his  own  free  act,  without  any  equivocation.
"  Swear  to  it,"  said  the  crowd ;  but  this  he  refused.
They  then  commanded  him  to' shout  "  Liberty  and
property  "  three  times,  and,  throwing  his  hat  into
the  air,  he  obeyed.  He  was  then  escorted  by  a  large
crowd  to  Hartford,  where  he  read  to  the  assembly
the  paper  that  he  had  just  signed.  About  1770  he
was  made  admiralty  judge  of  the  middle  district,
and  resided  for  several  years  in  Philadelphia,  after
which  he  returned  to  New  Haven.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  a  pamphlet  on  the  "  Stamp- Act."  which
is  now  very  rare  (New  Haven,  1766). — His  son,
Jared,  jurist,  b.  in  Connecticut  in  1749;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  31  Oct.,  1822,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1766.  He  then  went  to  London,  studied
law  at  the  Middle  Temple  for  five  years,  and  was
then  more  than  eighteen  months  in  Paris,  where  he
formed  the  acquaintance  of  Benjamin  Franklin.
On  his  return  he  became  a  prominent  lawyer  of
Philadelphia,  and,  although  the  son  of  a  loyalist,
espoused  the  cause  of  the  colonies  in  the  Revolu-
tion. He  was  a  delegate  from  Pennsylvania  to  the
Continental  congress  in  1780— '1.  a  representative
in  the  convention  that  framed  the  Federal  constitu-
tion in  1787,  twice  attorney-general  of  Pennsyl-
vania, U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  eastern  dis-
trict of  Pennsylvania,  and  received  and  declined
the  appointment  of  chief  judge  of  the  Federal
court.  In  1812  he  was  the  Federal  candidate  for
vice-president  of  the  United  States,  but  was  de-
feated. At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  presiding
judge  of  the  district  court  of  Philadelphia  county.
— The  younger  Jared's  son,  Charles  Jared,  states-
man, b.  in  Philadelphia.  3  Oct.,  1782  ;  d.  there.  14
May,  1862,  received  a  liberal  education,  studied
law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia.
He  then  travelled  in  Europe,  and  was  attached  to
the  U.  S.  embassy  to  France.  He  was  afterward
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from
1813  till  1815.  when  he  became  U.  S.  district  attor-
ney, and  held  that  office  until  he  was  removed  by
Gen.  Jackson  in  1829.  Soon  afterward  he  served
in  the  legislature.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Canal
and  internal  improvement  convention  at  Harris-
burg  in  1825,  and  also  of  the  Reform  convention
there  in  1837,  and  in  Philadelphia  in  1838.  In
1837  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  legation  to
Prussia.  He  served  again  in  congress  from  1841
till  1847,  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  foreign
affairs,  and  distinguished  himself  as  a  Democratic
leader.  In  1847  he  was  nominated,  by  President
Polk,  U.  S.  minister  to  France,  but  was  rejected  by
the  senate.  He  was  the  author  of  "Chiomara,"  a
poem  published  in  the  "  Port-folio  ''  (1800) :  "  Ed-
wy  and  Elgira,"  a  tragedy  (Philadelphia,  1801);
"  Inchiquin  the  Jesuit's  Letters  on  American  Lit-
erature and  Politics"  (New  York.  1810):  "Ju-
lian." a  dramatic  poem  (1831) ;  and  a  "  Historical
Sketch  of  the  Second  War  between  the  United
States  and  Great  Britain  "  (4  vols..  Philadelphia,
1N4-V52).  He  also  published  numerous  anonymous
contributions  to  the  "  Democratic  Press"  of  Phila-
delphia, and  to  the  "  National  Intelligencer "  of
Washington,  on  the  controversies  with  England
before  the  war  of  1812  (1811 -'15);  several
"  Speeches  "  concerning  that  war  (1813-'15) ;  a  dis-
course before  the  American  philosophical  society
on  the  "  Influence  of  America  on  the  Mind,"  which


348


INGERSOLL


INGHAM


JCPA


was  republished  in  England  and  France  (1823) ;  a
translation  of  a  French  work  on  the  freedom  of
navigation,  in  the  "  American  Law  Journal "  of
1829,  and  many  other  literary  and  political  dis-
courses. At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  preparing
a  "  History  of  the  Territorial  Acquisitions  of  the
United  States."— Another  son,  Joseph  Reed,  law-
yer, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  June,  1786 ;  d.  there,
20  Feb.,  1868,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1804,
studied  law  with  his  father,  and  practised  exten-
sively in  Philadel-
phia. In  1835  he
was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Whig,  and
served  till  1837,  and
again  from  1843  till
1849.  For  a  time  he
was  chairman  of  the
judiciary  committee.
He  was  an  advocate
for  protection  and  a
firm  supporter  of
Henry  Clay.  One  of
his  best  efforts  in
the  house  was  a  de-
fence of  Mr.  Clay's
tariff  of  1842.  In
1852  he  was  appoint-
ed by  President  Fill-
more minister  to
England,  as  successor  to  Abbott  Lawrence,  and  held
this  office  about  one  year,  when  he  was  succeeded
by  James  Buchanan.  He  then  retired  to  private
life,  devoting  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  The  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Lafayette
and  Bowdoin  in  1836,  and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  by  Ox-
ford in  1845.  He  was  a  warm  adherent  of  the
Union,  and  at  the  time  of  the  civil  war  prepared
an  able  essay  entitled  "  Secession,  a  Folly  and  a
Crime."  He  published  a  translation  from  the
Latin  of  Roccus's  tracts  "  De  Navibus  et  Naulo  "
and  "  De  Assecuratione  "  (Philadelphia,  1809),  and
was  the  author  of  a  "  Memoir  of  Samuel  Breck  "
(1863). — Another  son,  Edward,  wrote  poems  under
the  pen-name  of  Horace  for  the  "  Port-folio."  and
contributed  articles  to  "  Walsh's  Gazette."  He  was
the  author  of  "  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  the  United
States"  (Philadelphia,  1821). — Charles  Jared's  son,
Edward,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  2  April,  1817,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1835.  He  has  published  a  work  on  the  "  History
and  Law  of  Habeas  Corpus  and  Grand  Juries"
(Philadelphia,  1849) ;  and  "  Personal  Liberty  and
Martial  Law "  (1862) ;  and  has  edited  Hale's
"  Pleas  of  the  Crown,"  "  Addison  on  Contracts,"
and  "  Saunders  on  Uses  and  Trusts."

INGERSOLL,  Ralph  Isaacs,  statesman,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  8  Feb.,  1788 ;  d.  there.  26  Aug.,
1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811,  and  began  to
practise  in  his  native  city,  where  he  attained  high
rank  in  his  profession.  •  In  1819  he  was  chosen  a
representative  in  the  legislature  on  which  devolved
the  duty  of  conforming  the  existing  laws  to  the
new  constitution  which  had  taken  the  place  of  the
old  charter.  Mr.  Ingersoll  was  perhaps  the  most
conspicuous  debater  on  the  Democratic  side.  The
Federal  speakers  and  the  press  called  him  "  Young
Hotspur,  and  Theodore  Dwight,  in  his  political
lyrics,  alluded  to  hira  under  that  name.  For  seven
years  Mr.  Ingersoll  continued  to  represent  New
Haven  in  the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature,  and
in  1825  he  was  elected  at  the  same  time  to  the
legislature  of  the  state  and  to  congress.  He  was
re-elected  to  congress  for  four  consecutive  terms,


and  served  on  important  committees,  but  in  1833
he  declined  a  re-election  in  order  to  devote  himself
to  his  profession.  He  was  state's  attorney  for  ( On-
necticut  for  several  years,  and  in  1846  was  appoint-
ed by  President  Polk  U.  S.  minister  to  Russia.
After  holding  this  post  two  years,  he  resigned  and
returned  to  New  Haven,  where  he  spent  the  rest
of  his  life  in  retirement. — His  brother,  Charles
Anthony,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn.,  19
Oct.,  1798 :  d.  there,  12  Jan.,  1860,  studied  law
with  his  brother  and  attained  eminence.  From
1849  till  1853  he  was  state's  attorney,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  appointed  by  President  Pierce
judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of  Connecticut,
which  post  he  held  till  his  death.  Yale  gave  him
the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1827. — Ralph's  son,  Colin
Macrae,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  11  March,
1819,  was  educated  at  Trinity  and  at  the  Yale  law-
school,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1839.  In  1843
he  served  as  clerk  in  the  Connecticut  senate.  He
was  secretary  of  legation  at  St.  Petersburg  in
1847-'8,  and  was  a  representative  in  congress  from
1851  till  1855,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.
He  was  also  adjutant-general  of  Connecticut  in
1867  and  1871. — Another  son,  Charles  Roberts,
governor  of  Connecticut,  b  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
16  Sept.,  1821,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1840,  and
at  the  law-school  in  1844.  He  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1845,  and  has  been  frequently  elected  to
the  legislature.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Con-
necticut in  1873,  and  re-elected  till  1877,  when  he
declined  a  renomination.  He  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Democratic  ticket  in  1876.  Yale
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1874.

INGERSOLL,  Robert  Green,  lawyer,  b.  in
Dresden,  N.  Y.,  11  Aug.,  1833.  His  father  was  a
Congregational  clergyman  of  such  broad  views  as
frequently  to  cause  dissension  between  himself  and
his  parish.  The  son's  boyhood  was  spent  in  Wis-
consin and  Illinois,  where  the  family  removed  in
1843.  After  studying  law  he  opened  an  office  in
Shawneetown,  111.,  with  his  brother  Eben,  who  was
subsequently  a  member  of  congress.  Both  en-
gaged in  politics,  but  the  surroundings  were  un-
congenial, and  in  1857  they  removed  to  Peoria.  In
1860  Robert  was  a  Democratic  candidate  for  con-
gress, but  was  defeated.  In  1862  he  became  colo-
nel of  the  11th  Illinois  cavalry,  and  a  year  and  a
half  later  united  with  the  Republican  party.  In
1866  he  was  appointed  attorney-general  for  Illinois.
At  the  National  Republican  convention  of  1876  he
proposed  the  name  of  James  G.  Blaine  for  the
presidential  nomination  in  a  speech  that  attracted
much  attention.  From  that  time  his  services  as  a
campaign  orator  have  been  in  demand  throughout
the  country.  In  1877  he  refused  the  post  of  min-
ister to  Germany.  He  has  taken  part  in  numerous
noted  lawsuits  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  was
counsel  for  the  so-called  star-route  conspirators,
whose  trial  ended  in  acquittal  in  1883.  He  is  well
known  by  his  books,  pamphlets,  and  speeches  di-
rected against  the  Christian  religion.  He  has  pub-
lished "The  Gods "  (Washington,  1878) ;  " Ghosts "
(1879);  "Some  Mistakes  of  Moses "  (1879) ;  "Lec-
tures Complete  "  (1883) ;  "  Prose  Poems  and.  Selec-
tions" (1884);  a  large  number  of  minor  works,
and  introductory  chapters  for  two  books,  entitled
"  Modern  Thinkers,"  compiled  by  Van  Buren  Dens-
low  (Chicago,  1881) ;  and  "  The  Brain  and  the
Bible,"  by  Edgar  C.  Beall  (Cincinnati,  1882).

INGHAM,  Charles  Cromwell,  artist,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1797:  d.  in  New  York  city,  10
Dec,  1863.  He  studied  in  the  academy  of  Dublin,
and  obtained  a  prize  for  his  "  Death  of  Cleopatra."
He  settled  in  New  York  in 1817,  was  one  of  the


INGHAM


INGLIS


349


founders  of  the  National  academy  of  design,  and
its  vice-president  from  1845  till  1830.  Mr.  Ingham
was  also  one  of  the  originators  of  the  old  "  Sketch
Club."  His  works  include  "The  Laughing  Girl,"
"The  White  Plume,"  "The  Flower  Girl,"  and
*'  Day  Dreams."  He  also  executed  portraits  of  the
beauties  of  New  York,  and  of  Lafayette  (1825),
Gulian  C.  Verplanck,  owned  by  the  New  York  his-
torical society  (1830),  and  De  Witt  Clinton.

INGHAM,  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hebron,  Conn.,
5  Sept.,  1793;  d.  in  Essex,  Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1881.
He  received  a  good  education  in  Vermont,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Connecticut  in

1815,  and  settled  in  Saybrook  in  1817.  From  1827
till  1835,  and  again  in  1843-'4,  he  was  state's  attor-
ney for  Middlesex  county.  He  was  a  judge  of  probate
from  1829  till  1833.  judge  of  the  Middlesex  county
court  from  1849  till  1853,  and  a  representative  in
congress  from  1835  till  1839,  having  been  elected
as  a  Democrat.  He  also  served  in  the  Connecticut
legislature,  was  its  speaker  for  three  years,  and  for
one  year  clerk  of  the  house  of  representatives.  He
was  appointed  by  the  state  in  1837  an  agent  to
prosecute  claims  against  the  United  States,  and  was
successful.  In  1854  he  was  an  unsuccessful  candi-
date for  U.  S.  senator.  He  was  appointed  com-
missioner of  customs  in  1857.

INGHAM,  Samuel  Delucenna,  secretary  of
the  treasury,  b.  in  Pennsylvania,  16  Sept.,  1779 ;  d.
in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  5  June,  1860.  He  received  a
good  education,  and  for  several  years  was  manager
of  a  paper-mill  in  New  Jersey.  For  three  years
he  served  in  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,  and  was
prothonotary  of  one  of  the  state  courts.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Jackson  Democrat,  serving
from  1813  till  1818,  and  again  from  1822  till  1829,
and  was  chairman  of  several  committees.  He  was
appointed  by  President  Jackson  secretary  of  the
treasury,  but  resigned  when  the  cabinet  was  broken
up  on  account  of  Mrs.  Eaton.

INGLE,  Richard,  mariner,  b.  probably  in  Lon-
don, England,  early  in  the  17th  century.  In  1642
he  commanded  a  ship  from  London  that  was  seized
by  the  royalist  governor  of  Maryland,  but  escaped,
and,  securing  a  commission  from  parliament  to
cruise  in  the  waters  of  the  Chesapeake  against
"  malignants,"  reappeared  in  February,  1645,  in  the
ship  "  Reformation."  Taking  advantage  of  a  local
insurrection,  he  expelled  Leonard  Calvert,  and  held
possession  of  the  government  till  August,  1646,
when  Calvert  regained  control.  Ingle  was  specially
excepted  in  a  proclamation  of  amnesty.  His  exploit
is  known  as  the  "  Claiborne  and  Ingle's  rebellion,"
though  it  is  not  proved  that  the  former  acted  with
Ingle.  See  "  Richard  Ingle,  the  Maryland  Pirate
and  Rebel,"  by  Edward  Ingle  (Baltimore,  1884).

INGLIS,  Charles,  Anglican  bishop,  b.  in  Ire-
land in  1734;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  24  Feb.,

1816.  He  emigrated  to  this  country,  and  previous
to  1759  took  charge  of  the  free  school  at  Lancaster,
Pa.  He  was  licensed  by  the  Bishop  of  London  in
December,  1758,  and  appointed  missionary  at  Dov-
er, Del.,  by  the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the

fospel.  He  labored  there  from  1759  till  1765,  when
e  became  assistant  minister  of  Trinity  church,
New  York  city.  In  1775  he  replied  to  Paine's
"  Common  Sense  "  by  a  pamphlet,  which  proved  so
offensive  to  the  "  Sons  of  Liberty  "  that  they  com-
mitted it  to  the  flames.  Two  editions  were  printed
subsequently  at  Philadelphia.  Though  requested
to  do  so  by  Washington,  he  refused  to  omit  the
prayer  for  the  king  and  royal  family,  and  after  the
Declaration  of  Independence  he  caused  his  church
to  be  closed,  and  retired  in  August,  1776,  to
Flushing,  L.  L,  which  was  then  in  possession  of


f£#^t '.tfnfJld


the  British.  After  Washington's  defeat  he  fol-
lowed the  royal  army  to  New  York,  and  was  chosen
rector  of  Trinity  church  in  1777.  In  1781-2  he
was  chaplain  to  the  1st  battalion  of  New  Jersey
volunteers,  and  at  the  evacuation  in  1783  went  to
Halifax.  In  1787  he
went  to  England,
and  on  12  Aug.  was
consecrated  at  Lam-
beth the  first  bishop
of  Nova  Scotia,  with
jurisdiction  over  the
other  North  Ameri-
can provinces.  He
had  the  distinction
of  being  the  first  co-
lonial bishop  of  the
Church  of  England.
In  1767  King's  col-
lege (now  Columbia)
conferred  upon  him
the  degree  of  M.  A.,
and  in  1770  he  be-
came one  of  the  gov-
ernors of  the  college,
an  office  which  he  retained  until  his  removal  from
the  city.  He  published  "  Essay  on  Infant  Bap-
tism "  (New  York) ;  "  A  Vindication  of  the  Bishop
of  Llandaff's  Sermon  "  (New  York) ;  two  sermons,
and  a  letter  in  "Hawkins's  Historical  Notices."
— His  son,  John,  also  bishop  of  Nova  Scotia,  and
appointed  a  member  of  the  council  in  1825,  died
in  London  in  1850. — John's  son,  Sir  John  Eard-
ley  Wilmot,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,
in  1814;  d.  in  Hamburg,  Germany.  27  Sept.,  1862,
took  part  in  the  campaign  of  the  Punjaub  in
1848-'9.  and  obtained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel. His  regiment  was  at  Lucknow  when  that
place  was  besieged  by  the  Sepoys  in  the  summer
of  1857,  and  after  the  death  of  Sir  Henry  Law-
rence he  succeeded  to  the  command.  He  was
knighted  and  brevetted  major-general.

INGLIS,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Greenlaw,
Berwickshire,  Scotland,  8  June,  1825 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  15  Dec,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Edinburgh  in  1841,  and,  after
studying  theology  there,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1845,  and  came  to  the  United  States  in  1846.  He
held  charges  at  Washington  Heights,  X.  Y„  in
Bedford,  N.  Y.,  and  Montreal  and  Hamilton,
Canada,  and  in  1871  removed  to  Toronto,  hav-
ing been  called  by  the  general  assembly  of  the
Presbyterian  church  of  Canada  to  the  chair  of
systematic  theology  in  Knox  college,  which  he
held  one  year.  In  1872  he  accepted  a  call  to  a
Dutch  Reformed  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In
the  summer  of  1877  he  was  a  delegate  of  the  Re-
formed church  to  the  Presbyterian  council  at  Edin-
burgh. The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  by  Olivet  in  1872,  and  that  of  D.  D.  by  Rut-
gers in  1874.  He  published  Sunday-school  lessons
in  the  "  Sower  and  Gospel  Field  "  (1874-'7) ;  a  ser-
mon on  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  the  Church
on  the  Heights,  Brooklvn  (1875) ;  "  Svstematic  The-
ology in  its  Relation  to  Modern^Thought "  (1876) ;
and  prepared  a  course  of  "Vedder  Lectures,"
which  were  to  have  been  delivered  in  1879.

INGLIS,  James,  clergvman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1777;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  15  Aug.,  1820.
His  father  of  the  same  name  came  to  this  country
from  Scotland  about  1760.  The  family  removed
to  New  York  about  1780,  and  James  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1795,  studied  law  with  Alexander
Hamilton,  and  practised  at  the  New  York  bar.
He  then  studied  theology  in  New  York,  and  was


350


INGLIS


IXGRAIIAM


licensed  by  the  presbytery  in  1801.  In  1802  he  be-
came pastor  of  a  church  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  which
charge  he  held  till  his  death.  In  1814  he  was
moderator  of  the  general  assembly  of  his  denomi-
natiuii.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on
hi  in  by  Princeton  in  1811.  Dr.  Inglis  was  an  elo-
quent preacher,  and  published  various  occasional
Bermons,  and  a  volume  of  his  discourses,  accom-
panied by  forms  of  prayer,  appeared  after  his  death
(1820). — His  son,  John  Auchincloss,  jurist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  26  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  there,  26  Aug.,
1878,  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  in  1831,  studied
law,  and  began  to  practise  in  Cheraw,  S.  0.  He  be-
came judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  and  gen-
eral sessions,  and  of  the  supreme  court  of  appeals,
and  was  also  appointed  one  of  the  four  chancellors
of  the  state.  He  was  president  of  the  State  con-
vention that  adopted  the  ordinance  of  secession,
and  drafted  that  document.  His  house  and  library
were  destroyed  by  Sherman's  army  in  the  burning
of  Columbia  in  1864.  In  1868  he  removed  to  Bal-
timore, where  he  entered  into  practice,  and  in  1870
he  accepted  a  professorship  in  the  law  department
of  the  University  of  Maryland.  In  1874  he  was
appointed  judge  of  the  orphan's  court,  and  he  was
re-elected  in  1875.  Shortly  before  his  death  he
was  appointed  by  the  board  of  trade  a  judge  of
the  new  court  of  arbitration.  Judge  Inglis  was
active  in  religious  matters,  and  for  several  years
before  his  death  served  as  a  ruling  elder  in  a  Pres-
byterian church  in  Baltimore.

'  INGLIS,  Mary,  the  first  white  woman  in  Ken-
tucky, b.  in  1729 ;  d.  in  1813.  In  1756  one  of  the
extreme  frontier  settlements  of  Virginia,  on  Alle-
ghany ridge  (now  Montgomery  county,  W.  Va.),
was  attacked  by  a  party  of  Shawnee  Indians,  who
massacred  some  of  the  inhabitants  and  made  others
captives.  Among  the  latter  were  Mrs.  Inglis,  with
her  two  sons  and  her  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Draper.
They  were  carried  down  the  Kanawha  to  the  In-
dian towns  at  the  mouth  of  Scioto  river,  where  her
children  were  separated  from  her.  Mrs.  Inglis
won  great  favor  among  the  savages  by  her  skill  in
making  shirts  out  of  the  checked  fabrics  that  they
had  purchased  of  French  traders.  The  separation
from  her  sons  and  the  cruelty  of  the  savages  finally
decided  her  to  attempt  her  escape,  and  she  per-
suaded another  prisoner,  an  old  Dutch  woman,  to
join  her.  Obtaining  leave  to  gather  grapes,  they
disappeared  in  the  woods  and  underbrush  and  set
out  on  their  journey,  following  the  Ohio  valley
140  miles  back  to  a  point  opposite  the  Scioto  towns.
They  were  fortunate  enough  to  find  an  old  horse
grazing  on  the  Kentucky  side,  and  to  secure  some
corn  and  meat  for  their  further  journey.  Pressing
on  to  the  Virginia  line,  they  found  Big  Sandy  river
impassable.  Turning  their  course  up  the  stream,
they  came  to  a  raft  of  trees  and  logs  which  stretched
across  the  river.  Over  this  they  passed,  but,  unfor-
tunately, lost  their  horse.  After  they  had  wandered
on  toward  the  Kanawha,  their  store  of  provisions
was  exhausted  and  they  were  forced  to  live  upon
grapes,  walnuts,  papaws,  and  roots.  In  this  ex-
treme of  suffering  the  Dutch  woman  became  fran-
tic with  hunger  and  exposure,  and  finally,  after
repeated  threats,  made  a  deadly  assault  upon  Mrs.
Inglis.  Escaping  her  fury,  the  latter  wandered  by
moonlight  along  the  banks  of  the  Kanawha,  and
found  an  old  Indian  canoe,  in  which  she  crossed  to
the  opposite  shore.  At  daylight  her  companion
discovered  her  situation  and  begged  piteously  to
be  carried  over  also ;  but  this  Mrs.  Inglis  dared
not  risk.  She  started  alone  up  the  Kanawha,  and
soon  found  a  clearing  and  a  settler's  cabin,  whence
a  party  was  sent  back  and  returned  in  safety  with


the  Dutch  woman.  The  captives  had  been  over
forty  days  in  their  flight  through  the  wilderness,
during  which  they  traversed  a  distance  of  more
than  400  miles.  One  of  the  little  boys  died  in  cap-
tivity, and  the  other  was  ransomed  after  remaining
thirteen  years  among  the  savages.  Mrs.  Inglis's
daughters  married  men  who  became  distinguished
in  the  history  of  Virginia  and  Kentucky.

INGRAHAM,  Duncan  Nathaniel,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  6  Dec.  1802 ;  d.  in
Charleston.  S.  C,  16  Oct..  1891.  His  father.  Na-
thaniel, was  in  the  action  with  the  British  brig  "  Se-
rapis,"  and  his  uncle,  Capt.  Joseph  Ingraham,  was
lost  at  sea  in  the  U.  S.  ship  "Pickering."  Duncan
Nathaniel  entered  the  XT.  S.  navy  as  a  midshipman
in  June,  1812,  and  became  lieutenant,  1  April,
1818;  commander,  24  May,  1838;  and  captain,  14
Sept.,  1855.  While  commanding  the  sloop-of-war
"  St.  Louis,"  in  the  Mediterranean,  he  interfered  at
Smyrna,  in  July,  1853,  with  the  Austrian  consul's
detention  of  Martin  Koszta,  who  had  resided  nearly
two  years  in  the  United  States  and  declared  his  in-
tention of  becoming  an  American  citizen.  He  had
come  to  Smyrna  from  New  York  on  business  in-
tending soon  to  return,  but  on  21  June,  1853,  he
was  seized  by  a  party  of  armed  Greeks  that  were
employed  by  the  Austrian  consul-general  and  con-
fined on  board  the  "Hussar."  After  learning  the
facts  from  the  prisoner  Capt.  Ingraham  addressed
a  letter  on  this  subject  to  John  P.  Brown,  the
charge  d'affaires  of  the  United  States  in  Con-
stantinople, who  gave  the  official  opinion  that  the
surrender  of  Koszta  should  be  demanded.  On  2
July,  at  8  a.  m.,  Capt.  Ingraham  claimed  of  the
Austrian  commander  the  release  of  Koszta  by
4  p.  m.,  declaring  that  he  would  otherwise  take  him
by  force.  At  the  same  time  the  decks  of  the  "  St.
Louis  "  were  cleared  for  action,  and  all  was  made
ready  for  an  attack  on  the  "  Hussar,"  which  was
much  her  superior  in  size  and  armament.  At  11
a.  m.  the  Austrian  consul-general  proposed  to  de-
liver Koszta  to  the  French  consul,  to  be  held  by
him  subject  to  the  disposition  of  the  U.  S.  and
Austrian  consuls.  This  was  accepted  by  Capt.
Ingraham  as  giving  sufficient  assurance  of  the  per-
sonal safety  of  the  Hungarian,  and  Koszta  was
soon  released  and  returned  to  the  United  States.
This  affair  gave  rise  to  an  elaborate  discussion  in
Washington  between  Sec.  William  L.  Marcy  and
M.  Hulsemann,  the  charge  d'affaires  of  Austria.
The  conduct  of  Capt.  Ingraham  was  fully  approved
by  the  U.  S.  government,  and  on  4  Aug.,  1854,  con-
gress, by  joint  resolution,  requested  the  president
to  present  him  with  a  medal.  In  March,  1856,  he
was  appointed  chief  of  the  bureau  of  ordnance  and
hydrography  of  the  navy  department.  When  the
civil  war  began,  in  1861,  he  was  in  command  of
the  flag-ship  "  Richmond  "  in  the  Mediterranean.
He  resigned  his  commission,  and  entered  the  Con-
federate naval  service,  being  chief  of  ordnance,  con-
struction and  repair,  and  in  which  he  rose  to  the
rank  of  commodore.  He  served  in  every  war  since-
the  Revolution,  and  was  said  to  be  the  last  sur-
vivor of  those  that  entered  the  navy  in  1812.  He
married  Harriet,  granddaughter  of  Henry  Laurens.

INGRAHAM,  Edward  Duncan,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1793;  d.  there,  4  Nov.,  1854.
He  received  his  education  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  studied  law  under  Alexander  J.
Dallas,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1813.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Free-trade  convention  that
was  held  in  Philadelphia  in  1831.  In  1834  he  be-
came secretary  of  a  committee  that  was  appointed
by  the  house  of  representatives  to  investigate  the
affairs  of  the  IT.  S.  bank,  and  held  this  office  until


IXGRAHAM


INHAMBUPE


351


the  committee  adjourned  to  meet  in  Washington,
D.  C.  On  27  June,  1834.  he  was  appointed  one  of
the  general  directors  of  the  bank,  serving  until  the
expiration  of  its  charter.  He  was  widely  known
as  a  bibliophile  and  wit.  His  last  office  was  that
of  commissioner  under  the  fugitive-slave  law.  He
published  "  English  Ecclesiastical  Reports  "  (7  vols..
Philadelphia,  1809-'35) ;  "A  View  on  the  Insolvent
Laws  of  Pennsylvania  "  (2d  ed.,  1827) ;  "  Gow  on
Partnership,"  with  notes  (1837-'45) ;  and  Vattel's
"  Law  of  Nations  "  (7th  American  ed.  from  a  new
ed.  by  Joseph  Chitty,  1852).  He  also  edited  a  new
edition  of  Coleman's  "  Broad  Grins,"  which  is  now
very  rare,  and  he  published  for  private  circulation
an  account  of  the  burning  of  the  capitol  in  Wash-
ington by  the  English  in  1814.

INGRAHAM,  Joseph  Holt,  clergyman,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  in  1809;  d.  at  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,
in  December,  1860.  He  went  to  sea  before  the
mast,  and  saw  service  in  one  of  the  South  Ameri-
can revolutions.  After  his  return  he  received  a
collegiate  education,  began  to  write  for  publica-
tion before  he  was  twenty  years  of  age,  and  became
Srofessor  of  languages  in  Jefferson  college,  near
fatchez.  Miss.  In  1836  he  published  "  The  South-
west, by  a  Y  ankee."  Subsequently  he  produced  in
rapid  succession  a  series  of  romances  of  wild  ad-
venture, such  as  "  Lafitte,  or  the  Pirate  of  the  Gulf  "
(New  York),  some  of  which  had  a  large  circulation.
He  published  also  a  volume  called  "  The  American
Lounger."  In  1855  he  took  orders  in  the  P.  E.
church,  and  was  rector  of  a  parish  and  of  St.
Thomas's  hall,  a  school  for  boys,  in  Holly  Springs,
Miss.  After  he  became  a  clergyman  he  published
religious  romances  bearing  the  titles  "  The  Prince
of  the  House  of  David,  or  Three  Years  in  the  Holv
City  "  (New  York,  1855) ;  "  The  Pillar  of  Fire,  or
Israel  in  Bondage "  (1859) ;  and  "  The  Throne  of
David,  from  the  Consecration  of  the  Shepherd  of
Bethlehem  to  the  Rebellion  of  Prince  Absalom  "
(Philadelphia,  I860). — His  son,  Prentiss,  soldier,
b.  near  Natchez,  Miss.,  28  Dec,  1843,  was  educated
at  Jefferson  college,  Miss.  He  served  as  an  officer
in  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  wounded  and
taken  prisoner  at  the  siege  of  Port  Hudson.  After
the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  went  to  Mexico  and
joined  the  army  of  Juarez.  He  afterward  saw  ser-
vice in  Austria,  Crete,  and  Africa,  and  began  a  lit-
erary career  in  London,  but  on  his  return  to  the
United  States  took  part  in  1869  in  the  attempted
revolution  in  Cuba,  went  out  on  the  "  Hornet,"  and
ran  the  blockade  several  times.  He  published
sketches,  poems,  and  serial  stories,  producing  a
great  number  of  novels  and  novelettes.

INGRANDE,  Jose  Domingo  (in-gran'-day),  Ar-
gentine historian,  b.  in  Montevideo  in  1759 ;  d.
there  in  1817.  He  entered  the  Spanish  army  in
1778,  served  several  years  in  Europe,  and  was  a
major  when  he  resigned  in  1786  and  returned  to
his  country.  His  tastes  were  for  historical  re-
search, and  while  in  Spain  he  had  formed  a  valu-
able collection  of  documents  on  the  discovery  of
America.  He  went  in  1803  to  the  United  States,
where  he  remained  five  years,  visiting  all  the  large
cities,  and  lecturing  in  Boston  and  Philadelphia  on
South  American  history  and  the  political  condition
of  that  country.  He  also  contributed  papers  to
the  reviews,  and,  when  he  returned  to  Montevideo,
founded  the  journal  "  El  Nacional  "  in  1810,  which
afterward  took  an  active  part  in  the  struggles  that
preceded  the  independence  of  the  country.  He  died
suddenly,  just  at  a  time  when  his  country  needed
his  vigorous  journalistic  talent  in  the  agitations  for
independence.  He  published  "  Viajero  Universal "
(Montevideo, 1797) ;  "  Historia  de America "  (4


vols.,  1801):  and  "Monografia  de  Montevideo,"
which  is  yet  considered  a  standard  work  on  the
early  history  of  that  city  (1816).

INGULF,  Rudolf,  surnamed  Ingulf  Ton
Koln,  German  explorer  and  sculptor,  b.  in  Co-
logne in  1727;  d.  in  Vienna  in  1785.  He  began
life  as  a  merchant,  from  1751  till  1763  lived  in
Mexico,  where  he  managed  a  German  factory,  and,
after  gaining  an  independent  fortune,  followed
his  taste  for  travel.  He  set  out  in  1764,  and  for
five  years  visited  the  most  remote  parts  of  Mexi-
co ;  thence  he  crossed  the  isthmus  of  Panama,  and
advanced  as  far  as  New  Granada.  Returning  to
New  Spain,  he  entered  California,  and  was  the  first
to  ascertain  that  it  was  a  rich  gold-field,  announc-
ing that  fact  to  the  world  in  his  "  Lehrbuch  der
Geographie  von  Californien  "  (Leipsic,  1771).  But
the  hint  was  neglected,  and  his  theories,  which  re-
lied on  a  critical  examination  of  the  nature  of  the
soil  and  the  geodesic  formation  of  it,  were  ignored.
Among  his  other  publications  are  "Reisen  in  Neu
Spanien"  (2  vols.,  Leipsic,  1772,  in  4to);  "Die
geologischen  Formationen  von  Californien  "  (Vi-
enna, 1775).  These  works  were  eagerly  consulted
at  the  time  of  the  subsequent  discoveries  of  gold
in  California,  but  never  enjoyed  the  popularity
they  deserved.  His  "  Kosmographie  von  Ameri-
ka  "  (Vienna,  1779,  with  charts),  although  defective
in  many  points,  is  considered  as  one  of  the  best
works  of  the  kind  published  in  the  last  century,
and  a  copy  of  the  original  edition  has  been  sold  for
700  thalers.  As  a  sculptor  Ingulf  won  during  his
life  a  higher  reputation  than  as  an  author.  His
bust  of  Endymion,  the  group  of  "  Mars  and  Venus
wounded  by  Diomede,"  the  busts  of  Columbus,  Pi-
zarro,  and  Velasquez,  and  his  group  of  "  Indians
imploring  Spaniards,"  in  Berlin,  place  him  among
the  best  German  sculptors  of  the  last  century.

INHAMBUPE,  Antonio  Luiz  Pereira  da
Cunha  (een-yam-boo'-pay),  marquis  of,  Brazilian
statesman,  b.  in  Bahia,  6  April,  1760;  d.  in  Rio
Janeiro,  18  Sept.,  1837.  lie  studied  law,  was
graduated  at  Coimbra,  and  in  1802  was  appointed
by  the  government  district  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Rio  Janeiro.  When  the  royal  court  of
Portugal  retired  to  Brazil  in  1807,  the  regent,  Don
Juan,  consulted  him  in  the  most  difficult  ques-
tions. He  was  appointed  chancellor  for  the  prov-
ince of  Bahia  in  1808,  and  in  1809-15  was  gov-
ernor of  the  province  of  Rio  Janeiro,  afterward
serving  on  the  council  of  the  treasury,  the  com-
mission to  codify  the  naval  laws,  and  the  council
for  commerce,  navigation,  and  agriculture.  At
the  outset  of  the  revolution  of  February,  1821,  in
Portugal,  John  VI.,  not  desiring  to  leave  Brazil,
decided  to  send  the  crown-prince,  Pedro,  to  Europe,
and  called  an  assembly  of  the  deputies  of  the  Bra-
zilian cities  to  Rio  Janeiro,  appointing  da  Cunha
one  of  the  members  of  the  commission  to  execute
this  decree.  When  the  king  was  obliged  to  sail  for
Portugal,  da  Cunha  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  advisory  commission  to  the  prince  regent ;  but
in  the  subsequent  movement  for  independence  he
took  part  in  favor  of  his  country,  and  in  1823  was
appointed  by  the  emperor  counsellor  of  state,  and
president  of  the  commission  to  organize  the  con-
stitution of  the  empire.  In  the  same  year  he  was
elected  to  the  senate,  and  appointed  its  president,
but  left  the  chair  twice  on  being  called  to  organize
a  ministry.  On  the  abdication  of  Pedro  I.,  7  April,
1831,  the  Marquis  of  Inhambupe  was  appointed
[iresident  of  the  council  of  regency  during  the
minority  of  his  son.  He  accepted  against  his
wishes,  and  as  soon  as  public  order  and  tranquillity
were  assured  he  resigned  and  retired  to  private  life.


352


INHAUMA


INMAN


INHAUMA,  Joaquin  Jos6  Ignacio  de  Bar-

TOS  (een-yah-oo'-mah).  Viscount  of,  Brazilian  naval
officer,  b.  in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  30  July,  1808 ;  d.  in
Rio  Janeiro,  8  March,  1868.  In  1810  his  parents
settled  in  Brazil,  where  he  studied  at  the  naval
academy,  was  graduated  in  1822,  entered  the
navy  as  a  volunteer,  and  in  1823  was  promoted
midshipman.  In  1824-'5  he  served  against  the
revolutions  of  Pernambuco,  Ceara,  and  Maranhao,
and  in  1826  in  the  campaign  in  Uruguay,  where
he  ran  the  gantlet  of  nineteen  blockading  ships
in  an  open  boat  to  reach  the  Brazilian  squad-
ron, and  returned  with  re-enforcements  and  am-
munition. In  1827  he  was  shipwrecked  in  the
corvette  "  Duqueza  de  Goyaz  "  in  the  expedition
against  Patagonia,  taken  prisoner  on  the  coast,  and
sent  with  eighty  other  Brazilians  to  Buenos  Ayres ;
but  on  the  voyage  they  revolted  under  Barros's
leadership,  overpowered  the  guard,  and,  eluding
the  men-of-war  of  the  convoy,  arrived  in  safety  at
Montevideo  on  29  Aug.  He  served  during  the  revo-
lutions of  1831  in  Rio  Janeiro,  of  1836  in  Maran-
hao, and  of  1837  in  Bahia,  and  was  promoted  com-
mander. In  1841  he  was  appointed  inspector  of
the  arsenal  of  Rio  Grande  do  Sul,  and  defeated
the  rebels  in  that  city.  He  was  promoted  captain
of  a  frigate  in  1844,  and  in  1846  sent  to  England
to  construct  the  man-of-war  "  Constituicao." In

1849  he  obtained  the  rank  of  post-captain,  and  in

1850  was  appointed  inspector-general  of  the  dock-
yards of  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he  superintended  the
construction  of  several  men-of-war.  He  was  pro-
moted commodore  in  1852,  contre-admiral  in  1856,
in  1858  a  member  of  the  supreme  naval  council,
and  in  1861  minister  of  the  navy.  During  the
ravages  of  the  cholera  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1854  he
personally  carried  help  from  door  to  door.  Dur-
ing the  war  with  Paraguay  he  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  Brazilian  naval  squadron,
and  left  for  the  seat  of  war  in  December,  1866,  re-
ceiving his  promotion  to  vice-admiral  in  January,
1867.  On  15  Aug.  he  bombarded  Curupaity,  broke
through  the  enemy's  obstructions  on  board  the
iron-clad  "Brazil,"  sinking  several  torpedo-boats
and  iron-clads,  and  on  17  Sept.  was  rewarded  by
the  title  of  Baron  of  Inhauma.  He  was  promoted
admiral  in  January,  1868,  and  in  February  bom-
barded Humaita,  Timbo,  and  Tebicuary,  and
forced  the  passage  of  Angustura,  which  had  been
reputed  impossible,  directing  the  operations  per-
sonally from  the  bridge  of  the  "  Belmonte."  But
he  was  attacked  by  a  malignant  fever,  and  was
taken  to  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he  died,  a  few  days
after  receiving  the  title  of  Viscount  of  Inhauma.

iSlGO,  Abad  y  Lasierra,  known  as  Friar
Inigo  (in-vee'-go),  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Spain
about  1730;  d.in  Madrid  in  1789.  In  1772  he
went  to  Porto  Rico,  W.  I.,  with  Bishop  Manuel
Jimenez  Perez,  of  the  same  order,  whose  confessor
and  adviser  he  was,  and,  besides  the  duties  peculiar
to  his  missionary  work,  gave  himself  to  the  study
of  history,  geography,  political  economy,  and  the
habits  of  the  country.  About  1778  he  was  exiled
by  the  governor  of  the  island,  Don  Jose  Dufresne,
through  personal  enmity.  King  Charles  III.  dis-
approved this  act,  and  later  the  Count  of  Florida
Blanca,  first  minister  of  the  king,  commended  to
Friar  Inigo  the  task  of  writing  the  history  of  Por-
to Rico,  which,  on  25  Aug.,  1782,  he  delivered  into
the  minister's  hands  under  the  title  "  Historia  Geo-

frafica,  Civil  y  Natural,  de  San  Juan  Bautista  de
'uerto  Rico  "  (Madrid,  1788.  edited  by  Don  Anto-
nio Valladares  de  Sotomayor:  St.  John  of  Porto
Rico,  1830 ;  corrected  and  enlarged  ed.,  by  Don
Jose  Julian  de  Acosta  y  Calvo,  1866).


INMAN,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
3  Dec,  1755;  d.  in  St.  Christopher.  W.  I.,  in  1789.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1772,  and  entered
the  British  army  as  a  volunteer  in  December,  1775.
On  the  night  before  the  battle  of  Long  Island  he
captured  a  patrol  of  five  American  officers,  an
event  which  Johnson  says  largely  influenced  the
result  of  the  battle.  For  this  service  Sir  William
Howe  presented  him  with  an  ensigncy  in  the  17th
foot.  He  was  wounded  at  Princeton,  was  present
at  Brandywine,  Germantown,  and  Monmouth,  and
was  promoted  to  a  lieutenancy  in  the  26th  foot,  29
June,  1778.  Soon  afterward  his  regiment  was  sent
to  England,  and  there  he  obtained  the  captaincy
of  a  troop  of  horse  that  had  been  raised  in  the
West  Indies,  and  went  to  St.  Christopher,  where
he  died.  His  "  Narrative  of  the  Revolutionary
War,  1776-1779,"  was  published  in  the  "Pennsyl-
vania Magazine  of  History  and  Biography."

INMAN,  John  Hamilton,  financier,  b.  in  Jef-
ferson county,  Tenn..  23  Oct.,  1844.  His  father
was  a  banker  and  farmer.  John  left  school  at  fif-
teen years  of  age,  and  became  a  clerk  in  a  Georgia
bank,  of  which  his  uncle  was  president.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  Con-
federate army.  His  relatives  were  impoverished
by  the  war,  and  in  September,  1865,  he  went  to
New  York  city  to  seek  his  fortune.  He  obtained
employment  in  a  cotton  house,  was  admitted  to
a  full  partnership  in  the  firm  in  1868,  and  in  1870
founded  the  house  of  Inman,  Swann  and  Co.,  in
which  he  associated  himself  with  his  former  part-
ners. The  business  increased  rapidly,  and  in  a
few  years  he  amassed  a  fortune  of  several  million
dollars  in  the  cotton  trade,  which  was  attracted  to
New  York  city  largely  through  his  activity.  He
turned  his  attention  to  the  development  of  south-
ern resources,  and,  in  association  with  other  capi-
talists who  relied  on  his  judgment,  invested  over
$5,000,000  in  the  enterprises  of  the  Tennessee  coal,
iron,  and  railroad  company,  including  the  bitu-
minous coal-mines  at  Birmingham,  Ala.,  the  blast-
furnaces in  that  city,  and  Bessemer  steel  works  at
Ensley  City,  near  there.  He  induced  the  invest-
ment of  over  $100,000,000  in  southern  enterprises,
and  became  a  director  in  companies  that  possessed
more  than  10,000  miles  of  railroad.

INMAN,  William,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Utica,
N.  Y,  in  1797:  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Oct.,
1874.  His  parents  were  English.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman  on  1  Jan.,  1812,  served  on
the  lakes  during  the  war  of  1812-'15,  was  promoted
lieutenant  on  1  April,  1818,  and  was  in  charge  of
one  of  the  two  boats  that  captured  a  pirate  vessel
on  the  coast  of  Cuba  in  1823.  He  became  a  com-
mander on  24  May,  1838,  and  was  assigned  to  the
steamer  "Michigan"  on  the  lakes  in  1844-'6.
After  being  promoted  captain  on  2  June,  1850,  he
commanded  the  steam  frigate  "  Susquehanna,"  of
the  East  India  squadron,  in  1851.  From  1859  till
1861  he  was  in  command  of  the  squadron  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  which  recaptured  and  landed  in
Liberia  3,600  slaves.  He  was  promoted  commo-
dore and  placed  on  the  retired  list  on  4  April,
1867,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  the  senior
officer  of  his  rank. — His  brother,  Henry,  painter,
b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  20  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  17  Jan.,  1846,  intended  to  follow  the  life  of  a
soldier,  and  had  obtained  an  appointment  to  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  but  a  visit  to  the  studio
of  John  Wesley  Jarvis  decided  his  career:  and,
with  the  permission  of  his  father,  he  became  a
pupil  of  that  artist.  Jarvis.  who  exclaimed  at  the
first  sight  of  the  youth  that  he  had  "  the  very  head
for  a  painter,"  willingly  took  him  into  his  studio,


INMAN


INNESS


353


where  he  served  a  seven  years'  apprenticeship,  de-
voting himself  at  first  to  miniature  painting,  in
which  he  became  very  proficient.  At  the  age  of
twenty-one  he  opened  a  studio  of  his  own,  and

soon  acquired  a
high  reputation
as  a  portrait-
painter.  His  fame
was  first  estab-
lished by  a  por-
trait of  Chief-
Justice  Marshall.
He  also  painted
a  full-length  cab-
inet portrait  of
Bishop  William
White.  Mr.  In-
man  was  one  of
the  founders  and
the first vice-

S resident  of  the
ational acad-
-\  . A,  emy  of  design  in

^flT/Vvv  a  a*  ^*a  New  York  city  in

T4 JV^MA^a^u  lg24_,5> Inl-832

he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  and  a  few  years  later,
for  the  sake  of  a  rural  life,  to  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.
Thence  he  returned  to  New  York,  yet  soon  after-
ward, on  account  of  failing  health,  visited  Eng-
land, having  been  commissioned  by  American
friends  to  execute  for  them  portraits  of  Macaulay,
Wordsworth,  Chalmers,  and  Lord  Cottenham.  He
remained  a  year  in  that  country,  where  his  artistic
ability,  combined  with  wit,  conversational  powers,
taste,  and  learning,  found  many  admirers.  Not-
withstanding many  inducements  to  remain  there,
he  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1845,  but  his
sickness  returned,  and  he  died  soon  afterward.
He  had  received  the  commission  to  paint  one  of
the  panels  of  the  rotunda  of  the  capitol  at  Wash-
ington, and  had  already  outlined  his  subject  on
the  canvas,  representing  Daniel  Boone  in  the  wilds
of  Kentucky.  His  reputation  mainly  rests  on
his  portraits,  which  are  characteristic,  vigorously
painted,  and  rich  in  color.  Among  the  many  per-
sons who  sat  to  him  were  William  Wirt,  Nicholas
Biddle,  De  Witt  Clinton,  Horace  Binney,  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck,  John  James  Audubon,  Martin  Van
Buren,  and  William  H.  Seward.  A  full-length
portrait  of  William  Penn  by  him  hangs  in  Inde-
pendence hall,  Philadelphia,  and  other  works  in
the  Boston  athenaeum  and  the  New  York  city
hall,  but  his  best  portraits  are  in  private  houses.
He  was  an  exceedingly  versatile  artist,  and  exe-
cuted numerous  genre  paintings  and  landscapes.
Among  the  genre  and  historical  subjects  that  were
treated  by  him  were  "  The  Boyhood  of  Washing-
ton," "  Ruins  of  Brambletye  House,"  "  Trout-
Fishing,"  "  Waking  of  Rip  Van  Winkle,"  "  News-
boy," "  Scene  from  the  '  Bride  of  Lammermoor,' "
"  Sterne's  Maria,"  and  "  Mumble-the-Peg."  Some
of  his  landscapes  are  "  Dismal  Swamp,"  "  Birnam
Wood,"  "  Rydal  Falls,  England,"  and  "  An  Octo-
ber Afternoon,"  which  was  one  of  his  last  works.
He  produced  many  portraits  in  crayon,  and  was
one  of  the  first  to  learn  the  art  of  lithography  and
introduce  that  process  into  the  United  States  about
1828.  He  was  also  an  elegant  and  entertaining
writer,  and  contributed  articles  to  the  "Knick-
erbocker Magazine."  —  Another  brother,  John,
journalist,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  New
York,  30  March,  1850,  taught  in  North  Carolina
in  1823-'5,  then  spent  a  year  in  Europe,  and  after
his  return  studied  law,  but  did  not  practise,  be-
coming editor  of  the  New  York  "  Standard,"  after-

vol.  in. — 23


ward  of  the  "  Mirror,"  and  then  of  the  "  Spirit  of
the  Times."  In  1834  he  became  assistant  editor  of
the  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"  and,  after  the  death
of  William  L.  Stone  in  1844,  was  chief  editor  of
that  journal.  He  was  also  for  some  years  the
editor  of  the  "  Columbian  Magazine,"  and  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  other  periodicals. — Henry's
son,  John  O'Brien,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
10  June,  1828,  studied  art  under  his  father,  arid
painted  portraits  in  the  western  states.  Subse-
quently he  settled  in  New  York  city,  and  devoted
himself  to  genre  pictures.  He  also  produced  grace-
ful flower  pieces.  He  went  to  Europe  in  1866,  and
spent  twelve  years  in  Paris  and  Rome,  where  his
talents  found  recognition,  and  then  returned  to
New  York.  Some  of  his  best  works  represent  Ro-
man peasants.  Among  his  paintings  are  "Sun-
ny Thoughts,"  "  View  of  Assisi,"  and  "  Ecoute,"
exhibited  at  the  Academy.  New  York,  in  1886.

INNESS,  George,  landscape-painter,  b.  in  New-
burg,  N.  Y.,  1  May,  1825.  His  parents  removed
to  Newark,  N.  J.,  where  he  early  learned  drawing
and  the  rudiments  of  oil-painting.  He  has  from
his  youth  been  subject  to  epilepsy,  which  has  in-
terfered materially  with  the  consecutive  pursuit
of  his  art.  When  sixteen  years  old  he  went  to
New  York  to  study  engraving,  but  ill  health
obliged  him  to  return  home,  where  he  continued
to  sketch  and  paint.  When  twenty  years  of  age
he  passed  a  month  in  the  studio  of  Regis  Gignoux
in  New  York  city,  which  is  all  the  regular  instruc-
tion he  ever  had.  He  then  began  landscape-paint-
ing in  New  York  city,  made  two  visits  to  Europe,
and  lived  in  Florence  and  Rome  for  some  time.
For  several  years  after  his  return  he  made  his
home  near  Boston,  where  some  of  his  best  pictures
were  painted.  In  1862  he  went  to  reside  at  Eagles-
wood,  near  Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.,  and  a  few  years
later  removed  to  New  York  city.  He  was  chosen  a
National  academician  in  1868.  From  1871  to  1875
he  again  resided  in  Italy.  The  art  life  of  Inness
is  marked  by  two  distinct  styles,  the  first  indicat-
ing careful  finish  and  conscientious  regard  for  de-
tails. The  second  style,  formed  with  the  expand-
ing grasp  of  the  principles  of  art,  shows  a  richer
appreciation  of  the  truths  of  nature,  is  broad  and
vigorous,  paying  higher  regard  to  masses  than  to
details.  The  quality  of  his  paintings  is  very  un-
even, as  he  is  sometimes  careless,  and  often  mars
a  good  work  by  eccentric  and  experimental  de-
vices. Yet  no  painter  has  represented  the  aspects
of  nature  in  the  American  climate  with  deeper
feeling,  a  finer  sentiment  of  light  and  color,  or  a
better  command  of  technical  resources.  He  has
been  more  influenced  by  the  French  school  of
landscape-painting  than  any  other  American  art-
ist, yet  his  style  is  distinct  and  original.  He  is  a
follower  of  Swedenborg,  and  many  of  his  paint-
ings have  a  spiritual  or  allegorical  significance.
Among  his  best  pictures  are  "  The  Sign  of  Prom-
ise," "  Peace  and  Plentv,"  "  Going  out  of  the
Woods,"  "  A  Vision  of  Fa'ith,"  "  The  Valley  of  the
Shadow  of  Death,"  "  The  Apocalyptic  Vision  of
the  New  Jerusalem  and  River  of  Life,"  "  A  Pass-
ing Storm,"  "Summer  Sunshine  and  Shadow,"
"Summer  Afternoon,"  "Twilight,"  "Light  Tri-
umphant," "  Pine  Grove,"  "  Barbarini  Villa,"
"  Jov  after  the  Storm,"  "  View  near  Rome,"  "  Wash-
ing Day  near  Perugia,"  "  The  Mountain  Stream,"
"Autumn,"  "Italian  Landscape,"  "Passing
Clouds,"  "  The  Afterglow,"  "  The  Morning  Sun,
and  "Delaware  Water-Gap."  His  "American
Sunset  "  was  selected  as  a  representative  work  of
American  art  for  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867.
In  1878  he  exhibited  at  the  Paris  exposition  "  St.


354


INNPJS


IREDELL


Peter's,  Rome,  from  the  Tiber "  and  "  View  near
Medfield,  Mass.."  and  in  the  National  academy"  An
Old  Roadway,  Long  Island."  In  1882  he  exhibit-
ed at  the  academy  exhibition  in  New  York  city
"  Under  the  Green  Wood  " ;  in  1883,  "  A  Summer
Morning  " :  hi  1885,  "  A  Sunset "  and  "  A  Day  in
June  "  ;  in  1886,  "  In  the  Woods,"  "  Sunset  on  the
Sea-Shore,"  and  "  Durham  Meadows." — His  son,
George,  artist,  b.  in  Paris,  Prance,  5  Jan.,  1854,
was  in  1870-'4  a  pupil  of  his  father  in  Rome,  and
of  Bonnat  in  Paris  in  1875.  He  resided  in  Boston,
Mass.,  till  1878,  then  occupied  a  studio  with  his
father  in  New  York  city,  devoted  himself  to  ani-
mal painting,  beginning" to  exhibit  at  the  National
academy  in  1877.  For  many  years  his  residence
and  studio  have  been  in  Montclair,  N.  J.  His  style
is  dashing  and  forcible.  Among  his  works  are
"The  Ford"  and  "Patience,"  exhibited  in  1877;
"  At  the  Brook,"  and  "  The  Pride  of  the  Dairy,"
sent  to  the  academy  in  1878;  "Pasture  at  Che-
mung " ;  "  Monarch  of  the  Herd  "  ;  "  Returning  to
Work  "  (1886) ;  and  "  After  the  Combat,"  and  "  A
Mild  Day  "  (1887).

INNES,  George  Mignon,  Canadian  clergyman,
b.  in  Weymouth,  England,  21  Jan.,  1826.  He
passed  the'  examination  for  the  army  at  the  Sand-
hurst military  college  in  1849,  and  served  until
1861  in  the  royal  Canadian  rifles,  rising  to  the
grade  of  captain.  He  then  studied  theology,  and
was  ordained  deacon  in  London,  Ontario,  in  1862,
and  priest  in  1863.  He  was  assistant  minister  of
the  cathedral  of  Quebec  in  1863-8,  and  then  of  St.
Paul's  cathedral  in  London  till  1871,  when  he  be-
came canon  and  rector  of  the  cathedral.

INNES,  Harry,  jurist,  b.  in  Caroline  county,
Va.,  in  1752 ;  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  20  Sept..  1816.
He  was  the  son  of  a  Scottish  Episcopal  minister
and  was  educated  as  a  lawyer.  In  1776-'7  he  was
employed  by  the  committee  of  public  safety  in
Virginia  to  superintend  the  working  of  Chipil's
mines,  which  were  an  object  of  solicitude  as  a
source  of  lead  for  the  Revolutionary  army.  In
1779  he  was  appointed  by  the  legislature  of  Vir-
ginia a  commissioner  to  hear  and  determine  claims
to  unpatented  lands  in  the  Abingdon  district.  He
was  chosen  in  1783  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court
of  Virginia  for  the  district  of  Kentucky,  and  in
1785  attorney  -  general  for  the  same  district,  in
which  post  he  continued  until  1787,  when  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  district  judge  for  Kentucky.
When  Kentucky  was  erected  into  a  state  in  1792
he  declined  the  office  of  chief  justice.  With  George
Nicholas  and  John  Brown  he  favored  independent
action  and  a  separate  arrangement  with  Spain  re-
specting the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  river.
The  intrigues  of  Spanish  agents  to  induce  the
Kentuckians  to  accept  the  protection  of  Spain
were  repelled  by  those  patriots,  who  refused  tempt-
ing bribes.  Throughout  the  crisis  Judge  Innes
retained  the  confidence  of  President  Washington,
and,  when  his  enemies  brought  accusations  against
him  in  1808,  congress  refused  to  institute  meas-
ures for  his  impeachment.  His  daughter  became
the  wife  of  John  J.  Crittenden.

INSKIP,  John  Swanell,  clergyman,  b.  in
Huntingdon,  England,  10  Aug.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Ocean
Grove,  N.  J.,  7  March,  1884.  He  was  brought
by  his  parents  to  the  United  States  when  five
years  old.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  united  with
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  three  years
later  began  to  preach.  He  attained  distinction
as  an  orator  and  conductor  of  camp-meetings,
and  was  for  some  time  the  editor  of  the  "  Chris-
tian Standard."  He  published  "  Remarkable  Dis-
play of  the  Mercy  of  God  in  the  Conversion  of


a  Family  from  Infidelity";  "Life  of  Rev.  Will-
iam Summers,  a  Blind"  Man"  (Baltimore);  and
"  Methodism  Explained  and  Defended  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1856).

IRALA,  or  IRAOLA,  Domingo  Martinez  de
(e-rah'-lah,  or  e-rah-o'-lah),  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in
Vergara,  Guipuzcoa,  in  1486 ;  d.  in  Asuncion,
Paraguay,  in  1557.  He  sailed  in  1534  in  the  expe-
dition of  Pedro  de  Mendoza  to  South  America,  and
assisted  in  the  foundation  of  Buenos  Ayres  on  2
Feb.,  1535.  He  was  soon  appointed  second  in  com-
mand of  the  expedition  of  Ayolas  to  explore  the
Parana  and  Paraguay,  which  started  in  1536,  and
after  founding  Asuncion  on  15  Aug.,  ascended  the
river  to  20°  south  latitude,  where  Irak  was  left  in
charge  of  the  ships  while  Ayolas  started  on  his  un-
fortunate expedition  to  the  interior.  After  the
news  of  Ayolas's  death  was  received,  the  officers  and
colonists  elected  Irala  governor,  about  the  middle
of  1538.  Irala  took  some  wise  measures  to  protect
Asuncion,  and  quelled  a  general  rising  of  the  In-
dians. On  15  March,  1542,  the  newly  appointed
adelantado,  Cabeza  de  Vaca  (q.  v.),  appeared,  and
appointed  Irala  his  deputy,  but,  desiring  to  keep
him  absent,  sent  him  on  a  voyage  of  exploration  to
the  upper  Paraguay,  in  which  he  reached  17°  north
latitude,  at  the  port*  of  Los  Reyes,  returning  to
Asuncion  in  February,  1543.  Cabeza  de  Vaca  had
excited  the  hate  of  the  officers  and  clergy,  and  by  a
revolution  on  25  April,  1544,  was  deposed,  impris-
oned, and  sent  to  Spain,  and  Irala  for  the  second
time  was  chosen  governor.  In  1546  he  undertook
his  third  expedition,  to  discover  an  overland  foute
to  Peru,  and,  leaving  his  vessels  again  at  Los  Reyes,
set  out  with  about  300  Spaniards  and  3,500  Indian
allies  to  the  northwest,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  An-
des he  met  Spanish-speaking  Indians,  who  belonged
to  the  army  of  Pedro  Anzures.  From  them  he
heard  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  revolution  and  the  tri-
umph of  President  La  Gasca,  to  whom  he  sent  an
expedition  under  Nuflo  de  Chaves  to  ask  for  a  con-
firmation of  his  commission.  Forced  by  his  sol-
diers, he  at  last  retraced  his  steps,  and  after  extreme
hardships,  not  having  found  the  vessels  which  he
had  left  at  Los  Reyes,  arrived  at  Asuncion,  having
been  absent  two  years,  and  found  the  colony  in
revolution.  Diego  de  Abreu  was  in  command,  and
refused  to  surrender  the  government,  but  Irala  de-
feated him,  conducting  the  colony  with  vigor  and
wisdom,  and  obtaining  at  last  from  Spain  recog-
nition of  his  government.  In  1550  he  undertook
his  last  personal  expedition,  which,  on  account  of
the  privations  that  were  suffered  by  the  army,  is
known  as  the  "  Mala  Entrada,"  or  unfortunate  in-
vasion. He  continued  to  send  out  expeditions  for
the  consolidation  of  the  Spanish  rule,  including
one  in  1554  under  Nuflo  de  Chaves  for  the  conquest
of  the  province  of  Guayra,  and  one  in  1557  under
Melgarejo  to  consolidate  this  conquest  and  found
the  town  of  Ontiveros.

IREDELL,  James,  justice  of  the  supreme  court,
b.  in  Lewes,  England,  5  Oct.,  1750;  d.  in  Edenton,
N.  C,  20  Oct.,  1799.  He  was  the  son  of  a  merchant
of  Bristol,  and  went  to  North  Carolina  when  he  was
seventeen  years  old.  He  was  appointed  deputy
collector  of  the  port  of  Edenton,  married  the  sister
of  Samuel  Johnston  in  1773,  studied  law  with  his
brother-in-law,  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1775,  and
soon  attained  a  high  reputation  as  a  lawyer.  From
17  Feb.,  1774,  till  the  Revolution  he  held  the  office
of  collector  of  customs  at  Edenton.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  war  of  independence  he  resigned  this
post,  and  relinquished  the  prospect  of  a  large  inherit-
ance from  an  uncle  in  the  West  Indies  in  order  to  em-
brace the  popular  cause. He  was  elected  a  judge  of


IRELAND


IRELAND


355


the  superior  court  in  December,  1777,  which  office  he
resigned  in  August,  1778.  In  1779  Gov.  Richard
Caswell  appointed  him  attorney-general,  but  he  re-
signed soon  afterward.  During  the  Revolution  he
was  the  trusted  adviser  of  William  Hooper,  Samuel
Johnston,  and  other  Whig  leaders.  In  1787  the
assembly  appointed  him  a  commissioner  to  compile
and  revise  the  laws  of  the  state.  A  part  of  his  col-
lection was  printed  in  1789,  and  the  whole  work,
known  as  "  Iredell's  Revisal,"  was  published  in
1791  (Edenton).  He  was  the  leader  of  the  Fed-
eralists of  North  Carolina,  and  in  the  convention
held  at  Hillsborough  in  1788  he  argued  without
success  in  favor  of  the  adoption  of  the  Federal  con-
stitution. On  10  Feb.,  1790,  President  Washing-
ton appointed  him  an  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.
supreme  court.  In  the  case  of  Chisholm's  executor
against  Georgia  he  delivered  a  dissenting  opinion
to  the  effect  that  the  Federal  court  could  not  exer-
cise jurisdiction  over  a  state  at  the  suit  of  a  private
citizen.  In  that  of  Wilson  against  Daniels  he  also
dissented,  and  his  view  relative  to  jurisdiction  on
a  writ  of  error  was  adopted  in  subsequent  rulings
of  the  court.  His  addresses  to  grand  juries,  explain-
ing and  extolling  the  constitution,  were  often  pub-
lished at  the  request  of  the  jurors  in  Boston,  New
York,  Philadelphia,  and  Richmond.  Iredell  county
was  named  after  him  in  1788.  He  left  nearly  ready
for  the  press  at  his  death  a  treatise  on  pleading,
which  has  never  been  published.  See  his  "  Life
and  Correspondence,"  by  Griffith  J.  McRee  (New
York,  1857). — His  son,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Eden-
ton, N.  C,  2  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  there,  13  April,  1853,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1806,  and  studied
law.  In  the  war  of  1812-'15  he  raised  a  company
of  volunteers,  and,  marching  with  them  to  Norfolk,
took  part  in  the  defence  of  Craney  island.  After
the  peace  he  returned  to  his  profession,  and  was
sent  to  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1816.
He  was  speaker  in  1817  and  1818,  and  was  returned
to  the  legislature  for  many  years.  In  March,  1819,
he  was  nominated  a  judge  of  the  superior  court,  but
resigned  two  months  later.  He  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  North  Carolina  in  1827,  and  on  the  resig-
nation of  Nathaniel  Macon  was  sent  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  serving  from  23  Dec,  1828,  till  3  March,
1831.  He  subsequently  practised  law  in  Raleigh,
and  for  many  years  was  reporter  of  the  decisions
of  the  supreme  court.  He  was  one  of  three  com-
missioners who  were  appointed  to  collect  and  revise
the  laws  in  force  in  the  state.  The  result  of  their
labors  was  the  revised  statutes  passed  at  the  session
of  1836-'7,  and  afterward  published  (Raleigh,  1837).
His  reports  of  law-cases  in  the  supreme  court  fill
thirteen  volumes,  and  the  reports  of  cases  in  equity
eight  volumes  (Raleigh,  1841-'52).  He  published
also  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Executors  and  Ad-
ministrators," and  a  "  Digest  of  all  the  Reported
Cases  in  the  Courts  of  North  Carolina,  1778  to
1845  "  (Raleigh,  1839-'46).

IRELAND,  John,  governor  of  Texas,  b.  in  Hart
county,  Ky.,  1  Jan.,  1827.  He  studied  law,  re-
moved to  Texas  in  1852,  and  practised  at  Seguin,
of  which  town  he  was  elected  mayor  in  1856.  He
was  a  member  of  the  convention"  that  passed  the
ordinance  of  secession  in  1861,  and  served  through
the  war  in  the  Confederate  army,  becoming  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  a  Texas  infantry  regiment  in
1862.  In  1866  he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the
State  constitutional  convention,  and  the  same  year
a  district  judge.  He  was  sent  to  the  legislature  in
1872,  chosen  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1873,
and  in  1875  appointed  an  associate  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Texas.  In  1882  he  was  elected
governor,  and  in  1884  was  re-elected.


IRELAND,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Burn-
church.  County  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  11  Sept.,  1838.
His  parents  emigrated  to  the  United  States  when
he  was  a  boy,  and  settled  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  where
he  received  his  ear-
ly education  at  the
cathedral  schools.
He  went  to  France
in  September,  1853,
entered  the  Petit
seminaire  of  Mexi-
meux,  and  finished
the  course  in  four
years,  half  the  usual
time.  After  study-
ing theology  in  the
Grand  seminaire  at
Hyeres,  he  returned
to  St.  Paul  in  1861,
and  on  21  Dec.  was
ordained  by  Bishop
Grace.  He  served
as  chaplain  of  the
5th  Minnesota  regi-
ment during  part
of  the  civil  war,  and
was  afterward  ap-
pointed rector  of  the  cathedral  at  St.  Paul,  which
post,  with  that  of  secretary  of  the  diocese,  he  held
until  his  consecration  as  coadjutor  bishop.  During
this  period  Father  Ireland  labored  earnestly  in  be-
half of  every  charity  and  every  religious  and  edu-
cational institution  of  the  diocese.  In  1869  he  or-
ganized the  first  total  abstinence  society  in  the
state,  and  he  has  been  successful  in  organizing
other  temperance  societies.  In  1870  he  went  to
Rome  as  the  accredited  representative  of  Bishop
Grace  at  the  Vatican  council.  In  February,  1875,
he  was  chosen  to  succeed  Bishop  O'Gorman  in  the
vicariate  of  Nebraska,  but  through  the  efforts  of
Bishop  Grace  the  appointment  was  cancelled,  and
he  was  then  nominated  coadjutor  bishop  of  St.
Paul,  and  consecrated.  21  Dec,  1875.  After  this
Bishop  Ireland  undertook  the  work  of  coloniza-
tion in  the  northwest,  and  as  the  founder  of  suc-
cessful colonies,  and  one  of  the  directors  and
workers  in  the  National  colonization  association,
his  influence  has  been  widely  felt.  In  1876  he
made  large  purchases  of  land  in  Minnesota,  which
were  taken  up  by  900  Roman  Catholic  colonists.
The  prosperity  of  this  colony  led  him  to  buy  12,000
acres  from  the  St.  Paul  and  Pacific  railroad  in  the
following  year  with  equally  satisfactory  results.
He  has  been  an  active  worker  in  the  establishment
of  a  Roman  Catholic  university,  and  on  his  visit  to
Rome  in  1887  was  engaged,  in  conjunction  with
Bishop  Kean,  of  Richmond,  in  drawing  up  a  re-
port on  this  subject  for  the  pope.  He  then  went
to  England  and  Ireland,  where  his  lectures  con-
tributed to  a  revival  of  temperance  agitation.
Bishop  Ireland  is  an  able  orator  and  controver-
sialist. He  has  been  for  several  years  president  of
the  State  historical  society  of  Minnesota.

IRELAND,  Josias  Alexander,  physician,  b.  in
Jefferson  county,  Ky.,  15  Sept.,  1824.  He  studied
medicine  in  the  University  of  Louisville  and  in  the
Kentucky  school  of  medicine,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1851.  He  practised  in  Louisville,  and  since
1864  has  confined  himself  to  the  specialties  of
obstetrics  and  gynecology.  He  became  professor
of  obstetrics  in  the  Kentucky  school  of  medicine
in  1864.  professor  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Louisville  in  1866,  and  in  1867  returned
to  his  former  chair  in  the  Kentucky  school  of
medicine. In  1872  he  was  elected  professor  of  the


356


IRELAND


IRISARRI


diseases  of  women  and  children  in  the  Louisville
medical  college,  and  was  afterward  chosen  dean
of  that  institution.

IRELAND,  Joseph  Norton,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  24  April,  1817.  He  was  educated  in
private  schools  in  his  native  city  and  at  the  public
academy  in  Bedford,  N.  Y.  His  career  has  been
that  of  a  merchant  in  New  York.  Since  1853  Mr.
Ireland  has  resided  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.  His
publications  include  "  Records  of  the  New  York
Stage  from  1750  to  1860"  (New  York,  1866),  and
"  Memorials  of  Mrs.  Duff  "  (Boston,  1882).  Besides
these  volumes,  Mr.  Ireland  has  contributed  various
monographs  on  "  Actors  and  Actresses  of  Great
Britain  and  the  United  States"  (New  York,  1886).

IRIBARREN,  Juan  Cruillermo  (e-re-bar'-ren),
Venezuelan  soldier,  b.  in  Barquisimeto,  25  March,
1797;  d.  in  Caracas,  28  April,  1827.  In  1810  he
was  sent  to  the  Seminary  of  the  Trinity  in  Caracas,
but  in  1814,  desiring  to  take  part  in  the  struggle
for  independence,  ran  away  from  school,  and  after
many  privations  presented  himself  to  Gen.  Paez,
who  enrolled  him  in  his  force.  He  made  his  first
campaign  under  Gen.  LTrdaneta,  and  formed  part
of  the  troop  that,  under  Jose  Maria  Rodriguez,
executed  the  march  from  San  Carlos  in  relief  of
Valencia.  After  the  victory  of  Arichuana,  Paez
promoted  him  lieutenant,  and  after  that  of  Yagual,
in  1816,  captain.  After  the  battle  of  Mucuritas  in
January,  1817,  he  was  promoted  major.  In  1817,
at  the  head  of  500  lancers,  he  surprised  and  totally
routed  1,500  Spaniards  who  were  intrenched  in  a
strong  position  at  Banco  Largo,  and  Paez  ordered
a  special  gold  medal  to  be  struck  for  Iribarren,
with  the  inscription  "  For  marvellous  intrepidity."
This  was  the  only  medal  of  that  class  that  was
granted  during  the  war  of  independence.  With
the  Venezuelan  prisoners  that  he  had  taken  from
the  Spaniards,  Iribarren  formed  a  regiment  of
hussars,  which  he  called  Bravos  de  Paez,  and,  after
promotion  to  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel,  com-
pelled Morillo  to  evacuate  Calabozo  in  February,
1818.  He  took  part  in  the  campaign  of  that  year,
and  after  the  battle  of  Cojedes,  in  October,  was  ap-
pointed by  Bolivar  a  member  of  the  order  of  Liber-
tadores,  receiving  the  grand  cross  of  that  order
in  1819  after  the  battle  of  Queseras  del  Medio.
After  the  battle  of  Carabobo  he  was  detached  for
the  pursuit  of  small  bodies  of  the  enemy,  and  soon
pacified  the  country.  In  1824,  as  military  com-
mander of  Calabozo,  he  pursued  with  only  two  men
a  body  of  eighty-two  mutinous  soldiers,  killing  the
captain  and  a  private,  when  the  rest  of  the  rebels
surrendered  to  him.  In  March,  1827,  he  was  pro-
moted brigadier-general.

IRIGOYEN,  Bernardo  de  (e-re-goy'-en),  Ar-
gentine statesman,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  28  June,
1823.  He  studied  law  in  the  university  of  his  na-
tive city,  was  graduated  in  1843,  and  began  to
practise  at  the  bar.  In  1845  the  dictator  sent
him  to  the  city  of  Mendoza  to  assist  the  authori-
ties in  quelling  a  revolution,  and  afterward  em-
ployed him  in  various  public  offices.  On  the  down-
fall of  the  dictator  in  1852,  Irigoyen  gave  himself
to  his  law  practice,  and  attained  eminence  at  the
bar.  When  Avellaneda  was  elected  president  in
1874,  he  called  Irigoyen  to  form  part  of  his  min-
istry, and  appointed  him  secretary  of  foreign  rela-
tions, in  which  capacity  he  contributed  greatly  to
maintain  friendly  relations  with  foreign  nations,
especially  with  Chili.  He  also  concluded  several
treaties  of  commerce  with  European  nations,  which
greatly  benefited  his  country,  and  fostered  emi-
gration, which  has  given  a  powerful  impulse  to  the
prosperity  of  the  Argentine  Republic. He  held  the


same  office  during  the  administration  of  Gen.
Roca,  and  settled  the  Patagonia  boundary  ques-
tion with  Chili,  which  at  one  time  had  threatened
to  result  in  war,  by  the  treaty  of  1881.  He  also
prepared  the  basis  of  an  arrangement  of  the  dis-
puted boundary  with  Brazil.  At  the  end  of  1884
Irigoyen  resigned  his  portfolio,  as  he  had  been
proclaimed  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  by  the
Federal  party  and  by  part  of  the  National  autono-
mist party.  He  was  defeated  by  the  opposition
candidate,  Juarez  Celman,  and  returned  to  his
practice  as  a  lawyer,  but  was  soon  elected  senator
to  the  Federal  congress.

IRISARRI,  Antonio  Jose  de  (e-re-sar'-re),
South  American  statesman,  b.  in  the  city  of  Guate-
mala, 7  Feb.,  1786 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  June,
1868.  He  studied  in  his  native  city  and  in  Europe,
whence  he  was  recalled  at  the  death  of  his  father
in  1805.  In  1809  he  visited  Chili,  and,  having  mar-
ried an  heiress,  took  up  his  residence  in  that  coun-
try, and  joined  with  enthusiasm  the  movement  for
independence  in  1810.  He  had  charge  of  impor-
tant public.offices  during  the  struggle  for  liberty,
including  the  command  of  the  National  guard  and
the  civil  and  military  government  of  the  province
of  Santiago,  and  from  7  to  14  March,  1814,  he  was
temporarily  in  charge  of  the  supreme  direction  of
the  nation.  In  1818  he  was  appointed  minister  of
the  interior  and  foreign  relations,  and  in  October
of  the  same  year  he  went  to  Buenos  Ayres  as  min-
ister. At  the  end  of  1819  he  was  sent  to  London,
where  he  negotiated  a  loan  of  $5,000,000.  He
was  sent  to  Central  America  in  1827  as  minister  for
Chili,  and  in  1837  to  Peru.  He  was  minister  to
Ecuador  from  1839  till  1845,  and  in  1846-'8  to  Co-
lombia, but  resigned,  and  went  to  Curacoa  in  1849,
and  in  1850  to  the  United  States,  where  he  resided
till  his  death.  The  governments  of  Guatemala
and  Salvador  appointed  him,  in  1855,  their  minister
to  Washington,  and  for  a  long  time  he  was  dean  of
the  diplomatic  corps.  Irisarri  continued  his  liter-
ary work  in  the  United  States,  and  was  generally
esteemed  for  his  knowledge,  genial  character,  and
polished  manners.  Irisarri  was  chief  editor  of  the
"  Seminario  Republicano  de  Chili "  in  Santiago  in
1813  ;  of  "  El  Duende  "  in  the  same  city  in  1818 ;
of  "  El  Censor  Americano  "  in  London  in  1820 ;  of
"  El  Guatemalteco "  in  Guatemala  in  1828 ;  of
"  La  Verdad  des  nuda,"  "  La  Balanza,"  and  "  El
Correo  "  in  Guayaquil  in  1839-'43 ;  of  "  La  Concor-
dia "  in  Quito  in  1844-'5  ;  of  "  Nosotros,"  "  Orden  y
Libertad,"  and  "  El  Cristiano  Errante  "  in  Bogota
in  1846-'7 ;  and  of  "  El  Revisor  "  in  Curacoa  in  1849,
the  publication  of  which  he  continued  in  New  York.
He  also  published  "  La  defensa  de  la  historia  critica
del  asesinato  cometido  en  la  persona  del  Gran  Mari-
seal  de  Ayacucho  "  (Quito,  1845) ;  "  Memoria  bio-
grafica  del  Arzobispo  Mosquera"  (Bogota,  1848);
a  collection  of  his  satirical  poems,  a  novel, "  Cuestio-
nes  Filologicas,"  and  several  pamphlets. — His  son,
Hermojenes,  Chilian  poet,  b.  in  Santiago,  19  April,
1819,  began  his  career  as  a  public  writer  in  "  El
Seminario,"  of  Santiago,  in  1840,  and  has  since
been  a  contributor  in  prose  and  verse  to  a  number  of
the  literary  papers  and  magazines  of  Chili.  He  was
the  director  of  the  biographical  work  "  Galeria  de
hombres  celebres  de  Chili."  In  1857  he  was  elected
deputy  to  the  National  congress.  In  1860  he  was
honored  by  the  five  Central  American  republics
with  the  appointment  as  their  representative  in
Chili,  and  in  1863  went  in  that  capacity  to  Peru,
where  for  some  time  he  was  editor  of  the  political
paper  "  El  Heraldo  de  Lima."  In  1866  he  returned
to  Chili,  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  deputy
and  vice-president  of  congress. President  Perez


IRONS


IRVINE


357


invited  him  several  times  to  take  a  seat  in  his  cabi-
net, but  he  declined.  He  was  elected  to  the  senate
in  1873,  but  took  no  active  part  in  politics.  Under
President  Errazuriz  he  was  councillor  of  state,  but
at  present  (1887)  lives  in  retirement  on  his  estate  at
Quilpue.  His  poems  include  "  Al  Sol  de  Setiem-
bre,"  "  A  San  Martin,"  and  "  La  Mujer  Adiiltera."

IRONS,  Martin,  labor-agitator,  fj.  in  Dundee,
Scotland,  7  Oct.,  1832.  He  emigrated  to  the  United
States  with  his  parents  when  he  was  fourteen
years  of  age,  and  was  placed  as  an  apprentice  in  a
machine-shop  in  New  York  city.  Here  he  volun-
teered his  small  means  to  enable  sewing-girls  to
recover  wages  that  were  illegally  withheld.  He
subsequently  worked  at  his  trade  in  Carrollton,  La.,
then  opened  a  grocery-store,  but,  failing  in  this
business,  again  became  a  mechanic,  and  headed  a
strike  for  ten  hours'  labor  a  day  in  a  machine-shop
in  Lexington,  Ky.  He  joined  the  grangers,  be-
came master  of  the  largest  grange  in  the  state,
and  established  a  wagon-factory.  He  embarked
again  in  business,  without  success,  returned  to
Kansas  City  and  found  work  again  as  a  machinist.
Removing  to  Sedalia,  Mo.,  he  became  a  member  of
the  Knights  of  labor.  As  chairman  of  the  execu-
tive board  of  District  assembly  101  he  sought  to
adjust  grievances  against  a  railroad  company,  and,
failing  in  that,  ordered  a  strike,  which  spread  to
all  the  railroad  employes  of  the  southwest,  causing
misery  in  thousands  of  families  and  disturbance
of  business  throughout  the  country.

IRVIN,  James,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Centre
county,  Pa.,  18  Feb.,  1800;  d.  there,  28  Nov.,  1862.
He  was  trained  from  the  age  of  fourteen  in  his
father's  mercantile  business.  He  became  the  chief
manufacturer  of  Centre  county,  supervising  the
operation  of  twelve  charcoal  blast-furnaces,  be-
sides rolling-mills,  forges,  and  grist-mills.  He  rep-
resented his  district  in  congress  from  31  May,  1841,
to  3  March,  1845,  and  in  1847  was  the  Whig  can-
didate for  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  but  was  de-
feated by  the  temperance  vote,  though  he  was  an
advocate  of  temperance  principles.  He  joined  the
Republican  party  when  it  was  first  organized,  and,
having  lost  his  fortune  in  the  crisis  of  1857,  ac-
cepted about  1861  the  appointment  of  naval  store-
keeper in  Philadelphia,  which  he  held  at  the  time
of  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Pennsylvania  agricultural  college,  for  which  he
gave  200  acres  of  land. — His  brother,  William,

Shysician,  b.  in  Centre  county,  Pa.,  15  Nov.,  1805  :
.  in  Amoy,  China,  9  Sept.,  1865,  studied  at  Dickin-
son college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  and  was  graduated  M.  D.
at  Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadelphia,  in  1828.
He  did  not  practise  his  profession  long,  but  became
a  partner  of  his  brother  in  the  iron  business  at
Milesburg,  Pa.,  about  1833.  In  later  life  he  studied
homoeopathy,  and  in  1851  was  graduated  at  the
Homoeopathic  medical  college  of  Philadelphia.
After  practising  two  or  three  years  in  Bellefonte,
Pa.,  he  resumed  iron  manufacturing  in  Clinton
county. He  held  a  clerkship  in  the  treasury  de-

Eartment  at  Washington  from  1862  till  1864,  when
e  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Amoy.  He  em-
ployed his  professional  skill  for  the  benefit  of  the
natives  and  treated  many  cases  of  Asiatic  cholera,
but  finally  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease.

IRVIN,  William  W.,  jurist,  b.  in  Albemarle
county,  Va.,  in  1778;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Ohio,  19
April,  1842.  He  studied  law,  practised  in  Lancas-
ter, Ohio,  held  various  local  offices,  was  sent  sev-
eral times  to  the  legislature,  and  was  judge  of  the
Ohio  supreme  court  in  1809  -'15.  He  was  elected
as  a  Jackson  Democrat  to  congress  in  1828,  and  re-
elected in  1830,  but  defeated  in  1832.


IRVINE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  4
Aug.,  1735 ;  d.  there,  28  April,  1819.  His  father,
George  Irvine,  was  an  emigrant  from  the  north  of
Ireland.  In  1760  he  was  ensign  in  Capt.  Atlee's
company  of  the  provincial  regiment.  He  was  pro-
moted to  captain,  30  Dec,  1763,  and  the  year  fol-
lowing served  under  Col.  Henry  Bouquet  on  his
expedition  against  the  Indians  northwest  of  the
Ohio.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  con-
ference at  Philadelphia,  23  Jan.,  1775,  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolution  was  chosen  a  captain
in  the  1st  Pennsylvania  battalion,  and  on  25  Nov.,
1775,  was  commissioned  its  lieutenant-colonel.  He
served  in  the  Canada  campaign  of  1776,  was  com-
missioned colonel  of  the  9th  regiment  of  the  Penn-
sylvania line  on  25  Oct.,  1776,  and  was  subse-
quently transferred  to  the  command  of  the  2d
regiment.  He  resigned,  1  June,  1777,  owing  to  a
question  of  rank,  but  on  26  Aug.,  1777,  was  made
a  brigadier-general  of  the  militia.  On  5  Sept.
his  command,  the  2d  brigade  of  Pennsylvania
troops,  was  at  Wilmington,  Del.,  where  it  remained
until  after  the  action  of  Brandy  wine  on  the  11th.
At  the  battle  of  Germantown  he  was  with  Gen.
Armstrong  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  American
army.  On  5  Dec,  in  the  skirmish  at  Chestnut  Hill,
he  was  wounded  and  made  prisoner.  He  was  taken
to  Philadelphia,  thence  to  New  York,  and  after-
ward to  Flushing,  L.  I.,  where  he  remained  until
his  exchange,  1  June,  1781.  In  the  following  Sep-
tember, when  it  was  thought  that  the  British  in-
tended to  move  against  Philadelphia,  he  was  active
in  organizing  the  troops  to  oppose  them.  Congress
appointed  him  commander  at  Fort  Pitt,  11  Oct.,
1781,  and  on  27  May,  1782,  he  was  commissioned
major-general  of  the  Pennsylvania  militia,  which
office  he  held  until  1793.  He  was  a  member  of  the
supreme  executive  council  from  1782,  and  held  the
office  of  vice-president  of  the  state  from  6  Nov.,
1784,  till  10  Oct.,  1785.  During  the  session  of
1785-?6  he  served  in  the  general  assembly,  and  was
state  senator  from  1795  till  1799.  He  was  one  of
the  original  trustees  of  Dickinson  college,  and  a
firm  friend  of  popular  education.

IRVINE.  James,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
England,  3  Jan.,  1766 ;  d.  in  Quebec,  27  Sept.,  1829.
He  was  the  son  of  Adam  Irvine,  who  emigrated
from  Scotland  to  Canada  soon  after  the  conquest.
James  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Irvine,  Mc-
Naught  and  Co.,  merchants  of  Quebec  While  on
his  way  to  England  in  1797  he  was  captured  by
the  French,  and  was  held  as  a  prisoner  of  war  until
13  Sept.,  1798.  He  was  appointed  in  1805,  by  let-
ters patent,  a  warden  of  the  Trinity  house,  and  was
a  member  of  the  legislative  council,  and  of  the
executive  council  of  Lower  Canada.  In  1822  he
was  commissioned  president  of  the  court  of  appeal
of  the  executive  council,  during  the  absence  of  the
chief  justices  of  Montreal  and  Quebec,  and  in  1824
he  was  appointed  arbitrator  for  Lower  Canada,  to
adjust  the  duties  between  that  province  and  Up-
per Canada.  He  served  in  the  militia  ol  the  prov-
ince, was  on  duty  with  his  regiment  in  the  war  of
1812,  and  retired  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  1822.-James's  son,  John  George,  Canadian
soldier,  b.  in  Quebec,  31  Dec,  1802  ;  d.  there,  1
Nov.,  1871,  passed  his  early  life  in  business  in
Quebec  In  1837  at  the  beginning  of  the  rebellion
in  Canada  he  was  appointed  a  captain  in  the  Royal
Quebec  volunteers;  in  1838  was  gazetted  a  lieu-
tenant-colonel and  deputy  quartermaster-general ;
in  November,  1851,  provincial  aide-de-camp  to  the
governor-general,  and  principal  aide-de-camp  2
Oct.,  1868.  He  was  acting  adjutant-general  to  at-
tend on  the  Prince  of  Wales  during  his  visit  to


358


IRVINE


IRVINE


Canada  in  1860.  —  John  George's  son,  George,
statesman,  b.  in  Quebec,  16  Nov.,  1826,  was  edu-
cated in  a  private  school  in  Quebec,  and  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1848.  He  became  a
queen's  counsel  in  1867,  and  represented  Megantic
in  the  Canada  assembly  from  1863  till  the  union,
when  he  was  returned  to  the  Dominion  parliament,
and  continued  to  represent  that  county  till  the  gen-
eral election  of  1872,  when  he  declined  re-election.
He  represented  the  same  constituency  in  the  legis-
lative assembly  of  Quebec  from  the  union  till  1875,
when  he  was  defeated,  but  was  re-elected  in  1878.
He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  Quebec
in  1867,  was  solicitor-general  from  that  date  until
1873,  and  attorney-general  in  1873-'5.  He  has  been
professor  of  common  law  in  Morrin  college,  Quebec,
director  of  the  Union  bank  of  Lower  Canada,  gov-
ernment director  of  the  North  Shore  railway,  chan-
cellor of  Lennoxville  university  in  1875-'8,  and
was  appointed  judge  of  the  vice-admiralty  court  of
Quebec  in  1884. — Another  son,  Matthew  Bell,
Canadian  soldier,  b.  in  Quebec,  7  Jan.,  1832.  He
was  educated  in  Quebec  high-school,  and  joined
the  commissariat  department  of  the  British  army
in  1848.  He  served  in  western  Australia,  Turkey
and  the  Crimea,  the  West  Indies,  Spain,  and  on  the
Red  river  expedition,  and  for  his  distinguished
services  in  the  Ashantee  war  was  awarded  a  medal
and  clasp.  He  was  appointed  deputy  adjutant
commissary-general  in  1854,  assistant  commissary-
general  in  1865,  assistant  comptroller  in  1870,  depu-
ty comptroller  in  1873,  deputy  commissary-general
in  1875,  and  was  retired  with  the  honorary  rank  of
commissary-general  on  1  April,  1881.  He  became
a  companion  of  the  orders  of  St.  Michael  and  St.
George  in  1870,  was  made  a  companion  of  the
bath  for  the  Ashantee  campaign  in  1874,  and  elect-
ed a  member  of  the  Protestant  board  of  school-
commissioners  of  Quebec  in  1885. — Another  son,
Acheson  (Josford,  Canadian  soldier,  b.  in  Quebec
in  1837,  became  major  in  the  Quebec  rifles,  served
in  the  Red  river  expeditionary  force  in  1870,  was
promoted  lieutenant-colonel  in  1872,  and  was  sub-
sequently in  command  of  a  provincial  battalion  of
infantry  on  service  in  Manitoba.  He  became  as-
sistant commissioner  of  northwest  mounted  police
in  1876,  was  commissioner  in  1880-'6,  a  member
of  the  executive  council  of  the  Northwest  territory
in  1882-'6,  and  served  during  the  rebellion  of  1885.
IRVINE,  William,  soldier,  b.  near  Enniskillen,
Ireland,  3  Nov.,  1741 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29
July,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Dublin  univer-
sity, studied  medicine,  and  was  surgeon  on  board  a
ship-of-war  during  a  part  of  the  war  of  1756-'63
between  Great  Britain  and  France.  A  short  time
before  the  declaration  of  peace  he  resigned  his  com-
mission, emigrated  to  this  country,  and  in  1764
settled  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  where  he  practised  his  pro-
fession. At  the  opening  of  the  Revolution  he  took
part  with  the  colonies.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Provincial  convention,  which  assembled  in  Phila-
delphia on  15  July,  1774,  and  recommended  a  gen-
eral congress,  until  he  was  appointed  by  congress,
on  10  Jan.,  1776,  colonel  of  the  6th  regiment  of  the
Pennsylvania  line,  and  ordered  to  join  the  army  in
Canada.  He  raised  the  regiment,  led  it  to  the
mouth  of  the  Sorel,  and  co-operated  with  Gen.
William  Thompson  in  the  attempt  to  surprise  the
vanguard  of  the  British  army  at  Three  Rivers.  He
was  taken  prisoner  in  that  disastrous  battle  on  16
June,  1776,  and  released  on  parole  on  3  Aug.,  but
was  not  exchanged  until  6  May,  1778.  In  July,
1778,  he  was  a  member  of  the  court-martial  that
tried  Gen.  Charles  Lee.  In  1778  he  commanded
the  2dr  Pennsylvania  regiment,  and on  12  May,


1779,  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  2d  bri-
gade of  the  Pennsylvania  line.  His  brigade  was  en-
?aged  in  Lord  Stirling's  expedition  against  Staten
sland  and  in  the  unsuccessful  attack  of  Gen.
Wayne  at  Bull's  Ferry  on  21  and  22  July,  1780.
He  engaged  unsuccessfully  in  recruiting,  and  at-
tempted to  raise  a  corps  of  cavalry  in  Pennsylvania.
On  8  March,  1782,  he  was  ordered  to  Fort  Pitt,  to
take  command  of  the  troops  on  the  western  fron-
tier, where  he  remained  till  1  Oct.,  1783.  In  1785
he  was  appointed  agent  for  the  state  to  examine
the  public  lands,  and  had  the  administration  of  an
act  for  directing  the  mode  of  distributing  the  do-
nation lands  that  had  been  promised  to  the  troops
of  the  commonwealth.  He  suggested  the  purchase
of  the  tract  called  the  "  triangle  "  in  order  to  give
Pennsylvania  an  outlet  on  Lake  Erie.  He  became
a  member  of  the  Continental  congress  in  1786,  and
was  selected,  with  Nicholas  Gilman  and  John  Kean,
one  of  the  commissioners  for  settling  the  accounts
of  the  United  States  with  the  several  states.  He
was  a  member  of  the  convention  for  revising  the
constitution  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1794  he  was  sent
as  a  commissioner  to  the  whiskey  insurgents,  and,
when  he  failed  in  his  efforts  to  quiet  them,  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  Pennsylvania  mili-
tia, and  took  part  in  the  movements  resulting  in
their  pacification.  He  was  elected  a  representative
in  the  3d  congress,  and  served  from  2  Dec,  1793,
to  3  March,  1795.  He  afterward  removed  to  Phila-
delphia, and  in  March,  1801,  was  appointed  super-
intendent of  military  stores  there.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  State  society  of  the  Cincinnati  at  the
time  of  his  death.  —  His  brother,  Andrew,  d.  in
Carlisle,  Pa.,  4  May,  1789,  was  also  an  officer  of  the
Revolutionary  army,  holding  the  rank  of  captain.
He  entered  the  service  as  lieutenant,  marched  with
his  brother  in  the  Canadian  expedition,  and  after-
ward served  under  Wayne,  and  took  part  in  the
movements  that  preceded  the  massacre  of  Paoli,
where  he  was  wounded.  He  continued  in  active
service  throughout  the  war,  and  fought  in  the
northern  campaigns  and  at  the  south.  —  Another
brother,  Matthew,  physician,  was  a  surgeon  in
Gen.  Lee's  division. — William's  son,  Callender,
soldier,  b.  in  1774 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  9  Oct.,
1841,  was  appointed  a  captain  of  artillery  and  en-
gineers in  the  U.  S.  army  on  1  June,  1798,  and  re-
signed on  20  May,  1801.  On  the  death  of  his
father  he  succeeded  him  as  superintendent  of  mili-
tary stores,  and  in  1812  became  commissary  of  pur-
chases for  the  U.  S.  army. — Another  son,  William
N.,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania,  entered  the  U.  S.
army  as  captain  of  light  artillery  on  3  May,  1808,
and  resigned  on  15  Aug.,  1811,  but  after  the  begin-
ning of  hostilities  with  Great  Britain  joined  the
army  again  as  colonel  of  the  42d  infantry,  on  4
Aug.,  1813,  and  served  till  his  regiment  was  dis-
banded on  15  June,  •  1815.  —  Another  son,  Arm-
strong, b.  in  Pennsylvania ;  d.  at  Fort  Warren,
Mass.,  15  Jan.,  1817,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1811,  and  commissioned  a  lieu-
tenant of  light  artillery.  He  served  during  the
war  with  Great  Britain  on  the  Niagara  frontier  in
1812,  and  on  the  St.  Lawrence  the  following  year,
took  part  in  the  capture  of  Fort  George  in  Upper
Canada,  was  commissioned  a  captain  in  his  brother's
regiment  on  1  Oct.,  1813,  and  was  in  the  battle  of
Chrysler's  Field  on  11  Nov.,  1813.  On  the  reduc-
tion of  the  army  after  the  treaty  of  peace  in  1815,
he  was  retained  as  captain  of  light  artillery,  and
was  aide  to  Gen.  Ripley  in  1816.

IRVINE, William, pioneer, b. in  Virginia
about  1750 ;  d.  in  1820. He  was  one  of  the  earli-


IRVING


IRVING


359


est  and  most  notable  of  Kentucky  pioneers,  built
Irvine  station,  in  Madison  county,  in  1778,  and
took  part  in  most  of  the  bloody  frays  with  the
savages  at  the  time.  He  was  at  Little  Mountain,
where  Capt.  Estill  and  eighteen  riflemen  fought
twenty -five  Wyandot  braves,  and  was  badly
wounded.  He  became  clerk  of  the  quarter  ses-
sions and  county  courts  of  Madison  county,  and
afterward  of  the  circuit  court,  was  elected  to  the
burgesses  of  Virginia  from  the  district  of  Ken-
tucky, was  a  delegate  to  the  several  conventions  at
Danville  looking  to  the  organization  of  a  new
state,  and  a  member  of  the  convention  of  1799,
which  framed  the  second  constitution  of  Kentucky.
He  was  also  several  times  a  presidential  elector.—
His  brother,  Christopher,  pioneer,  d.  in  Ohio  in
1786,  was  the  comrade  of  William  in  all  his  pioneer
adventures.  The  brothers  jointly  built  and  occu-
pied the  Irvine  station.  In  1786  Christopher  led
a  company  of  men,  under  the  command  of  Col.
Ben  Logan,  against  the  Indians  in  northern  Ohio,
and  was  killed  by  a  savage  whom  he  was  pursuing,
and  who,  in  turn,  was  killed  by  Irvine's  men.

IRVING,  Jacob  jEmilius,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  29  Jan.,  1797;  d.  at
Niagara  Falls,  7  Oct.,  1856.  He  was  the  son  of
Jacob  JEmilius  Irving,  of  Ironshore,  Jamaica,  and
•of  Liverpool.  The  son  entered  the  British  army  at
an  early  age,  served  with  the  13th  light  dragoons
through  the  Waterloo  campaign,  and  was  wounded
in  the  action  of  18  June,  1815.  On  his  return  to
England  he  was  presented  with  the  freedom  of  the
•city  of  Liverpool  in  recognition  of  his  gallant  con-
duct and  services  in  the  war.  In  1834  he  came  to
Canada,  and  in  1837  aided  in  suppressing  the  re-
bellion on  the  Niagara  frontier.  When  the  mu-
nicipal system  was  introduced  he  was  selected  as
first  warden  for  the  district  of  Simcoe.  In  1843  he
became  a  member  of  the  legislative  council,  and,
identifying  himself  with  the  Liberal  party,  took
part  in  the  struggle  with  Lord  Metcalf.

IRVING,  John  Beaufain,  artist,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  26  Nov.,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20
April,  1877.  He  was  educated  at  Charleston  col-
lege, and  undertook  the  management  of  the  fami-
ly estate.  He  went  to  New  York  city  to  study
painting  in  1847,  but  after  a  few  months  returned
•discouraged  to  his  home.  In  1851  he  went  to  Diis-
seldorf,  where  he  became  the  pupil  of  Leutze.  He
remained  in  that  city  four  years,  and  while  there
•executed  a  large  picture  representing  "  Sir  Thomas
More  taking  Leave  of  his  Daughter  on  the  Way
to  his  Execution."  On  his  return  to  Charleston
he  painted  portraits,  but  did  not  follow  art  as  a
profession  until  after  the  close  of  the  civil  war,
when,  having  lost  his  fortune,  he  removed  to  New
York  city.  He  painted  genre  pictures,  which  at-
tracted attention  by  their  spirited  composition,
richness  of  coloring,  and  elaborate  finish.  His
refined  style,  careful  manipulation  of  the  brush,
and  brilliant  scheme  of  color,  suggested,  without
imitating,  the  Diisseldorf  school,  and  caused  him
to  be  compared  later  to  Meissonier.  He  carried
his  art  to  a  degree  of  minute  elaboration  beyond
any  other  American  painter,  but  was  less  happy  in
the  treatment  of  •  historical  subjects  than  in  genre.
In  1867  he  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  design
""  The  Splinter  "  and  "  The  Disclosure."  "  Wine-
Tasters,"  exhibited  in  1869,  secured  his  election  as
an  associate  of  the  National  academy.  In  1871  he
sent  a  full-length  portrait  of  Mrs.  August  Belmont.
"The  End  of  the  Game,"  exhibited  in  1872,  estab-
lished his  reputation,  and  in  that  year  he  was
•chosen  a  full  member  of  the  academy.  In  1874  he
exhibited  "  A  Musketeer  of  the  Seventeenth  Cen-


tury "  and  "  The  Bookworm,"  and  in  1875  "  Cardi-
nal Wolsey  and  his  Friends,"  which,  with  "  The
End  of  the  Game,"  was  sent  to  the  Centennial  ex-
hibition in  1876.  The  same  year  he  painted  "  King
Henry  VIII.  Merry-making."  He  sent  to  the
academy  in  1876  "  Off  the  Track."  and  in  1877  "  A
Banquet  at  Hampton  Court  in  the  Sixteenth  Cen-
tury." "  The  Last  Rally  "  is  one  of  his  best  pictures.
His  "  Connoisseurs  "  was  exhibited  at  the  Paris  ex-
position of  1878.  His  last  work  was  "Cardinal
Richelieu  and  Julie  in  the  Garden  of  the  Tuileries."

IRVING,  Paulus  .Km i litis,  British  soldier,  b.
in  Bonshaw,  Dumfries,  Scotland,  23  Sept.,  1714 ;  d.
in  England,  22  April,  1796.  He  entered  the  army
at  an  early  age,  and,  as  major  in  command  of  the
15th'  regiment  of  foot,  served  under  Wolfe,  and
was  wounded  on  the  Plains  of  Abraham.  On  30
June,  1765,  being  then  commander-in-chief  of  the
forces,  he  administered  the  government  of  the
province  of  Quebec  during  the  absence  of  Gen.
Murray.  In  1771  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-
governor  of  Guernsey,  and  he  was  afterward  gov-
ernor of  Upnor  Castle,  Kent. — His  son,  Sir  Paulus
jKmilius,  bart.,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Waterford,
Ireland,  30  Aug.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Carlisle,  England,  31
Jan.,  1828,  entered  the  army,  and  was  lieutenant  of
the  47th  regiment  of  foot  in  1764,  captain  in  1768,
and  major  in  1775.  He  was  engaged  in  the  bat-
tles of  Lexington  and  Bunker  Hill,  at  the  affair
of  Three  Rivers  in  June,  1776,  at  Crown  Point  and
Ticonderoga,  and  was  with  Burgoyne  till  his  sur-
render. He  subsequently  served  in  the  West  In-
dies, was  made  a  general  in  1812,  and  created  a
baronet.  19  Sept.,  1809.

IRVING,  Roland  Duer,  geologist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  27  April,  1847;  d.  in  Madison,  Wis.,  30
May,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  as  a
mining  engineer,  and  in  1879  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  from  that  institution.  Soon  after  his
graduation  he  became  assistant  on  the  Ohio  geo-
logical survey,  and  in  1870  was  elected  professor  of
geology,  mining,  and  metallurgy  in  the  University
of  Wisconsin.  In  1879  the  title  of  his  chair  was
changed  to  that  of  geology  and  mineralogy,  which
professorship  he  afterward  held.  He  became  as-
sistant state  geologist  of  Wisconsin  in  1873,  and
continued  as  such  until  1879.  During  1880-'2  he
was  one  of  the  U.  S.  census  experts,  and  in  1882
was  made  geologist  in  charge  of  the  Lake  Superior
division  of  the  U.  S.  geological  survey.  His  spe-
cialty was  the  micro-petrography  of  the  fragmental
rocks  and  crystalline  schists,  and  his  best  work  was
accomplished  in  the  direction  of  pre-Cambrian
stratigraphy  and  the  genesis  of  some  of  the  so-
called  crystalline  rocks,  particularly  of  the  quartz-
ites  and  ferruginous  iron  rocks  of  the  Lake  Supe-
rior regions.  Prof.  Irving  was  a  member  of  scien-
tific societies  to  whose  transactions  he  contributed
important  papers.  His  publications  under  the  au-
spices of  the  Wisconsin  geological  survey  include
"Geology  of  Central  Wisconsin  "  (Madison,  1877);
"Geology  of  the  Lake  Superior  Region  "  (1880);
"Crystalline  Rocks  of  the  Wisconsin  Valley"
(1882);  "Mineralogy  and  Lithology  of  Wisconsin"
(1883);  and  he  contributed  the  reports  of  the  U.  S.
geological  survev  to  "  The  Copper-Bearing  Rocks
of  Lake  Superior"  (Washington,  1883);  "On  Sec-
ondary Enlargements  of  Mineral  Fragments  in
Certain  Rocks"  (1884);  with  Charles  R.  Vanhise,
"The  Archa?an  Formations  of  the  Northwestern
States  "  (1885) ;  with  Thomas  C.  Chamberlain,  "  The
Junction  between  the  Eastern  Sandstone  and  the
Keweenaw  Series,  Keweenaw  Point,  Lake  Superior"
(1885) ;  and  "  The  Classification  of  the  Early  Cam-
brian and  Pre-Cambrian  Formations  "  (1886).


360


IRVING


IRVING


IRVING, Washington,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  3  April,  1783  ;  d.  at  Sunnyside,  Irvington,
N.  Y.,  28  Nov.,  1859.  His  father  was  William
Irving,  of  the  Orkneys,  a  man  of  good  lineage,  who
a  little  after  the  middle  of  the  last  century  had
taken  to  a  sea-faring  life  ;  and  it  was  while  serving
as  petty  officer  upon  a  British  armed  packet,  which
plied  between  Falmouth  and  New  York,  that  he
encountered  at  the  former  port  a  beautiful  girl —
Sarah  Sanders  by  name — who  became  his  wife.
He  married  in  1761,  and  in  1763  migrated  with
her  to  New  York,  where  he  established  himself  in
trade  in  William  street,  at  a  point  midway  be-
tween Pulton  and  John.  There  are  no  traces  now
of  that  first  Irving  home  into  which  were  born
eleven  children,  eight  of  them  reaching  maturity  ;
of  these,  Washington,  the  subject  of  this  notice,
and  the  author  of  the  "  Sketch-Book,"  was  the
youngest.  The  father  did  fairly  well  in  his  business
ventures,  but  had  his  tribulations,  growing  out  of
his  fervid  patriotism  in  the  days  of  the  Revolution,
when  his  house  lay  within  easy  gun-shot  of  the  Brit-
ish war-ships.  Once,  indeed,  he  had  been  compelled
to  decamp  and  take  refuge  in  the  Jerseys,  but  in
1784 — a  year  after  the  birth  of  his  son  Washington
— he  was  established  in  a  new  and  commodious
home.  There  are  old  New-Yorkers  who  remember
its  quaint  gables,  and  our  author's  biographer  tells
us  of  a  visit  that  Washington  Irving  made  to  this
home  of  his  boyhood  ten  years  before  his  death,
and  of  the  merry  twinkle  of  the  eye  with  which
he  told  of  his  escapades  over  this  or  that  loft  or
through  this  or  that  window  in  the  peaked  gables,
for  a  run  to  the  theatre  in  John  street,  or  for  a
foray  upon  adjoining  roofs,  whence  he  could  safe-
ly discharge  a  little  volley  of  pebbles  down  the
chimney  of  some  wondering  neighbor.  Such  sto-
ries were  not  needed  by  any  reader  of  the  Knicker-
bocker chronicle  to  convince  him  of  the  love  of
mischief  in  the  lad.  Indeed,  mischievous  propen-
sities declared  themselves  the  more  strongly  in  all
likelihood  because  the  father,  Deacon  Irving,  was
a  strict  disciplinarian.  He  was,  indeed,  a  man  of
all  probity,  with  a  high  sense  of  honor,  and  uni-
formly respected;  but  he  held  all  play-houses  in
detestation,  counted  dancing  a  sin,  and  looked
askance  upon  any  Sunday  reading  in  his  house-
hold beyond  the  catechism  or  Bible  story,  or — de-
lightful exception  for  the  boy  —  Bunyan's  "Pil-
grim's Progress."  The  mother  of  Washington  had
more  of  toleration  in  her  judgments  and  of  sun-
shine in  her  temperament ;  all  accounts  represent
her  as  a  dear,  good,  lively,  cheery,  sympathetic
person,  beloved  in  her  household,  and  doubtless
taking  away  the  edge  from  many  a  paternal  rebuke
by  her  forgiving  caresses.

At  the  age  of  four  Irving  went  to  a  woman's
school  in  Ann  street,  and  shortly  afterward  to
that  of  an  old  soldier  in  Fulton  street.  But  these
were  not  the  busy  thoroughfares  that  we  know
by  those  names.  In  going  and  coming,  the  lad
must  have  caught  sight  many  times,  between  the
houses,  of  East  river  and  of  the  heights  of  Long
Island.  There  were  gardens  in  his  own  street
which  reached  down  to  the  water,  the  old  Dutch
church  had  its  green  yard  abutting  upon  Nas-
sau street,  and  beyond  Chambers  cows  were  at
pasture.  The  boy's  schooling  was  not  of  a  thor-
ough sort,  and  when  it  ended,  he  being  then  six-
teen, he  had  only,  beyond  the  ordinary  English
branches,  a  smattering  of  Latin  and  of  music,  and
such  dancing  skill  as  he  had  come  by  furtively.
But  he  had  read  intelligently  and  voraciously  such
books  as  "  Sindbad,"  "  Gulliver,"  and  '•  Robinson
Crusoe." Why  he  was  not  presented  for  a  course


in  Columbia  college,  which  two  of  his  elder  broth-
ers had  taken,  does  not  appear;  instead,  he  entered
a  law-office,  relieving  his  studies  there  (which,  it
would  seem,  were  not  very  strenuous)  by  literary
squibs,  under  the  pen-name  of  "Jonathan  Old-
style,"  for  the  "  Morning  Chronicle,"  and  later  by
a  memorable  sloop  voyage  up  the  Hudson,  tacking
and  scudding  under  the  Highlands,  and  floating
for  days  together  in  sight  of  the  blue  Kaatskills,
on  his  way  to  visit  some  kinsfolk  who  lived  in  the
wilds  of  northern  New  York.  The  trip  was  under-
taken partly  for  his  health ;  continued  invalidism,
with  threat  of  pulmonary  trouble,  determined  his
friends  in  the  spring  of  1804  to  send  him  upon
European  voyagings.  It  was  largely  at  the  in-
stance of  his  brother  William,  who  was  seventeen
years  his  senior,  and  well  established,  that  this
scheme  was  effected.  Washington  was  at  that
date  twenty-one,  a  little  below  the  average  height,
delicate,  handsome  of  feature — Vanderlyn's  some-
what too  effeminate  portrait  of  him  gives  doubtless
a  good  notion  of  his  appearance  in  that  day — full
of  all  courtesies,  too,  and  with  a  most  winning
manner.  He  had  even  then  given  token  of  strong
literary  aptitude  and  of  a  keen  humor.  He  carried
abundant  letters,  and  was  warmly  received  at
Bordeaux,  at  Genoa,  at  Naples ;  a  glamour  of  ro-
mance hangs  over  his  story  of  the  trip  in  home
letters.  Off  Messina  he  saw  the  great  fleet  of
Nelson,  which  was  presently  a-wing  for  Trafalgar ;
at  Rome  he  met  Washington  Allston,  and  by  in-
terfusion of  minds  became  almost  mated  to  All-
ston's  life  of  art.  Meantime  admonitory  letters
were  coming  from  the  staid  brother  William  to  see
Florence,  to  see  Venice,  to  improve  his  opportuni-
ties. But  he  had  determined  to  make  a  straight
way  for  Paris.  He  heard  that  excellent  lectures
on  chemistry  and  botany  were  within  free  reach
there,  besides  the  chances  for  the  language.  And
he  goes,  and  has  a  gay  "  outing  "  in  that  capital ;
there  is,  indeed,  mention  in  his  record  of  the  costs
of  a  botanical  dictionary,  and  for  two  months'
tuition  in  French ;  but  there  is  more  mention  of
Talma  and  of  the  theatres,  which  he  takes  by  turn
and  follows  up  with  alacrity  and  method.

He  goes  thence  to  London,  via  Holland,  and  is
"  put  out  there,"  as  he  says,  by  his  "  gray  coat,  em-
broidered white  vest,  and  colored  small-clothes,"
a  gay  young  fellow!  He  is  enraptured  with  Mrs.
Siddons,  who  is  playing  in  those  days ;  is  in  the
theatre,  indeed,  when  news  of  Nelson's  death  comes
to  England  like  a  thunderbolt.  On  his  return  to
New  York  in  1806  with  re-established  health  and
with  critical  faculty  whetted  by  foreign  life,  he
undertook,  in  conjunction  with  his  friend  James
K.  Paulding  (q.  v.)  and  his  brother  William,  'the
publication  of  "  Salmagundi,"  a  periodical  of  the
"  Spectator  "  stamp,  but  lacking  its  finish  and  vi-
tality. He  took  up  law  again,  but  never  showed  a
love  for  it.  There  entered  also  a  disturbing  ele-
ment into  his  studies  of  whatever  sort  at  this
period,  by  reason  of  a  strong  attachment  with
tragic  ending  which  he  formed  for  the  accom-
plished daughter  of  his  friend  and  legal  instructor,
Judge  Hoffman.  In  a  confidential  communication
to  an  intimate  friend  many  years  later  he  says:
"  I  was  by  her  when  she  died ;  all  the  family  were
assembled  round  her,  some  praying,  others  weep-
ing, for  she  was  adored  by  them  all.  I  was  the  last
one  she  looked  upon.  The  despondency  I  had
suffered  for  a  long  time  in  the  course  of  this  at-
tachment, and  the  anguish  that  attended  its  catas-
trophe, seemed  to  give  a  turn  to  my  whole  charac-
ter and  throw  some  clouds  into  my  disposition,
which  have  ever  since  hung  about  it. When  1  be-


vy^-z//^^/sU^  u/^z^Txtt^


IRVING


IRVING


361


came  more  calm  and  collected,  I  applied  myself,  by
way  of  occupation,  to  the  finishing  of  my  work.
I  brought  it  to  a  close  as  well  as  I  could,  and  pub-
lished it ;  but  the  time  and  circumstances  in  which
it  was  produced  rendered  me  always  unable  to
look  upon  it  with  satisfaction."  The  work  alluded
to  was  the  "  History  of  New  York  by  Diedrich
Knickerbocker  "  (1809),  a  work  which  in  his  latter
years  Irving  was  able  to  look  upon  with  more
complacency.  It  had  great  success ;  it  established
his  early  fame ;  even  its  pecuniary  returns,  $3,000,
were  notable  in  that  day.  There  are  traces  in  it
of  his  love  of  Sterne  and  of  Rabelais;  there  are
broader  sallies  in  it  than  he  would  have  ventured
upon  in  his  maturity ;  but  there  is  a  breezy  and
boisterous  fun  that  is  all  his  own,  and  that  has
brought  the  echoes  of  its  rollicking  humor  dis-
tinctly down  to  our  times.  There  is  some  coquetting
with  the  law  after  this ;  he  even  appeared  at  the
trial  of  Aaron  Burr  (Richmond,  1807)  in  a  quasi-
legal  capacity ;  but  he  was  more  apt  in  the  social
junketings  he  encountered  and  enlivened  in  Phila-
delphia and  Baltimore.

Li  1810  he  became  a  partner,  with  one-fifth  in-
terest, in  a  commercial  house  that  was  established
by  his  brothers — Peter,  in  England,  and  Ebenezer,
in  New  York.  This  promised,  and  for  a  time
gave,  a  fair  revenue,  which  allowed  such  easy
dalliance  with  literature  as  his  humors  permitted ;
there  followed,  indeed,  certain  editorial  relations
with  the  old  "  Analectic  Magazine "  in  Philadel-
phia in  1813-'14,  in  which  appeared  one  or  two
papers  that  were  afterward  incorporated  in  the
"  Sketch-Book."  Yet  his  literary  methods  were
scarcely  more  business-like  than  his  law.  In  1815
he  sailed  for  Europe,  old  recollections  hiring  him ;
besides  which,  his  brother  Peter  was  in  England ;
a  married  sister  had  a  charming  home,  gay  with
young  voices,  near  Birmingham;  scores  of  old
friends  were  ready  to  welcome  him  in  London,  and
Napoleon  was  just  started  on  a  new  career,  after
Elba.  But,  on  Irving's  arrival  in  Liverpool,  Water-
loo had  befallen,  his  brother  Peter  was  ill,  and  the
affairs  of  the  house  of  P.  and  E.  Irving  were  shaky.
As  a  consequence  much  commercial  task-work  fell
to  his  hands ;  there  was  relief,  however,  in  the  trips
to  London,  and  to  the  charming  home  near  Bir-
mingham ;  in  the  meeting  with  Allston  and  Leslie,
who  contributed  to  an  illustrated  edition  of  the
Knickerbocker  history ;  ip  the  theatre-going,  where
Kean  and  the  O'Neil  were  shining ;  in  quiet  saun-
terings  about  Warwickshire ;  in  encounters  with
Campbell  and  Disraeli,  and  with  Scott  at  Abbots-
ford.  The  "  Knickerbocker  "  fame  opened  doors
to  him  everywhere,  and  his  delightful  humor,  bon-
homie, and  courtesy  kept  them  open.  There  were
two  or  three  years  of  such  pleasures,  dampened  by
commercial  forebodings,  till  at  last,  in  1818,  the
house  went  into  bankruptcy.  William  Irving
meantime  had  used  influences  at  Washington,
through  which  a  secretaryship  in  the  navy  depart-
ment, with  $2,500  per  annum,  was  offered  to  the
author ;  but  it  was  peremptorily  declined.  He  was
feeling  his  power  to  do  somewhat  with  his  pen
of  better  worth ;  yet  for  a  long  time  the  very  exal-
tation of  his  purpose  palsied  his  writing  faculty.
It  was  not  until  1819  that  he  transmitted  to  this
country,  for  publication  in  New  York  and  Phila-
delphia, the  first  number  of  the  "Sketch-Book."
It  appeared  in  June,  ninety-two  pages,  octavo,
"  large  type  and  copious  margins,"  and  sold  for  sev-
enty-five cents.  Among  the  papers  in  this  first
number  was  the  story  of  Rip  Van  Winkle,  the
tatterdemalion  of  the  Kaatskills,  who  is  still  living  a
lusty  youthhood. Other  numbers  quickly  succeed-


ed, and  were  approved  and  hugely  enjoyed  in  New
York  and  Philadelphia,  before  yet  British  applause
of  them  had  sounded.  But  this  came  in  its  time,
and  with  a  fervor  that  had  never  before  been  kin-
dled by  work  from  an  American  hand.  John
Murray  became  eventually  (1820)  the  publisher  of
the  "  Sketch  -  Book,"  as  also  of  the  succeeding
works  of  '•  Bracebridge  Hall"  (2  vols.,  London,
1822),  and  "  Tales  of  a  Traveller  "  (1824).  For  the
first  he  paid  $2,400,  for  the  second  $5,250,  and
for  the  third  $7,875 — sums  which  most  readers
will  regard  as  bearing  inverse  ratio  to  their  merits,
but  which  marked  Irving's  growing  popularity.
The  "  Sketch  -  Book "  was  approved  by  the  best
critical  judgment  of  those  days,  for  its  graces  of
language,  its  delicate  fancies,  its  touches  of  pathos,
and  its  quiet  humor  ;  and,  although  there  may  be
modern  question  of  this  judgment  at  some  points,
there  is  a  leaven  of  charm  in  it  for  the  average
mind  which  has  kept  it  in  favor  and  made  it  the
most  popular  of  the  Irving  books.

Meantime  the  author  was  enjoying  himself  in
travelling.  In  1826  he  found  himself  in  Madrid,
going  thither  at  the  instance  of  U.  S.  minister
Alexander  H.  Everett,  who  made  him  attache  of
the  legation,  and  advised  his  translation  of  Navar-
rete's  "  Voyages  of  Columbus,"  which  was  then  in
course  of  publication.  This  work  he  entered  upon
with  zeal;  but  soon,  inspired  by  the  picturesque
aspects  of  the  subject,  gave  over  the  project  of
translation  and  determined  to  make  his  own  "  Life
of  Columbus."  Upon  this  he  worked  with  a  will,
and  as  early  as  July,  1827,  advised  Murray  of  its
completion.  It  was  published  (3  vols.,  1828)  by
Murray  in  London  and  Carvill  in  New  York,  their
joint  payments  reaching  the  sum  of  $18,000.  The
sale  did  "not  equal  the  expectations  of  Mr.  Murray;
an  abridgment,  however,  without  honorarium  to
the  author,  had  large  success.  The  research  requi-
site to  this  work  gave  Irving  a  footing  with  serious
readers,  who  had  ignored  him  as  a  romancer :  its
accuracy,  its  clearness  of  style,  and  its  safe  judg-
ments have  given  it  place  in  all  historic  libraries.
Two  succeeding  books,  of  a  more  popular  cast,
which  grew  out  of  Irving's  study  of  Spanish  chron-
icles, were  the  "  Conquest  of  Granada  "  (1829)  and
the  "  Alhambra  "  tales  (1832).  This  last  was  the  re-
sult of  the  author's  enjoyable  occupancy,  by  favor  of
the  governor,  of  a  suite  of  rooms  in  the  old  Moor-
ish palace  in  the  summer  of  1829.  There  is  in  it
pleasant  description  of  his  surroundings  there —
the  towers,  the  courts,  the  dusky-eyed  attendants —
with  a  fantastic  dressing  up  of  old  Moorish  legends.
The  "  Granada  "  chronicle  is  a  romantic  narrative
of  the  actual  struggles  which  belonged  to  the
Moorish  subjugation  in  Spain.  It  was  while  a
resident  of  the  Alhambra,  in  1829,  that  Irving  re-
ceived news  of  his  appointment  to  the  post  of  sec-
retary of  legation  in  London.  With  some  hesi-
tancy he  accepted,  bade  adieu  to  his  Spanish
friends,  and  went  to  a  pleasant  renewal  of  his  old
alliances  in  England.  He  passed  three  years  there,
taking  to  diplomatic  lines  of  life  not  ungraciously,
and  making  new  friendships ;  and  with  a  medal  of
the  Royal  society  of  literature  (1830),  a  doctorate
from  Oxford  (1831),  and  other  enviable  honors,  he
sailed  for  New  York  in  1832.  after  seventeen  years
of  absence.  The  greeting  that  met  him  was  most
marked  and  sincere ;  even  the  stammering  hesi-
tancy with  which  he  met  it,  at  a  public  dinner,
provoked  new  cheers  of  hearty  welcome.  Neither
diplomacy  nor  great  literary  successes  had  spoiled
his  modesty.

It  was  at  this  period  that  he  purchased  and
put  in  shape  the  stone  cottage  that  formed his


362


IRVING


IRVING


after-home,  and  that  of  his  brother  and  nieces,  at
Sunnyside,  which  is  shown  in  the  accompanying
illustration.  But  the  travelling  habit  was  strong
upon  him,  and  within  a  year  he  was  away  upon  the
prairies,  the  trip  having  delightful  outcome  there-
after in  his  "Tour  on  the  Prairies"  (1835).  A
friendly  association,  too,  with  John  Jacob  Astor,  at
whose  home  on  Harlem  river  he  spent  much  time,
resulted  in  the  compilation,  in  conjunction  with
his  nephew  Pierre,  of  the  records  of  "  Astoria  "  (2
vols.,  Philadelphia,  1836).  This  was  followed  by
the  ••  Adventures  of  Captain  Bonneville  "  (1837).


■5V6ikv*>S*V»  SSMiRMfciKV^


A  project  for  writing  a  history  of  Mexico  that  he
had  long  entertained  was  given  up  on  learning,  in
1839,  that  William  H.  Prescott  was  engaged  upon
the  theme.  A  temporary  association  with  the
"  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "  became  the  occasion
of  putting  to  press  a  few  papers  of  various  quality,
which  served  later  to  make  up  the  bulk  of  a  book
of  miscellany,  called  "Wolfert's  Roost"  (New
York,  1854).  In  the  year  1842,  while  Irving  was
living  quietly  at  Sunnyside,  he  was  appointed  by
President  Tyler,  at  the  instance  of  Daniel  Webster,
then  secretary  of  state,  minister  to  Spain.  The
United  States  senate  promptly  confirmed  the  ap-
pointment, and  the  whole  country  gave  a  quick  and
loud  approval.  The  author,  aged  fifty-nine,  and  be-
ginning to  feel  somewhat  the  weight  of  years,  was
reluctant  to  leave  home ;  but  the  expenses  of  his
household  were  large;  all  his  earlier  books  were
out  of  print  and  bringing  no  revenue ;  his  vested
property  was  tied  up  largely  in  non-paying  stocks
or  lands ;  his  purpose  of  engaging  upon  the  "  Life
of  Washington  "  might,  he  thought,  find  execution
in  Madrid.  He  accepted,  therefore,  and  in  a  letter
from  Paris,  on  the  way  to  his  post,  he  says :  "  I  am
somewhat  of  a  philosopher,  so  I  shall  endeavor  to
resign  myself  to  the  splendor  of  courts  and  the
conversation  of  courtiers,  comforting  myself  with
the  thought  that  the  time  will  arrive  when  I  shall
once  more  return  to  sweet  little  Sunnyside,  to  be
able  to  sit  on  a  stone  fence  and  talk  about  politics
and  rural  affairs  with  neighbor  Forkel  and  Uncle
Brom  [Ebenezer]."  His  residence  of  four  years
at  the  court  of  Spain  was  uneventful;  but  his
letters  of  that  period  afford  interesting  glimpses
of  the  young  queen,  of  Christina,  of  Espartero,  of
Narvaez,  of  the  insurrections  of  1843.  Even  his
diplomatic  correspondence  shows  at  times  the  old
glow  that  belonged  to  his  Andalusian  life.  He
was  never  weaned  from  a  yearning  fondness  for
the  atmosphere  of  Spain,  for  the  dark-eyed  women,
and  for  the  proud  grandees  that  once  gave  dignity
to  its  history.  Little  was  accomplished,  however,  in
these  years  upon  his  "  Life  of  Washington."  Over
and  over,  in  his  private  letters,  he  lamented  his
literary  inactivity;  but  the  round  of  diplomatic
courtesies  and  the  larger  round  of  friendly  sociali-
ties were  in  the  way  of  methodic  work.  Uncertain
health,  too,  compelled  repeated  absences,  and  seri-


ously interfered  with  that  old  blitheness  of  mood
under  which  only  his  best  work  could  find  accom-
plishment.

Resigning  his  post  some  months  before  the  ap-
pointment of  his  successor,  he  returned  to  the  Unit-
ed States,  reaching  his  home  of  Sunnyside  in  Sep-
tember, 1846,  where  thirteen  years  of  happy  life
still  remained  for  him.  One  of  his  first  tasks  upon
arrival  was  to  enlarge  the  country  home  and  make
it  ample  for  a  household  which,  by  his  generous  in-
sistence, now  included  his  brother  Ebenezer  and  his
family.  The  squat  tower,  with  its  pagoda-like
roof,  added  at  this  time,  is  perhaps  the  most  salient
architectural  feature  of  the  homestead.  There
were  periodic  dashes  from  year  to  year  at  his  long-
delayed  "  Life  of  Washington  " ;  and  in  1848  an
agreement  with  George  P.  Putnam — a  liberal  and
energetic  publisher  of  New  York,  who  became  a
fast  friend — demanded  revision  of  all  his  published
works  for  a  new  and  uniform  edition  (15  vols.,
1848-'50).  This  enterprise  proved  extraordinarily
successful,  and  Irving  was  induced  to  add  to  his
older  books  a  "  Life  of  Mahomet  and  his  Success-
ors "  (1849-'50),  which  had  been  long  floating  in
his  mind,  but  not  of  the  author's  best;  also  a
"  Life  of  Goldsmith  "  (1849) — this  last  was  an  ex-
tension of  a  sketch  that  was  originally  printed  in
the  Paris  (Baudry)  library  of  British  authors,  and
offered  a  subject  which  was  at  one  with  all  of
Irving's  tastes  and  sympathies.  It  is  a  delightful
biography,  and  sparkles  throughout  with  the  au-
thor's best  touches.  In  1852  he  writes,  "  My  '  Life
of  Washington  '  lags  and  drags  heavily  " ;  indeed,
age  had  begun  to  tell  seriously  upon  him ;  nor  did
he  find  in  his  study  of  old  home  records  the  pic-
turesque aspects  which  so  kindled  his  enthusiasms
in  his  former  gropings  among  the  Moorish  and
Spanish  chronicles.  Yet  he  put  an  honest  hand  to
the  work  and  a  clear  head ;  but  it  was  not  until
1855  that  the  first  volume  appeared.  It  was  well
received ;  but  it  was  easy  to  see  that  esteem  for  the
author  and  for  his  past  triumphs  lent  no  inconsid-
erable force  to  the  encomiums  bestowed  upon  the
new  work.  At  the  close  of  1855  the  second  vol-
ume appeared;  the  third  in  1856;  the  fourth  in
1857;  the  fifth  dragged  wearily.  "I  have  taken
things  to  pieces,"  he  says,  "  and  could  not  put  them
together  again."  "  A  streak  of  old  age  "  had  come
upon  him ;  he  had  "  wearisome  muddles  "  in  his
work;  his  asthma  was  very  afflictive:  his  years
counted  seventy-five ;  nor  was  it  until  1859,  within
less  than  a  twelvemonth  of  his  death,  that  the  fifth
and  last  volume  appeared.  The  conditions  had
not  been  such  as  favor  vigorous  literary  work.  We
must  go  back  to  the  days  of  his  full  strength  and
vigor  to  measure  his  true  forces.  In  this  book  of
"  Washington  "  there  is  a  clear,  pale  outline  of  the
distinguished  American  leader,  wonderfully  vivid
transcripts  of  the  battles,  sagacious  judgments,
great  fairness,  and  sturdy  American  feeling;  but
there  is  no  such  strong  grasp  of  the  subject  or
such  sustained  vigor  of  treatment  as  will  rank  it
with  his  earlier  works  or  with  great  biographies.

There  were  no  financial  anxieties  to  disturb  his
later  years ;  the  revenue  from  his  books  was  very
large ;  he  could  and  did  make  his  old  generosities
more  lavish ;  his  hospitalities  were  free  and  hearty ;
he  loved  the  part  of  entertainer  and  graced  it.
His  mode  of  living  showed  a  quiet  elegance,  but
was  never  ostentatious.  At  the  head  of  his  table —
cheered  by  the  presence  of  old  friends — his  speech
bubbled  over  with  young  vivacities,  and  his  arch-
ing brow  and  a  whimsical  light  in  his  eye  foretold
and  exalted  every  sally  of  his  humor.  His  rides  and
drives  and  cheery  smiles  of  greeting  brought  him


IRVING


IRVING


363


to  the  knowledge  of  all  the  neighborhood.  When
he  died,  the  grief  there  was  universal  and  sincere.
On  the  day  of  his  funeral  (1  Dec,  1859),  a  remark-
ably mild  day  for  the  season,  the  village  shops
were  closed  and  draped  in  mourning,  and  both
sides  of  the  high-road  leading  from  the  church,  of
which  he  had  been  warden,  to  the  grave  by  Sleepy
Hollow,  where  his  body  lies,  were  black  with  the
throngs  of  those  who  had  come  from  far  and  near
to  do  honor  to  his  memory.  We  cannot  class
Washington  Irving  among  those  strenuous  souls
who  delve  new  channels  for  thought ;  his  touch  in
literature  is  of  a  gentler  sort.  We  may  safely,
however,  count  him  the  best  beloved  among  Amer-
ican authors — his  character  was  so  clean,  his  lan-
guage so  full  of  grace,  his  sympathies  so  true  and
wide,  and  his  humor  so  genuine  and  abounding.
After  his  death  appeared  his  "  Life  and  Letters,"
Edited  by  his  nephew,  who  also  collected  and  edited
his  "  Spanish  Papers  and  other  Miscellanies "  (3
vols.,  1866).  During  Irving's  lifetime,  600,000  vol-
umes of  his  works  were  sold  in  the  United  States,
and  from  his  death  till  the  present  time  (1887)  the
annual  sale  has  averaged  30,000  volumes.  Of  the
portraits  of  Irving,  that  by  his  friend.  Gilbert
Stuart  Newton,  painted  in  1820,  was  most  es-
teemed by  the  family,  and  best  liked  by  the  au-
thor. The  portrait  by  John  Vanderlyn,  painted
in  1805,  that  by  John  Wesley  Jarvis,  in  1810.  and
that  by  Charles  Martin,  an  English  artist,  in
1851,  are  well  known  by  engravings.  The  Jarvis
picture  was  considered  excellent,  and  with  the
bust  by  Ball  Hughes,  which  is  also  good,  is  still

? reserved  at  the  Irving  homestead  of  Sunnyside.
brtraits  by  Escacena,  painted  in  Seville,  Spain,  in
1829,  by  Vogel  in  Dresden  in  1823,  and  by  Foy
in  Paris  in  1824,  which  are  named  in  Pierre  Ir-
ving's biography,  are  not  known  by  engravings,  nor
has  their  present  ownership  been  traced.  Sir  David
Wilkie's  sketch  of  "  Washington  Irving  consulting
the  Archives  of  Cordova"  (25  April,  1828),  which
forms  the  frontispiece  to  one  of  Wilkie's  published
volumes,  can  hardly  be  considered  a  likeness.  The
steel  portrait  that  accompanies  this  article  is  from
a  photograph.  Busts  of  Irving  have  been  set  up  in
Central  park  and  in  Prospect  park,  Brooklyn.  The
latest  edition  of  Irving's  works  is  that  published  in
New  York  (27  vols.,  12mo,  1884-'6).  A  tabulated  list
of  books  and  pamphlets  relating  to  the  author's
life  and  writings  appeared  in  the  "  reference  lists  "
of  the  Providence  public  library  for  April,  1883.
In  the  same  year  was  founded  a  Washington  Irving
association  at  Tarrytown,  which  commemorated
the  hundredth  anniversary  of  the  author's  birth  by
a  public  meeting  and  addresses,  of  which  record
was  made  in  a  memorial  volume  (New  York,  1884).
The  standard  life  of  Irving  is  that  by  his  nephew,
Pierre  M.  Irving  (4  vols.,  1862-'3 ;  memorial  ed.,  4to,
1883 ;  German  abridgment  by  Adolph  Lann,  Ber-
lin, 1870).  See  also  William  C.  Bryant's  address
before  the  New  York  historical  society  (New  York,
1860);  that  of  Henry  W.  Longfellow  before  the
Massachusetts  historical  society,  published  in  its
"  Proceedings  "  (Boston.  1860) :  "  Irvingiana  "  (New
York,  1860) ;  Charles  Dudley  Warner's  "  Life  of
Irving"  in  the  "American  Men  of  Letters"  series
(Boston,  1881) ;  and  James  Grant  Wilson's  "  Brvant
and  his  Friends"  (New  York,  1886).— His  brother,
William,  merchant,  b.  in  New  York  city,  15  Aug.,
1766 ;  d.  there,  9  Nov.,  1821,  engaged  in  commercial
pursuits,  and  from  1787  till  1791  was  a  fur-trader
with  the  Indians  on  the  Mohawk  river,  residing  at
Johnstown  and  Caughnawaga,  N.  Y.  In  1793  he
settled  in  New  York  city,  and  married  a  sister  of
James  K.  Paulding,  one  of  the  authors  of  •'  Salma-


gundi." In  the  preparation  of  the  latter  work  he
took  an  active  part,  contributing  most  of  the  politi-
cal pieces  "  from  the  mill  of  Pindar  Cockloft."  He
also  furnished  hints  and  sketches  for  several  of  the
prose  articles,  as  the  letters  of  "  Mustapha "  in
Nos.  5  and  14,  which  were  elaborated  by  his  brother
Washington.  His  extensive  experience,  combined
with  his  wit  and  genial  mariners,  made  his  house  a
literary  centre,  and  although  his  poetical  and  other
contributions  to  "  Salmagundi,"  if  issued  separately,
would  have  given  him  a  distinct  place  among
American  humorists,  he  was  entirely  unambitious
of  literary  fame.  He  was  elected  to  congress  three
times  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  22  Jan.,  1814.  till
1818,  when  he  resigned  in  consequence  of  declining
health. — Another  brother,  Peter,  author,  b.  in
New  York  city,  30  Oct.,  1771 ;  d.  there,  27  June,
1838,  was  graduated  as  a  physician  in  Columbia  in
1794,  but  never  practised  his  profession.  In  Octo-
ber, 1802,  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Morn-
ing Chronicle,"  a  Democratic  newspaper,  which
advocated  the  election  of  Aaron  Burr  to  the  presi-
dency. Among  the  contributors  were  the  editor's
brothers,  Washington  and  John  Treat,  J.  K.  Paul-
ding, William  A.  Duer,  and  Randolph  Bunner.  In
1807  he  travelled  in  Europe,  and  on  his  return
projected,  with  his  brother  Washington,  the  work
that  the  latter  developed  into  "  Knickerbocker's
History  of  New  York."  He  again  visited  Europe
in  1809,  established  himself  in  business  there,  and
remained  until  1836.  During  his  residence  abroad
he  published  "  Giovanni  Sbogarro,  a  Venetian
Tale  "  (New  York,  1820).— Another  brother,  John
Treat,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1778;  d.
there,  18  March,  1838,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1798.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  from  1817  until  his  death  served  as  presiding
judge  of  the  New  York  court  of  common  pleas.
By  his  contributions  to  his  brother's  "  Chronicle  "
he  acquired  some  reputation  through  his  poetical
attacks  on  his  political  opponents.  "  He  was,"  says
the  biographer  of  Washington  Irving,  "  a  man  of
perfect  uprightness  and  great  refinement  of  char-
acter, and  enjoyed  through  life  the  high  respect  of
the  community.  In  his  earlier  days  he  had  some-
thing of  a  literary  turn,  which,  however,  was  soon
quenched  under  the  dry  details  of  the  law  and  the
resolute  fidelity  with  which  he  gave  himself  up
to  the  claims  of  his  profession." — William's  son,
Pierre  Munroe,  lawyer,  b.  in  1803 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  11  Feb.,  1876.  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1821,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  Meeting  his  uncle,  Washington,  in  Spain  in
1826,  during  a  "  youthful  tour  of  Europe,  he,  at
the  latter's  request,  took  charge  of  the  work  of  get-
ting the  "Life  of  Columbus"  correctly  through
the  press  in  London.  Subsequently  he  acted  as
his  uncle's  literary  assistant,  managed  his  business
affairs,  and  attended  him  in  his  last  illness.  Some
years  before  his  death,  Washington  Irving  appoint-
ed Pierre  his  biographer,  and  in  1862-'3  the  latter
published  "  The  Life  and  Letters  of  Washington
Irving "  (New  York).  He  also  edited  his  uncle's
"  Spanish  Papers  and  Other  Miscellanies  "  (1866). —
Theodore,  educator,  son  of  Washington's  brother,
Ebenezer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  9  May,  1809 ;  d.
there,  20  Dec,  1880.  joined  his  "uncle  in  Spain,  and
remained  three  years  abroad,  attending  lectures
and  devoting  himself  to  the  study  of  modern  lan-
guages. He  subsequently  read  law  in  London  and
New  York.  In  1836  he  was  appointed  professor  of
history  and  belles-lettres  in  Geneva  (now  Hobart)
college,  where  he  remained  until  1848,  when  he
accepted  the  corresponding  chair  in  the  Free
academy  (now  College  of  the  city)  of  New  York.


364


IRWIN


IRWING


This  he  resigned  in  May,  1852,  and  two  years  later,
having  studied  theology,  was  ordained  a  priest  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  chui'ch.  He  became
rector  of  Christ  church,  Bay  Ridge,  Long  Island,
and  for  several  years  had  charge  of  St.  Andrew's
and  afterward  of  Ascension  parish,  Staten  island.
In  1874  he  again  engaged  in  teaching,  becoming
rector  of  a  young  ladies'  school  in  New  York  city.
He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Columbia  in
1837,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  in  1851.  Be-
sides contributing  frequently  to  periodical  litera-
ture, Mr.  Irving  was  the  author  of  "  The  Conquest
of  Florida  by  Hernando  de  Soto"  (Philadelphia
and  London,  1835 ;  revised  ed.,  uniform  with  the
collective  edition  of  Washington  Irving's  works,
New  York  and  London,  1851) ;  "  The  Fountain  of
Living  Waters  "  (New  York,  1854 ;  4th  ed.,  1855) ;
"Tiny  Footfalls"  (1869);  and  "More  than  Con-
queror" (1873). — John  Treat's  son,  John  Treat,
author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  2  Dec,  1812,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1829,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Sketches  in  an  Expedition  to  the  Pawnee  Tribes  "
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia  and  London,  1835) :  "  Hawk
Chief"  (Philadelphia  and  London,  1836);  "The
Attorney  "  and  "  Harry  Harson,  or  the  Benevolent
Bachelor,"  the  last  two  being  first  published  in  the
"  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "  over  the  signature  of
"  John  Quod  "  in  1842-'3 ;  and  "  The  Van  Gelder
Papers  and  Other  Sketches  "  (New  York,  1887).

IRWIN,  Jared,  statesman,  b.  in  Mecklenburg
county,  N.  C,  in  1750 ;  d.  in  Union,  Washington
co.,  Ga.,  1  March,  1818.  He  removed  in  early
boyhood  with  his  parents  to  Burke  county,  Ga.,
was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  served  in  a  Georgia
regiment  during  the  last  four  years  of  the  Revolu-
tionary war,  afterward  commanding  a  detach-
ment of  Georgia  militia  on  the  frontier,  and  against
the  Creek  Indians.  About  1788  he  removed  to
Washington  county,  Ga.,  was  a  member  of  the  first
legislature  that  convened  after  the  independence
of  the  colonies  was  established,  was  in  that  body
almost  continuously,  except  while  he  was  governor
for  the  state,  from  1790  till  1811,  and  frequently
was  president  of  the  senate.  He  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitutional  conventions  of  1789,  1795,
and  1798,  and  was  president  of  the  last  named.  In
1796  he  became  governor,  and  his  administra-
tion was  marked  by  the  rescinding  of  the  "  Yazoo
law  "  that  had  been  passed  by  a  previous  corrupt
legislature. He  was  re-elected  governor  in  1806.

IRWIN,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Pennsylva-
nia, 15  April,  1832.  He  was  commissioned  mid-
shipman in  1847,  passed  midshipman  in  1853,
lieutenant  in  1855,  captain  in  1875,  and  commo-
dore in  1886.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  on
the  frigate  "  Wabash  "  at  the  battle  of  Port  Royal,
and  with  a  detachment  of  officers  and  seamen  of
the  ship  participated  in  the  bombardment  and
capture  of  Fort  Pulaski.  His  conduct  on  this
occasion  was  commended  in  the  official  report.  He
was  on  duty  in  California,  and  was  promoted  rear
admiral.  20  May,  1891. .

IRWIN,  John  Scull,  banker,  b.  in  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  4  April,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  the  West-
ern university  of  Pennsylvania  in  1842,  and  in
medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1847.  He  practised  till  1853,  when  he  abandoned
the  medical  profession  on  account  of  failing  health,
and  entered  a  banking-house  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,
continuing  in  that  business  for  twenty  years.  In
1865  he  became  treasurer  of  the  Fort  Wayne  school
board,  and  in  1875  superintendent  of  the  city
schools,  and  a  member  of  the  state  board  of  educa-
tion. On  resigning  from  the  board  of  trustees  of


Indiana  university  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
He  is  a  member  of  the  national  council  of  the  Edu-
cation association,  and  has  been  active  in  the  coun-
cils of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.

IRWIN,  Mathew,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1740 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  March,  1800.  He
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1767,  and  was
a  successful  importer  in  Philadelphia  till  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolution,  when  he  entered  the
army  as  captain  and  quartermaster  in  the  Penn-
sylvania line.  He  served  in  various  capacities
until  1783,  and  in  December,  1777,  when  the  army
at  Valley  Forge  was  destitute  of  clothing  and  pro-
visions, was  one  of  sixty  citizens  of  Philadelphia
to  provide  funds  for  its  temporary  support,  his  sub-
scription being  £5,000.  In  1785  he  became  re-
corder of  Philadelphia,  and  from  the  adoption  of
the  constitution  of  1790  was  master  of  rolls  of  the
state  of  Pennsylvania  until  his  death. — His  son,
Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  22  Feb.,  1785;
d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  14  May,  1870,  was  educated
at  Franklin  college,  Pa.,  but,  in  consequence  of  the
death  of  his  father,  who  left  a  heavily  encumbered
estate,  was  not  graduated.  In  1804  he  became
editor  of  the  "  Philadelphia  Repository,"  studied
law,  and  in  1808  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  this
year  he  accepted  an  appointment  in  the  Indian
department  at  Natchitoches,  La.,  and  also  prac-
tised law  there  for  two  years.  Failure  of  health
necessitating  his  return  in  1810,  he  settled  in
Uniontown,  Fayette  co.,  N.  Y.,  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1824-'6,  and  during  his  term  of
office  framed  the  bill  for  the  extension  of  the
Chesapeake  and  Ohio  railroad.  In  1828  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  till  his
appointment  in  1830  as  judge  of  the  western  dis-
trict of  Pennsylvania,  which  office  he  held  till  his
death.  His  opinion  regarding  the  fugitive-slave
act  of  1850  had  a  large  circulation.

IRWIN,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fagg's
Manor,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  17  Oct.,  1756;  d.  in
Bucks  county,  Pa.,  3  March,  1812.  He  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1770,  was  ordained  to
the  Presbyterian  ministry  in  1774,  and  was  pastor
of  the  Nesharniny  church,  Bucks  county,  Pa.,
from  that  year  until  his  death.  He  was  clerk  of
the  " old  synod "  in  1781-5,  and  moderator  of  the
general  assembly  in  1801.  Mr.  Irwin  was  the
first  to  encourage  John  Fitch,  the  steamboat
builder,  and  the  inventor's  autobiography,  which
is  now  in  the  Philadelphia  library  in  manuscript,
is  addressed  "  to  the  Rev.  Nathaniel  Irwin."
Irwin  combined  great  business  shrewdness  with
devotion  to  his  profession,  and  was  an  eloquent
orator.  He  exercised  much  influence  in  local
politics,  and  a  caricature,  printed  at  the  time  of  the
location  of  the  Bucks  county  court-house,  repre-
sents him  without  his  hat  and  in  his  shirt-sleeves,
striving  with  all  his  might  to  pull  the  building
in  the  direction  of  Doylestown.

IRWIN,  William,  governor  of  California,  b.
in  Butler  county,  Ohio,  in  1827 ;  d.  in  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  15  March,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at
Marietta  college  in  1848,  and,  after  teaching  for
three  years  at  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  and  holding  a
tutorship  at  Marietta,  went  to  Chicago,  where  he
read  law  for  a  few  months.  After  passing  two  years
in  Oregon,  he  settled  in  Siskiyou  county,  Cal.,  and
engaged  in  mining,  lumbering,  and  publishing  a
newspaper.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  as  a
Democrat  in  1861,  was  its  president  pro  tempore
during  his  second  term,  in  1874  became  lieutenant-
governor,  and  in  1875  governor  of  California.

IRWING,  Mary  Katie,  English  adventuress,
b.  in  the  island  of  Guernsey  in  1678 ;  d.  in  Port


ISAACS


ISERT


365


Royal,  Jamaica,  in  1721.  Her  parents  kept  a
sailors'  boarding-house,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve
she  eloped  with  a  boy  named  William  Read,
dressed  in  her  brother's  clothes,  and  with  Read
shipped  as  a  sailor  on  a  merchantman  that  was  ap-
parently bound  for  the  West  Indies.  The  ship
proved  to  be  a  slaver,  and  was  captured  near  Tor-
tugas  island  by  buccaneers,  who  murdered  the
crew,  except  a  few  who  enlisted  among  them.
William  and  Mary  were  spared  for  their  youth,
and  served  four  years  with  the  pirates,  who  would
have  remained  in  ignorance  of  Mary's  sex  but  for
a  wound  she  received  in  an  engagement  with  a
Spanish  man-of-war.  When  her  wound  was  healed
she  resumed  female  attire,  but  her  position  in  the
ship  became  unbearable,  as  on  her  account  quar-
rels spread  among  the  crew,  in  which,  in  1695,
young  Read  lost  his  life,  and  in  1696  she  agreed  to
marry  his  murderer,  the  second  mate  of  the  ship,
named  Harry  Walter.  They  lived  afterward  several
vears  in  Panama,  where  they  kept  a  lodging-house,
but  after  Walter's  death,  in  1707,  Mary  resumed
man's  attire,  and  armed  a  privateer,  with  which
she  ransacked  and  pillaged  Les  Caves  in  Santo  Do-
mingo, and  the  coasts  of  Venezuela  and  Jamaica,
securing  large  spoils.  She  soon  became  famous
among  the  corsairs,  as  she  coolly  murdered  those
who  fell  into  her  hands,  boasting  that  she  had  her-
self slaughtered  600  Spaniards.  At  last  a  man-of-
war  was  specially  despatched  from  New  Spain  to
capture  her,  and,  after  eluding  pursuit  for  months,
she  was  taken  near  Jamaica,  with  the  aid  of  an
English  ship,  and  hanged  in  that  island.

ISAACS,  Samuel  Myer,  clergyman,  b.  in
Leeuwarden,  Holland,  4  Jan.,  1804;  d.  in  New
York  city,  19  May,  1878.  He  went  to  London
with  his  family  in  1814,  was  called  to  the  pastorate
of  a  New  York  syna-
gogue in  1839,  and,
on  a  division  in  the
congregation  in  1845,
a  new  body  was  or-
ganized, of  which  he
was  minister  until  his
death.  Mr.  Isaacs  was
successful  in  arous-
.  ing  his  community  to
philanthropic  work,
and  he  was  among
the  first  to  labor  for
the  establishment  of
Jewish  institutions  in
New  York,  like  the
Mount  Sinai  hospi-
tal, the  Hebrew  free
schools,  and  the  Unit-
ed Hebrew  charities.
He  was  a  popular  speaker,  and  was  often  called  to
consecrate  synagogues  throughout  the  country,  and
was  a  frequent  orator  at  public  assemblies.  In
1857  he  established  the  "  Jewish  Messenger,"  as  an
organ  of  conservative  Judaism,  and  advocated  his
views  with  warmth  and  ability.  He  was  a  life-long
friend  and  correspondent  of  Sir  Moses  Montefiore.
A  brief  biography  of  him  was  published  by  his
sons  on  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  the  "  Jew-
ish Messenger"  in  Januarv,  1882.

ISAMBERT,  Henry  (e-zam'-bair),  French  sol-
dier, b.  in  Cahors  in  1749;  d.  in  Santo  Domingo
in  December,  1800.  He  served  in  the  colonial
troops  from  1769  till  1792,  and  commanded  the
Royal  Martinique  regiment  in  Santo  Domingo  at
the  beginning  of  the  French  revolution  in  1789.
He  took  an  active  part  in  the  repression  of  the
troubles  that  the  new  democratic  principles  caused


^Jfr>j£*


in  the  island  among  the  slaves,  advising  the  sum-
mary execution  of  the  rioters,  and  sometimes  de-
nying them  even  a  trial.  He  was  recalled  in  1792,
and  imprisoned  during  the  reign  of  terror  on  sus-

gicion  of  being  a  royalist;  but  the  downfall  of
Robespierre,  which  happened  the  day  before  his
proposed  execution,  saved  him,  and  he  was  after-
ward released.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
council  of  the  ancients  in  1796,  but  was  again  ar-
rested and  transported,  with  other  distinguished
victims  of  the  reaction,  to  Guiana.  His  faithful
wife,  a  Creole  of  Martinique,  joined  him,  and  he
bought  an  estate  to  avert  suspicion,  but  in  June,
1798,  escaped  to  the  Dutch  city  of  Paramaribo
and  sailed  for  London.  Having  obtained  his  par-
don in  the  following  year,  Isambert  returned  to
France,  where  Bonaparte  reinstated  him  in  the
army  with  the  rank  of  major-general,  and  attached
him  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Rochambeau,  who  was
preparing  to  sail  for  Santo  Domingo.  There  he
distinguished  himself  against  the  rebel  negroes,
and  was  killed  in  an  engagement  near  Caves.  He
published  "  Journal  des  faits  relatifs  a  la  journee
du  18  f ructidor,  du  transport,  du  sejour  et  de  Inva-
sion des  deportes,  suivi  d'un  abrege  historique
sur  la  Guiane  Francaise"  (2  vols.,  London,  1799),
and  "  Histoire  de  Saint  Domingue,  l'element  noir
et  la  colonisation  Francaise  "  (Sinnimari,  1798).

ISELIN,  Jacob  Christian  (e'-ze-leen),  Swiss
explorer,  b.  in  Basle  in  1753 ;  d.  in  Freiburg  in
1811.  He  studied  in  Geneva,  and  was  professor  of
history  in  the  University  of  Basle,  when,  in  1785,
he  inherited  a  large  estate  from  an  uncle,  and  re-
solved to  explore  the  New  World.  He  visited  the
Canary  islands,  Brazil,  Chili.  Peru,  the  Marquesas
islands,  Pomata,  and  Tahiti,  and  afterward  went
by  land  from  California  to  Texas,  descended
thence  to  Mexico  and  via  the  isthmus  of  Panama
to  South  America,  where  he  remained  altogether
twenty-two  years.  He  returned  in  1806  to  Europe
with  a  large  number  of  documents,  maps,  and
notes,  which  he  deposited  in  the  public  library  of
his  native  town,  and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his
life  to  researches  among  the  public  libraries  of
Europe,  thus  gathering  a  huge  collection  of  origi-
nal documents  on  America.  He  published  "  Ana-
lecta  Peruviana  seu  genera  et  species  plantarum  in
Peruvia  crescentium"  (2  vols.,  Geneva,  1808);
"  Monografia  de  las  voces  compuestas  de  Chile  "
(2  vols.,  Basle,  1809) ;  "  Ascencion  du  Pichincha  et
Chimborazo"  (Geneva,  1810);  "Du  mouvement
religieuse  dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud"  (Basle,  1809) ;
"  Histoire  de  la  conquete  et  de  la  domination
Espagnole  dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud,"  which  was
for  a  long  time  a  standard  work  on  the  conquests
and  explorations  of  European  adventurers  (6  vols.,
Basle.  1811,  with  charts).

ISERT,  Paul  Edmond  (e'-zert),  Danish  trav-
eller, b.  in  Copenhagen  in  1757;  d.  in  Guinea,
Africa,  in  1789.  He  went  to  Africa  in  1783  in  the
capacity  of  chief  surgeon,  resided  for  three  years
at  Fort  Christiansborg,  on  the  Guinea  coast,  and
after  exploring  the  country  of  the  Ashantees  em-
barked on  a  slaver  bound  for  the  Antilles.  During
the  voyage  a  part  of  the  negroes  revolted,  and  he
was  dangerously  wounded.  He  landed  at  Santa
Cruz,  visited  successively  St.  Eustache,  Guade-
loupe, Martinique,  Porto  Rico,  and  Cuba,  and
sailed  for  Europe  in  1788.  He  was  afterward  sent
to  Africa  by  the  Danish  government  to  found  a
colony  on  an  island  in  the  river  Volta.  He  pub-
lished "  Reise  nach  Guinea  und  den  Caraibischen
Inseln"  (Copenhagen,  1788;  reprinted  at  Berlin
and  Leipsic,  1790;  and  translated  into  Danish,
Swedish,  Dutch,  Spanish,  and  French,  Paris,  1793).


366


ISHAM


1TAB0RAHY


ISHAM,  .1  i rah.  soldier,  b.  in  Colchester,  Conn.,
in  May,  1778 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  6  Oct.,
1842.  His  father,  Capt.  John  Isham,  was  a  Revo-
hit  iouary  officer,  and  often  a  member  of  the  gen-
eral assembly  of  the  state.  The  son  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1797,  studied  law  with  David  Daggett
and  John  G.  Brainard,  and  established  himself  in
the  practice  of  his  profession  in  New  London  in
1800.  He  occupied  many  local  offices  of  public
trust,  was  at  one  time  mayor  of  New  London,  state's
attorney  for  New  London  county  from  1838  till
1842,  and  from  1840  till  his  death  was  judge  of
probate  for  New  London  district.  During  the  war
of  1812  with  Great  Britain  he  commanded  at  the
bombardment  of  Stonington.

ISLES,  Andr6  (eel),  Chevalier  des,  French  ad-
venturer, b.  in  Dieppe  in  1530 ;  d.  in  Florida  in  1565.
Admiral  Coligny,  having  resolved  to  secure  lands
in  America,  where  the  French  Protestants  could  be
at  liberty  to  enjoy  their  religion,  gave  Des  Isles
in  1560  two  vessels,  with  orders  to  discover  some
convenient  locality  not  occupied  by  European  set-
tlers. Sailing  from  Dieppe  in  May,  1560,  he  was
driven  by  storms  on  the  coast  of  Florida,  and  land-
ed in  July  near  a  cape,  which  he  named  French
cape  and  which  is  now  known  as  Cape  San  Juan.
He  discovered  on  5  Aug.  the  river  Royale,  built
a  fort,  and,  leaving  twenty  men  to  hold  it,  re-
turned to  France.  The  result  of  the  expedition
greatly  pleased  Admiral  Coligny,  but  religious  dis-
sensions prevented  him  from  sending  another  expe-
dition before  1562,  when  he  appointed  Capt.  Ribaut
governor  of  the  proposed  colonies,  and  gave  him
three  ships  carrying  600  emigrants.  Des  Isles  ac-
companied the  expedition,  and  acted  as  Ribaut's
lieutenant.  They  found  the  fort  destroyed  and  its
garrison  dead,  but  rebuilt  it  and  named  it  Fort
Royal,  and  Des  Isles  was  left  in  command  of  the
place  with  250  men.  Ribaut  returned  from  France
in  the  following  year  with  a  re-enforcement  of  300
men,  but  Coligny  had  appointed  a  new  commander
for  Fort  Royal,  the  Count  of  Laudonniere,  and  his
arrival  caused  trouble.  Des  Isles,  supported  by
Ribaut,  refused  to  relinquish  the  fort,  and  when
he  was  compelled  to  do  so  established  a  new  colony
at  the  mouth  of  Toubachire.  Everything  prospered
at  first,  but  soon  hostilities  began  between  the  ri-
vals, and  when  Ribaut  returned  with  re-enforce-
ments in  1565,  he  found  the  French  reduced  to
about  125  men.  He  pacified  the  captains,  and
went  on  an  exploration  of  the  coast,  but  during  his
absence  the  Spanish,  under  Menendez,  attacked
Fort  Royal,  and  Laudonniere,  in  spite  of  the  oppo-
sition of  Des  Isles,  signed  a  capitulation,  which  the
Spaniards  violated,  massacring  all  the  French.

ISOART,  Louis  (e-zo-ahr),  Spanish  mission-
ary, b.  in  Burgundy  in  1599  ;  d.  in  San  Jose,  Para-
guay, in  1640.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in  1624,  went
to  Buenos  Ayres  in  the  following  year,  and  in
1627  was  attached  to  the  missions  of  the  Caro
forests,  between  Yuvi  and  Piratini  rivers.  He
found  there  about  500  Indian  families,  which  he
civilized  and  established  in  a  village.  Five  years
later  his  superiors  sent  him  to  a  larger  field  of
labor  among  the  Tupi  and  Mamelo  Indians,  who
had  never  yet  permitted  a  European  to  cross
their  country,  and  were  reputed  the  most  warlike
Indians  of  those  regions.  Isoart  went  alone  to
their  forests,  and,  presenting  himself  to  the  ca-
cique, told  him  he  had  come  to  make  him  a  Chris-
tian. The  courage  of  the  missionary  impressed  the
chief,  and  through  his  influence  Isoart  was  enabled
to  establish  missions.  The  Indians  had  so  much
confidence  in  him  that  they  never  recognized  the
laws  of  Spain,  but  lived  for  a  century  under  the


rule  of  Isoart.  He  left  several  manuscripts,  which
were  afterward  published  in  "  Litterae  annusB  pro-
vincial Paraguaria?  Societates  Jesu  "  (2  vols.,  Pome,
1646) ;  "  Relations  et  progres  de  la  religion  Chre-
tienne  faits  au  Paraguay"  (1647);  "  Histoire,
chroniques,  et  usages  des  Indiens  Mamelos  et  Tu-
pis  "  (1649) ;  and  several  other  works.

ISSERTIEUX,  Diendonn6  Gabriel  Yves
(eess-err-tyuh),  Cotnte  d',  French  soldier,  b.  in
Plouharnel,  Brittany,  in  1753 ;  d.  in  Guiana  in
1819.  He  served  with  distinction,  as  a  volunteer,
in  the  war  of  American  independence  from  1776  till
the  surrender  of  Yorktown  in  1781,  when  he  accom-
panied the  Count  of  Saint  Simon,  who  carried  the
news  to  Louis  XVI.  He  served  afterward  in  the
body-guards,  and,  emigrating  to  the  United  States
when  the  guards  were  dissolved  in  1791,  he  opened
a  French  school  in  New  Orleans.  When  Napoleon
was  proclaimed  emperor  he  returned  to  France  and
was  appointed  captain  of  artillery.  He  acted  as
adjutant  to  Gen.  Lagrange  in  the  expedition  to
Dominica,  taking  part  in  the  bombardment  of  Les
Roseaux,  the  capital  of  the  English  colony,  on
23-25  Feb.,  1806,  and  was  promoted  major.  He
commanded  a  battalion  in  Cayenne  in  1807,  and
protested  when  Gov.  Hugues  surrendered  the  colo-
ny to  the  Portuguese  in  1811.  He  remained  a
prisoner  in  Kingston,  Jamaica,  till  1814,  when  he
was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  by  Louis  XVIII.
and  sent  again  to  command  in  Guiana.  He  is  the
author  of  "  La  verite  sur  la  capitulation  du  Gou-
verneur  Hugues  "  (Cayenne,  1819),  and  "  Memoire
a,  Sa  Majeste  l'Empereur  sur  la  situation  de  Cay-
enne a.  l'epoque  de  la  capitulation  "  (Paris,  1813).

ISTHUANFI,  Nicolas  (iss-too-ahn'-fe),  Hun-
garian physician,  b.  in  Comorn  in  1742 ;  d.  in
Paramaribo  in  1806.  He  went  to  the  West  In-
dies as  soon  as  he  was  graduated  in  Vienna,  prac-
tised medicine  in  St.  Eustache,  and  was  ap-
pointed president  of  the  sanitary  board  of  Dutch
Gxiiana  in  1773.  A  few  years  later  Baron  Malouet,
governor  of  French  Guiana,  engaged  Isthuanfi,
with  others,  to  reorganize  the  French  sanitary
system,  and  his  timely  measures  checked  an  epi-
demic of  yellow  fever  and  Asiatic  cholera  that
broke  out  in  Cayenne  in  1781.  He  also  thorough-
ly disinfected  the  city,  and  persuading  the  author-
ities to  offer  rewards  for  the  erection  of  handsome
residences.  At  the  beginning  of  the  revolution  in
1789,  Isthuanfi  still  held  the  office  of  president  of
the  board  of  health,  but  during  the  ensuing  troubles
his  advice  was  often  ignored,  and  he  was  even
imprisoned  in  1793.  He  escaped  to  Paramaribo,
bought  an  estate,  and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his
life  to  agricultural  experiments.  He  published
"  Traite  de  pharmacie  moderne  "  (Cayenne,  1781) ;
"  Traite  de  la  fievre  jaune  "  (1786) ;  "  Les  mala-
dies de  la  Guyane  "  (1787) ;  "  Medicinske  Voorden-
bock  gefolged  van  een  Verhandling  over  planten
voor  medicinske  gebroek  "  (Paramaribo,  1801) ;  and
"  Les  Guianes,  sont-elles  malsaines  ?  experience
d'un  medecin  "  (1801).

ITABORAHY,  Joaquim  Jos6  Rodrigues
Torres  (e-tah-bo-rah-e'),  Viscount  of,  Brazilian
statesman,  b.  in  S.  Joao  de  Itaborahy,  13  Dec.  1802 ;
d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  8  Jan..  1873.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Coimbra  in  1825,  and  on  his
return  to  his  native  country  in  1826  was  made  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  in  the  military  academy  of
Rio  Janeiro.  He  became  secretary  of  the  navy,  16
June,  1831,  remaining  at  the  head  of  his  department
during  several  administrations.  On  16  July,  1833,
he  retired  from  the  cabinet,  and  in  the  same  year
was  elected  to  congress,  taking  an  active  part  in
reforming  the  constitution  of  the  empire. Soon


ITAMARACl


ITURBIDE


367


afterward  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  prov-
ince of  Rio  Janeiro,  which  office  he  occupied  till
1839.  On  23  May,  1840,  he  again  entered  the  min-
istry as  secretary  of  the  navy,  but  the  cabinet  lasted
only  one  month.  He  was  then  elected  to  congress
again,  in  1844  was  appointed  senator  by  the  em-
peror, and  in  1849  was  made  secretary  of  state.
Assisted  by  the  financier  Bernardo  Franco,  he
founded  the  Brazilian  bank.  On  6  Sept.,  1853,  he
retired  from  the  cabinet,  being  appointed  council-
lor of  the  government  in  financial  matters,  and  in
the  same  year  was  nominated  president  of  the  bank
that  he  had  founded.  In  1859-'60  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  national  board  of  education,  and  by  his
advice  many  improvements  were  introduced,  espe-
cially in  the  imperial  college  of  Pedro  II.  He  was
after  1864  the  principal  leader  of  the  Conservative
party.  He  was  called  to  the  treasury  portfolio  dur-
ing the  war  between  Brazil  and  Paraguay,  in  1868,
and  served  till  peace  was  concluded,  when,  on  28
Sept.,  1870,  he  resigned.  In  1871  his  health  failed,
and  he  retired  from  public  life.

ITAMARACA,  Antonio  Peregrino  Maciel
Monteiro  (e-tah-mah  rah-cah),  Baron  of,  Brazilian
statesman,  b.  in  Pernambuco  in  1802;  d.  in  Lisbon.
Portugal,  5  Jan.,  1868.  He  studied  in  Coimbra
and  Paris,  and  was  graduated  in  medicine  from  the
university  of  the  latter  city  in  1828.  After  his  re-
turn to  Brazil  he  began  to  practise  his  profession,
but  soon  abandoned  it  to  take  an  active  part  in
politics.  He  was  elected  to  congress  from  the
province  of  Pernambuco,  joined  the  opposition
against  the  regent  Feijo  in  1836,  and  soon  was  con-
sidered one  of  the  leaders  of  his  party.  When
Feijo  was  forced  to  abdicate,  19  Sept.,  1837.  Ita-
maraca  was  called  to  take  charge  of  the  portfolio
of  foreign  relations,  ably  settled  the  Oyapoc  diffi-
culty with  France,  and  signed  several  treaties  of
commerce  with  other  foreign  powers.  In  1843  he
was  again  elected  deputy  by  the  province  of  Per-
nambuco, distinguishing  himself  as  an  orator,  till
congress  was  dissolved  by  the  victorious  Liberal
opposition.  In  1850  he  was  again  sent  to  congress,
and  was  elected  president  of  the  lower  house.
After  many  years  of  legislative  duties  he  was  ap-
pointed minister  to  Portugal.  He  wrote  many
poems,  most  of  which  remain,  in  manuscript.  A
collection  of  the  whole  is  now  (1887)  in  preparation.

ITAPARICA,  Manoel  de  Santa  Rita  (e-tah-
pah-re-cah),  Brazilian  poet,  b.  in  the  island  of  Ita-
parica  in  1704;  d.  about  1770.  He  was  admitted
to  the  novitiate  in  the  convent  of  Paraguazu  on  2
July,  1720,  and  in  1724  took  priestly  orders.  He
was  a  man  of  very  pronounced  temperament  and
faculties,  as  well  as  an  able  and  eloquent  preacher.
Although  he  did  so  much  for  the  progress  of  learn-
ing in  his  country,  he  passed  his  life  in  poverty.
The  work  that  made  his  name  famous  is  "  Poema
sacro  e  tragicomico  em  que  se  contem  a  vida  de
Santo  Eustachio  martyr  chamado  antes  Placido  e
de  sua  mulher  e  filhos.  Por  um  anonymo,  natural
da  ilha  de  Itaparica  da  Bahia,  Dado  a  luz  por  um
devoto  del  Santo,"  which  was  translated  into  Span-
ish and  Italian.  Itaparica  also  wrote  "Eusta-
chidos"  (1736);  "Um  Epigramma  latine  a  morte
do  Rei  Fidelisimo,"  "  Uma  Cancion  funebre,"  and
three  sonnets.

ITAUMA,  Candido  Borges  Monteiro  (e-tah-
oo'-mah),  Viscount  of,  Brazilian  physician  and
politician,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  12  Oct.,  1812;  d.
there,  25  Aug.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  as  sur-
geon in  the  academy  of  Rio  Janeiro  in  1833,  and
began  practice,  but  at  the  same  time  studied  medi-
cine, and  was  graduated  in  1834.  He  then  became
connected  with  the  medical  department  of  the


academy,  filling  various  chairs  till  1858,  and  dur-
ing this  time  was  the  first  to  introduce  modern
instruments  in  surgery.  He  was  physician  to  the
imperial  family,  and  in  1849  became  mayor  of  Rio
Janeiro.  Soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  com-
missioner of  emigration,  and  on  27  Aug.,  1858,
president  of  the  province  of  Sao  Paulo.  The  em-
peror created  him  baron  of  Itauma  and  senator  of
the  empire.  In  1869  he  went  to  Europe  with  the
intention  of  studying  improvements  in  medical
science,  but  on  his  return  was  invited  by  Dom  Pe-
dro II.  to  be  his  companion  in  his  journey  through
Europe.  On  its  termination  in  1872,  Dr.  Itauma
accepted  the  portfolio  of  agriculture  and  com-
merce, and  in  that  year  he  was  made  a  viscount.
As  minister  of  commerce  he  protected  the  emi-
gration of  Europeans,  introduced  many  useful
inventions,  and  supervised  the  construction  of
many  miles  of  telegraph  and  railroad.  He  was  en-
gaged on  this  enterprise  when  he  died,  so  poor  that
the  government  had  to  make  an  appropriation  for
the  support  of  his  family.  Dr.  Itauma  was  a  mem-
ber of  manv  scientific  societies.

ITURBIDE,  or  YTIRBIDE,  Agnstin  de  (e-
tur-be'-deh),  emperor  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Valladolid
(now  Morelia).  27  Sept.,  1783;  d.  in  Padilla,  19
July.  1824.  His  father  came  from  Navarre  shortly
before  his  birth,  and  settled  in  New  Spain.  The
son  studied  at  the  seminary  of  his  native  town  till
the  death  of  his  father  in  1798.  when  he  entered
the  provincial  infantry  as  sub-lieutenant,  and  in
1805  went  with  it  to  garrison  Jalapa,  and  married
Ana  Maria  Huarte,  of  Valladolid.  On  his  return
in  1809  he  aided  in  suppressing  a  revolutionary
movement,  and,  when  in  1810  Hidalgo  was  plan-
ning with  Allende  the  revolution  for  Mexican  in-
dependence, he  declined  to  join  them,  and  took  the
field  for  the
Spanish  cause,
joiningwithhis
force  Torcuato
Trujillo,  to  dis-
pute the  entry
of  the  insur-
gent army  to
the  capital  at
Monte  de  las
Cruces.  Itur-
bide  was  in  the
battle  of  30
Oct.,  and.  being
promoted  cap-
tain of  the  bat-
talion of  Tula,
was  sent  to  the
army  of  the
south  under
Garcia  Rio.  Im-
paired health
compelled  him  to  go  to  the  capital  on  leave  of
absence,  and  he  thus  escaped  the  fate  of  his  com-
mander, who  was  surprised  and  killed  by  the
insurgents.  After  a  visit  to  his  native  town  he
was  sent  to  Guanajuato  as  second  in  command
of  Garcia  Conde,  and  took  part  in  the  suppres-
sion of  the  rebellion,  capturing  one  of  the  prin-
cipal leaders  in  that  province.  Albino  Garcia.  He
was  then  appointed  colonel  of  the  regiment  of  Ce-
laya.  with  headquarters  at  Irapuato,  organized  the
defence  of  San  Miguel.  Chamacuero,  and  San  Juan
de  la  Vega,  and  defeated  the  forces  of  the  revolu-
tionary chiefs.  Rafael  Rayon,  Tovar,  and  Father
Torres.  In  1813  he  was  ordered  with  Llano  to
cover  Valladolid,  which  was  threatened  by  the
forces  of  Jose  Maria  Morelos,  and  he  repulsed  the


368


ITURBIDE


iturbide


forces  of  Morelos  on  22  Dec.  and  the  following
days,  and  completely  routed  them  at  Puruaran  on
15  Jan.,  1814.  He  was  repulsed  before  Coporo  by
Ignacio  Rayon  in  1815,  and  in  181(5  was  appointed
commander-in-chief  of  Guanajuato  and  Michoa-
can ;  but  his  cruelties  and  violent  measures  became
so  notorious  that  several  citizens  complained.  He
was  indicted,  and,  although  absolved  of  the  grav-
est charges,  was  dismissed,  as  the  Spanish  govern-
ment suspected  the  Mexican  officers.  He  retired
to  private  life,  maturing  plans  of  vengeance,  espe-
cially as  he  knew,  better  than  any  one  else,  the
state  of  public  opinion,  and  foresaw  the  final  over-
throw of  the  Spaniards.

On  the  proclamation  of  the  constitution  in  the
peninsula,  1820,  Iturbide  obtained  from  the  vice-
roy, Ruiz  de  Apodaca,  command  of  the  army
of'  the  south.  On  16  Nov.  he  left  Mexico  at  the
head  of  his  old  regiment  and  a  total  force  of  about
2,500  men,  and,  making  his  headquarters  at  Telo-
loapam,  began  to  win  over  the  officers  of  his  com-
mand to  his  plan.  He  feigned  encounters  with  the
revolutionist  loader  Guerrero,  with  whom,  in  reality,
he  was  in  secret  communication,  and  who  offered
to  assist  him  and  submit  to  his  orders.  Iturbide
reported  to  the  viceroy  that  he  had  nearly  repressed
the  revolution,  by  this  means  obtaining  re-enforce-
ments, and  on  22  Dec.  marched  from  Teloloapam,
and,  after  a  final  interview  with  Guerrero  in  Aca-
tempan,  10  Jan.,  1821,  surprised  and  captured  at
Barrabas  a  convoy  of  $525,000  in  silver  bars,  which
the  merchants  of  Vera  Cruz,  believing  that  the
revolution  was  suppressed,  had  sent  to  Acapulco.
He  now  proclaimed  in  the  little  town  of  Iguala,
24  Feb.,  1821,  his  plan  of  independence,  which  is
known  as  the  "  plan  de  Iguala,"  or  "  plan  de  las
tres  garantias,"  which  provided  for  the  protection
of  religion,  the  union  of  Spaniards  and  Mexicans,
and  independence  under  the  separate  government
of  Ferdinand  VII.,  or  a  prince  of  the  reigning  dy-
nasty. The  viceroy  sent  a  force  against  him  under
Gen.  Pascual  Lilian,  but  public  opinion  was  over-
whelmingly in  favor  of  independence,  and  every-
where the  military  chiefs  pronounced  for  Iturbide.
His  forces  increased  daily,  and  in  the  middle  of
April  numbered  over  6,000  men.  Meanwhile  the
viceroy  had  been  deposed  and  succeeded  provision-
ally by  Gen.  Novella,  who  hastily  erected  fortifica-
tions for  protecting  the  capital,  but  he  was  gradu-
ally abandoned  by  his  supporters,  and  when,  in
July,  the  new  viceroy,  O'Donoju,  arrived  in  Vera
Cruz,  he  resolved  to  treat  with  Iturbide.  They  had
an  interview  at  Cordova,  where,  on  24  Aug.,  they
concluded  a  treaty,  by  which  the  viceroy  recognized
the  independence  of  Mexico  under  the  reign  of
Ferdinand  VII.,  or  one  of  the  princes,  and  in  case
of  their  refusal  the  Mexicans  were  to  choose  an
emperor  for  themselves.  After  being  triumphant-
ly received  at  Puebla,  Iturbide  entered  the  capital,
27  Sept.,  1821,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  16,000
men.  A  junta  was  installed  with  O'Donoju  as  a
member,  and  the  next  day  the  declaration  of  inde-
pendence was  signed  and  proclaimed.  By  decree  of
the  junta  of  11  Oct.  a  regency  of  five  members,  in-
stead of  the  original  three,  was  formed,  with  Itur-
bide as  president,  and  he  was  at  the  same  time  ap-
pointed commander-in-chief,  with  the  title  of  "  se-
rene highness,"  and  an  annual  salary  of  $120,000.
The  Spanish  residents  that  desired  to  leave  the
country  were  permitted  to  do  so  without  molesta-
tion, and  this  and  other  liberal  measures  of  the
new  government  contributed  to  establish  peace.
The  few  remaining  Spanish  garrisons,  with  the  ex-
ception of  Vera  Cruz,  became  disheartened  and
surrendered,  and  the  provinces  of  Yucatan  and


Chiapas  and  the  Guatemala  canton  of  Soconusco
declared  their  independence,  but  were  afterward
united  with  the  Mexican  empire.

Soon  dissensions  broke  out  in  the  junta,  under
whose  interference  Iturbide  was  chafing,  the  unpaid
troops  were  discontented,  and  public  opinion  was
divided  between  monarchical  and  republican  ideas.
Hoping  for  immediate  relief,  Iturbide  hastened  the
convocation  of  the  1st  congress,  which  met,  24
Feb.,  1822,  but  it  obstinately  refused  to  grant  him
money  for  the  troops.  Thus  driven  to  extremes,
with  16.000  men  at  his  disposal,  and  aided  by  the
public  commotion  that  was  caused  by  the  arrival
of  the  news  that  the  treaty  of  Cordova  had  been
declared  void  in  Spain,  he  allowed  his  partisans  to
proclaim  him.  emperor  on  the  night  of  18  May.
This  movement  was  generally  sustained  by  the
troops,  and,  notwithstanding  its  resistance,  con-
gress finally  sanctioned  his  election  on  21  May,  and
received  his  oath  of  office,  and  on  21  July  he  was
solemnly  crowned  amid  pompous  ceremonies  in
the  cathedral  under  the  name  of  Agustin  I.  Soon
opposition  began  to  appear  everywhere,  and  when,
on  26  Aug.,  he  imprisoned  fifteen  deputies  to  con-
gress, who  were  suspected  of  participation  in  a
conspiracy  that  had  been  organized  in  Valladolid,
he  fell  into  disagreement  with  that  body,  and  on
31  Oct.  dissolved  it  arbitrarily.  The  "junta  in-
stituyente,"  which  succeeded  the  congress  on  2  Nov.,
was  unable  to  establish  order,  and  defection  be-
came general  among  the  army  officers.  Santa-
Anna,  who  had  been  ordered  to  Mexico,  proclaimed
the  republic  in  Vera  Cruz  on  2  Dec,  Guerrero  went
to  the  south  to  raise  an  insurrection,  and  Gen.
Echavarri,  who  had  been  ordered  against  Santa-
Anna,  joined  him,  signing  on  1  Feb.,  1823,  the
"  plan  de  Casa-Mata."  Driven  to  despair,  Iturbide
hastily  reassembled  the  congress  that  had  been
dissolved  by  him  four  months  before,  and  on  7
March  presented  his  abdication,  which  was  ignored
by  that  body.  It  declared  his  election  void  from
the  beginning,  and  decreed  that  he  should  imme-
diately leave  the  country  and  reside  in  Italy  with
a  pension  of  $25,000  yearly.  He  was  meanwhile
under  the  custody  of  Gen.  Bravo,  and  on  11  May
he  sailed  in  the  English  ship  "  Rawlins  "  for  Leg-
horn, where  he  arrived  on  2  Aug.  But  the  grand-
duke  did  not  desire  to  see  him  reside  there,  and  he
went  thence  to  London  in  the  beginning  of  1824.

His  Mexican  partisans,  meanwhile,  represented
that  the  country  desired  his  return,  and,  impelled
by  a  wish  to  recover  his  crown,  he  sailed  on  4
May,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  his  nephew,  the
Polish  colonel  Benseki,  and  three  priests,  for
Mexico,  and,  after  looking  vainly  for  some  of  his
partisans  in  the  Bay  of  San  Bernardo,  anchored  on
14  July  in  the  small  port  of  Soto  la  Marina,  un-
aware that  the  government,  meanwhile,  had  de-
clared him  a  traitor  and  an  outlaw  should  he  set
foot  again  on  Mexican  territory.  After  Benseki
had  obtained  permission  from  the  military  com-
mander, Felipe  de  la  Garza,  for  his  "  party  of  colo-
nists" to  land,  Iturbide  went  on  shore,  but  was
immediately  recognized,  notwithstanding  his  dis-
guise, and  arrested.  Garza  conducted  him  to  the
prison  of  the  town,  and  advised  him  to  prepare  to
die.  He  sent  for  his  chaplain,  but  the  commander,
meanwhile,  resolved  to  present  him  to  the  provin-
cial congress  of  Tamaulipas,  which  was  then  in
session  in  the  neighboring  town  of  Padilla.  He
arrived  there  on  19  July,  that  body  condemned
him  to  immediate  execution,  and  he  was  shot  on
the  evening  of  the  same  day  in  the  square  of  Pa-
dilla, after  assuring  the  multitude  that  he  was  not
a  traitor  to  his  country,  and  exhorting  them  to


ITURRI


IVERSON


369


obey  the  constitutional  government.  He  was
buried  in  the  small  cemetery  there,  but  under  the
administration  of  Gen.  Bustamante  in  1838  con-
gress ordered  his  remains  to  be  transported  to  the
city  of  Mexico,  and  on  25  Sept.  of  that  year,  after
solemn  ceremonies,  they  were  placed  in  the  chapel
of  San  Felipe  de  Jesus,  in  the  cathedral,  in  a  mar-
ble sarcophagus.  After  his  execution  congress  de-
creed that  his  family  should  reside  in  Colombia,
giving  them  a  yearly  pension  of  $8,000 ;  but,  there
being  no  ship  for  that  country,  his  wife  was  per-
mitted to  go  to  the  United  States.  She  lived  for
many  years  in  Philadelphia,  and  then  went  to  Ba-
yonne,  France. — The  emperor's  elder  son,  Angel,
died  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  18  July,  1872,  leaving  a
son,  Agustix,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1863,  who
was  adopted  by  Maximilian  as  heir  to  the  throne,
and  after  the  death  of  his  father  returned  to  the
United  States. — The  emperor's  younger  son  died
in  Paris,  France,  in  May,  1873.

ITUBRI,  Francisco  Javier  (e-toor'-re).  South
American  missionary,  b.  in  Santa  Fe  de  la  Vera
Cruz,  Argentine  Republic,  in  1738 ;  d.  in  Italy  after
1800.  He  was  a  Jesuit,  and  labored  among  the
Paraguay  Indians.  After  the  expulsion  of  the
Jesuits  he  went  to  Rome,  where  he  acted  as  private
tutor  to  the  younger  members  of  the  Spanish  lega-
tion. He  wrote  "  Carta  critica  sobre  la  historia  de
America  del  Sefior  D.  Juan  Bautista  Mufioz  escrita
de  Roma,"  in  which  he  inveighs  bitterly  against
Muiioz  and  other  Spanish  writers  who  calumniated
the  Americans  (Madrid,  1798).  and  "Dafios,  que
debe  temer  la  Espafia  de  la  libertad  con  que  se
calumnian  sus  colonias  "  (1800).  Both  works  were
reprinted  (Buenos  Ayres,  1818).  He  also  wrote
"  Historia  natural,  ecclesiastica,  civil,  del  Vireynato
de  Buenos  Ayres,"  the  manuscript  of  which  is  in
the  Jesuit  college  at  Rome.

ITURRIAGA,  Manuel  Mariano  de  (e-toor-e-
ah'-gah),  Mexican  clergyman,  b.  in  Puebla  de  Los
Angeles.  Mexico,  24  Dec,  1728;  d.  in  Italy  about
1814.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1744.
and  became  professor  of  rhetoric,  philosophy,  and
theology  in  Guatemala  and  Puebla.  After  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  society  in  1767  he  went  to  Italy,
where  bishops  from  every  part  of  Europe  con-
sulted him  on  theology.  He  was  one  of  the
most  voluminous  of  writers,  and  published  works,
in  Spanish,  Latin,  and  Italian,  on  religion,  phi-
losophy, and  general  literature.  He  translated
into  Spanish  most  of  the  dramas  of  Metastasio,  as
well  as  some  of  the  masterpieces  of  the  French
stage.  His  works  published  before  he  was  banished
from  America  are  "  El  Dolor  Rey :  Pom  pa  f  unebre
con  que  la  Ciudad  de  Guatemala  oro  la  Memoria
de  la  Sefiora  Dona  Maria  Barbara  de  Portugal,
Kt 'ina  de  Espafia  "  (Guatemala,  1759)  and  "  Oracion
funebre  pronunciada  en  la  Catedral  de  Guatemala
en  elogio  de  la  espresada  Reina"  (1759).  A  full
list  of  Iturriaga's  works  will  lie  found  in  Backer's
"  Bibliotheque  des  ecrivains  de  la  Compagnie  de
Jesus  "  (2d  series,  Liege,  1854).

ITCRRIBALZ  AGA,  Antonio  de  (e-toor-re-bal-
thah'-gah),  Spanish  naval  officer,  b.  in  Motrico,  11
Aug.,  1656;  d.  in  1728.  When  he  was  twelve  years
old  his  father,  a  pilot,  took  him  to  sea  and  in-
structed him  in  the  art  of  navigation.  He  was  ap-
pointed chief  pilot  in  1686,  and  served  for  thirty
years  in  South  America.  He  was  commissioned
admiral  in  1702,  and  ordered  to  take  command  of
the  Spanish  forces  in  South  American  waters,  but
was  nevertheless  permitted  as  a  special  favor  to
retain  the  office  and  the  emoluments  of  chief  pilot.
He  rendered  great  service  to  his  country  by  re-
organizing the  Spanish  navy,  building  navy-yards
vol.  m. — 24


in  Montevideo  and  Buenos  Ayres,  and  designing
new  models  for  men-of-war.  He  successfully  op-
posed the  English  Admiral  Byng  in  the  Mediter-
ranean sea  in  1718,  and  saved  in  1726  an  immense
treasure  that  had  been  brought  by  galleons  from
New  Spain,  convoying  it  safely  to  Santander.  For
this,  Phdip  V.  pensioned  and  ennobled  him.  Itur-
ribalzaga  published  "Las  Reglas  y  proporciones
para  la  construccion  de  bajeles,"  with  plans  (Se-
ville, 1721),  and  "Historia  de  la  Nautica  en  los
Dominios  Espafioles  de  America."

ITURRIGARAY,  Jose  de  (e-too-re-gah-ri),
viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Cadiz,  Spain,  about  1760 ;
d.  there  about  1815.  He  distinguished  himself  as  a
colonel  in  the  war  between  Spain  and  France,  and
came  to  Mexico  in
the  first  days  of
January,  1803,  as-
suming office  as
vieerov,  5  Feb.,
1803.  "  During
his  administra-
tion the  first  at-
tempts in  vacci-
nation were  made
under  the  direc-
tion of  Francisco
Javier  Balmis.and
also  in  using  qui-
nine in  yellow  fe-
ver. Almost  all
the  time  of  the
viceroy  was  occu-
pied in  providing
sums  of  money
that  were  due  to
France,  and  in
maintaining  Cu-
ba, Puerto  Rico,  and  Florida  in  a  state  of  defence,
in  view  of  the  impending  war  with  England.  To
provide  the  necessary  sum.  amounting  to  over  $41,-
000.000,  all  sources  of  public  wealth  being  exhaust-
ed, desperate  financial  measures  were  resorted  to,
and  much  church  property  was  sold.  On  9  Dec,
1803.  he  erected,  amid  costly  festivities,  though  the
funds  for  necessary  public  .expenses  were  exhausted,
the  bronze  statue  of  Charles  IV..  which  now  si  amis
on  the  Paseo  de  la  Refonna.  He  attended  with
care  to  the  development  of  mines.  He  founded
colleges,  improved  the  public  roads,  organized  and
disciplined  the  militia  and  army,  and  fortified
cities.  He  had  a  dispute  with  the  United  States
about  the  boundary  between  Texas  and  Louisiana,
which  he  arranged  to  the  satisfaction  of  all.  When
Charles  IV.  abdicated  in  favor  of  his  son,  Ferdi-
nand VII.,  Iturrigaray  seemed  disposed  to  disobey
the  government,  but  was  compelled  by  the  audiencia
to  proclaim  the  new  king.  When  in  May  both
Charles  IV.  and  Ferdinand  VII.  were  imprisoned  by
Napoleon  in  Bayonne,  and  the  French  rule  began  in
Spain,  he  openly  disobeyed  orders  from  the  popu-
lar junta,  and  it  is  alleged  that  he  favored  the  in-
dependence of  Mexico,  intending  to  proclaim  him-
self king.  A  conspiracy  was  now  formed  against
him  under  Gabriel  Yermo,  a  rich  Spaniard,  and
during  the  night  of  15  Sept.,  1808,  the  govern-
ment palace  was  occupied  by  a  force  of  the  con-
spirators, and  Iturrigaray  arrested  and  declared
deposed.  On  25  Sept.  he  was  transported  as  pris-
oner to  San  Juan  de  Ulna,  and  on  6  Dec.  sent  to
Spain  in  the  frigate  "  San  Justo."  He  died  before
the  termination  of  his  trial,  which  was  long  delayed.

IVERSON.  Alfred,  senator,  b.  in  Burke  countv,
Ga.,  3  Dee.,  1798;  d.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  4  March,  1873.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1820,  studied  law,


JL+.


370


IVES


1VISON


and  practised  at  Columbus,  Ga.  He  was  three
times  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  the  lower
house,  and  once  in  the  upper,  and  was  for  seven
years  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  for  the  Colum-
bus circuit.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1844,
and  in  1846  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat.
He  was  afterward  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and
took  his  seat  on  3  Dec,  1855,  but  withdrew,  28  Jan.,
1861,  on  the  passage  by  his  state  of  an  ordinance
of  secession.  While  in  the  senate  he  was  for  a
long  time  chairman  of  the  committee  on  claims.
He  was  an  open  advocate  of  disunion,  and  one  of
the  leaders  of  the  secession  movement.  Just  be-
fore withdrawing  from  the  senate  he  said  in  a
speech  that  the  southern  states  would  never  be
satisfied  with  any  concession  "  that  does  not  fully
recognize,  not  only  the  existence  of  slavery  in  its
present  form,  but  the  right  of  the  southern  people
to  emigrate  to  the  common  territories  with  their
slave  property,  and  their  right  to  congressional
protection,  while  the  territorial  existence  lasts."
After  hostilities  had  begun,  Mr.  Iverson  became
colonel  of  a  regiment  that  he  had  raised  for  the
Confederate  army,  and  in  November,  1862,  was
commissioned  brigadier-general.

IVES,  Levi,  physician,  b.  in  1750;  d.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  17  Oct.,  1826.  He  was  a  skilful
practitioner,  a  founder  of  the  New  Haven  medical
society,  and  one  of  the  editors  of  "  Cases  and  Ob-
servation," which  was  reputed  to  be  the  first  medi-
cal journal  that  was  published  in  the  United  States.
— His  son,  Eli,  physician,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
7  Feb.,  1779 ;  d.  there,  8  Oct.,  1861,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1799,  and  for  the  next  two  years  was
rector  of  the  Hopkins  grammar-school  in  New
Haven.  He  studied  medicine  in  the  mean  time,  and
in  1801  began  practice  with  his  father,  meeting
with  great  success.  In  1813,  together  with  the
elder  Silliman,  he  secured  the  establishment  of  the
medical  department  of  Yale  college,  and  he  was
professor  of  materia  medica  there  from  1813  till
1829.  He  occupied  the  chair  of  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine  from  1829  till  1852,  when  he
resigned,  but  subsequently  resumed  his  professor-
ship for  a  short  period.  He  gave  special  attention
to  indigenous  vegetable  remedies,  and  was  one  of
the  first  to  employ  chloroform,  having  administered
it  in  1831  by  inhalation  for  the  relief  of  a  case  of
difficult  respiration.  He  founded,  and  was  for
many  years  president  of,  the  Horticultural  and
Pomological  societies,  and  spent  much  time  and
labor  in  the  maintenance  of  a  botanical  garden.
He  had  been  president  of  the  State  and  National
medical  association,  and  was  an  active  advocate  of
temperance,  education,  and  emancipation.  He  con-
tributed four  articles  to  the  "  Journal  of  Science,"
and  published  an  "  Address  before  the  New  Haven
Horticultural  Society"  (1837).  —  Eli's  grandson,
Charles  Miliums,  physician,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  22  June,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1852,  and  at  Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadel-
phia, in  1854.  He  began  practice  in  New  Haven
in  1856,  and  in  1868-'73  was  professor  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine  in  Yale.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  an  article  on  "  Prophylaxis  of  Phthisis  Pul-
monalis,"  and  a  prize  essay  on  the  '•  Therapeutic
Value  of  Mercury  and  its  Preparations,"  both  pub-
lished by  the  Connecticut  medical  society.

IVES,  Levi  Silliman,  clergyman,  b.  in  Meri-
den,  Conn.,  16  Sept.,  1797 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  13
Oct.,  1867.  His  studies  were  interrupted  by  the
war  of  1812,  in  which  he  served  for  about  a  year.
He  entered  Hamilton  college  in  1816,  but  withdrew,
owing  to  failing  health.  In  1819-  he  united  with
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  in  1822  was


made  deacon,  in  which  year  he  married  a  daughter
of  Bishop  Hobart.  He  was  ordained  priest  by  Bish-
op White  in  1823,  and  held  pastorates  in  Batavia,
N.  Y.,  and  in  Philadelphia  and  Lancaster,  Pa.  In
1831  he  was  elected  bishop  of  North  Carolina.  He
manifested  great  interest  in  education,  and  espe-
cially in  the  religious  training  of  the  negro  slaves,
for  whom  he  prepared  a  catechism.  Bishop  Ives
sympathized  strongly  with  the  tractarian  move-
ment in  England,  and  in  1848-'9  began  to  publish
and  maintain  doctrines  that  were  objectionable  to
the  majority  in  his  diocese.  A  severe  struggle  en-
sued. Bishop  Ives  at  first  publicly  renounced  the
doctrines  that  he  had  espoused,  but  returned  to
them  again,  and  on  Christmas-day,  1852,  while  in
Europe,  made  formal  submission  to  the  pope  at
Rome,  and  became  a  Roman  Catholic.  In  the  en-
suing general  convention  he  was  pronounced  ipso
facto  deposed  from  his  bishopric.  On  his  return  to
New  York  he  became  professor  of  rhetoric  in  St.
Joseph's  theological  seminary,  and  lecturer  on  the
same  subject  in  the  convents  of  the  Sacred  Heart
and  the  Sisters  of  Charity.  He  also  established  the
Catholic  protectory  for  destitute  children,  was  its
first  president,  and  bequeathed  his  library  to  this
institution,  which  he  left  in  a  flourishing  condition.
He  wrote  a  "  Catechism  "  (New  York) ;  "  Manual
of  Devotion  " ;  "  Humility  a  Ministerial  Qualifica-
tion "  (1840) ;  "  Sermons  on  the  Obedience  of  Faith  "
(1849) ;  and  "  The  Trials  of  a  Mind  in  its  Progress
to  Catholicism :  a  Letter  to  his  Old  Friends  "  (Bos-
ton, 1853 ;  London,  1854).

IVES,  Thomas  Poynton,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  17  Jan.,  1834;  d.  in  Havre,
France,  17  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  the  son  of  a  mer-
chant in  Providence,  and  when  the  civil  war  began
offered  his  services  to  the  government,  entering  the
navy  as  a  volunteer.  At  the  same  time  he  pre-
sented his  yacht  to  the  navy  department,  and  re-
fused to  receive  any  compensation  for  his  services
as  an  officer  of  the  navy.  He  became  acting  master,
3  Sept.,  1862,  acting  volunteer  lieutenant,  for  "  effi-
cient and  gallant  conduct,"  26  May,  1863,  and
acting  volunteer  lieutenant-commander,  7  Nov.,
1864.  He  bore  an  active  part  in  the  earlier  opera-
tions against  the  Hatteras  forts  and  at  Roanoke
island,  was  then  transferred  to  the  Potomac  flotilla,
and  subsequently  assigned  to  ordnance  duty  at
the  Washington  navy-yard.  Illness  compelled  him
to  tender  his  resignation,  which  the  department  re-
fused to  accept,  but  granted  him  leave  of  absence.

IVISON,  Henry,  publisher,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scot-
land, 25  Dec,  1808 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  26  Nov.,
1884.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1820,  and
was  apprenticed  to  William  Williams,  of  Utica,  for
the  purpose  of  learn-
ing the  bookbinder's
trade.  After  serv-
ing his  time  he  con-
tinued with  his  em-
ployer until  about
1830,  when  he  estab-
lished the  house  of
H.  Ivison  and  Co.  in
Auburn,  N.  Y.  In
1846  he  removed  to
New  York  city,  and
became  associated
with  Mark  H.  New-
man in  the  publish-
ing business,  and  af-
ter Mr.  Newman's
death  in  1853  the
firm  became  Ivison  and  Phinney.  This  house
made  a  specialty  of  publishing  educational  works,


I  WERT


IXTLILXOCHITL


371


and  became  one  of  the  largest  in  the  United
States,  having  a  list  of  over  300  school-books,  in-
cluding "  Webster's  School  Dictionary,"  "  Dana's
Geology,"  "Gray's  Botany,"  "Robinson's  Mathe-
matics," "Fasquelle's  French  Course,"  and  "Wells's
Scientific  Series."  On  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Phin-
ney  in  1866,  the  firm-name  became  Ivison,  Blake-
man,  Taylor  and  Co.,  and  in  1880  Mr.  Ivison  retired
from  active  participation  in  the  business,  and  was
succeeded  by  his  only  son,  David  B.  Ivison.

IWERT,  Sebald  (e'-vert),  Dutch  navigator,  b.
in  Antwerp  in  1558 ;  d.  in  Magellan  in  1603.  He
became  chief  of  staff  to  Simon  de  Cordes  when  the
latter  succeeded,  on  the  death  of  Admiral  Jacques,
to  the  command  of  the  Dutch  South  American  ex-
ploring expedition  of  1598.  The  expedition  arrived
in  Buenos  Ayres  in  December,  and  anchored  in
April,  1599,  inside  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  near  the
Penguin  islands,  in  a  bay  that  they  named  Mussel
bay.  A  few  days  later  they  advanced  300  miles
and  entered  a  water  which  they  named  Green
bay.  After  remaining  here  three  months  and  suf-
fering greatly  from  cold  and  sickness,  they  left
at  the  end  of  August,  and  after  various  other  ad-
ventures sailed  for  Antwerp  in  February,  1600.  On
28  Feb.,  120  miles  from  the  continent,  Iwert  dis-
covered a  group  of  three  islands  which  he  named  the
Sebald  islands.  In  1603  he  went  again  to  Magel-
lan, to  join  the  expedition  of  Olivier  de  Noort,  but
died  a  few  days  after  reaching  the  Penguin
islands.  He  made  a  valuable  chart  of  parts  of  the
South  American  coast,  and  published  "  Relation
du  voyage  des  Amiraux  Mahn  et  Simon  de  Cordes
au  detroit  de  Magellan  "  (Leyden,  1603,  with  charts).

IXTLILCUECHAHUA  (isst  -  leel  -  quay  -  chah'-
wah),  Toltec  king,  b.  about  734 ;  d.  about  825.  He
was  the  son  of  Chalchiuhtlanetzin,  first  Toltec  king
and  founder  of  that  monarchy.  Ixtlilcuechahua
ascended  the  throne  of  Tula  in  771,  inherited  the
wisdom  and  prudence  of  his  father,  and  was  be-
loved by  his  subjects.  Though  he  did  his  best  to
maintain  peace  with  the  neighboring  nations,  he
defended  his  own  and  enlarged  his  dominions  by
conquest  of  the  countries  that  attacked  Tula.  He
made  great  exertions  to  civilize*  his  kingdom,
establishing  schools  for  teaching  useful  arts  and
industries,  and  appointed  Huematzin  as  chroni-
cler of  the  kingdom,  giving  him  the  special  charge
of  collecting  the  historical  paintings  which  his
nation  had  preserved  through  all  its  peregrina-
tions and  which  afterward  formed  the  celebrated
Teomaxtli.  He  reigned  fifty-two  years,  and.  ac-
cording to  the  Toltec  law,  resigned  in  favor  of  his
immediate  heir,  Huetzin.  in  823.

IXTLILXOCHITL  I.  (isst -leel- sot -cheetle'),
Texcocan  king,  d.  in  1419.  He  was  the  son  of  the
celebrated  King  Techotlalatzin  who  ascended  the
throne  in  1357,  and  his  name  means  black  flower's
face.  The  king  of  Atzcapotzalco,  Tezozomoc,  was
his  enemy,  and  intended  to  dethrone  him  and  oc-
cupy his  place.  With  this  intention  he  made  an
arrangement  with  the  other  kings  of  the  valley  of
Mexico  who  were  tributaries  of  the  kingdom  of
Texcoco,  and  they  proclaimed  a  rebellion.  But
Ixtlilxochitl  was  acknowledged  by  several  of  the
chiefs  assembled  in  the  city  of  Huexutla,  and
Tezozomoc,  gathering  a  strong  army,  marched
against  Texcoco,  but  was  defeated,  and  ixtlilxochitl
granted  him  a  generous  pardon.  The  ambitious
Tezozomoc  was  not  grateful  for  this  act  of  mercy,
and  when  he  returned  to  his  kingdom  occupied
himself  in  preparing  a  new  expedition  against
Texcoco.  With  a  powerful  army  he  entered  the
kingdom  again,  and  though  Ixtlilxochitl  was  pre-
pared to  resist  him,  he  was  surprised  in  a  wood


where  he  was  hunting.  Immediately  he  and  those
who  accompanied  him  were  put  to  death,  the  royal
insignia  were  carried  to  Atzcapotzalco,  and  Tezo-
zomoc was  crowned  king  of  Texcoco.  Ixtlilxo-
chitl's  son  witnessed  from  a  tree  the  death  of  his
father  and  swore  to  avenge  it,  as  he  did,  killing  in
1531  Tezozomoc's  son  and  successor,  Maxtla.

IXTLILXOCHITL  II.,  Texcocan  king,  b.
about  1500;  d.  about  1550.  He  was  the  son  of
Netzahualpilli,  king  of  Texcoco.  The  astrologer
who  cast  the  boy's  horoscope  at  his  birth  advised
his  father  to  take  the  infant's  life,  since,  if  he  lived
to  grow  up.  he  was  destined  to  unite  with  the
enemies  of  his  country  and  overturn  its  institu-
tions and  religion.  But  the  old  monarch  replied,
according  to  the  chroniclers,  that  the  time  had
arrived  when  the  sons  of  Quetzalcoatl  were  to
come  from  the  east  to  take  possession  of  the  land ;
and,  if  the  Almighty  had  selected  his  child  to  co-
operate with  them  in  the  work,  his  will  might  be
done.  When  he  was  about  twelve  years  old  the  lad
formed  a  band  of  followers  of  his  own  age,  with
whom  he  practised  military  exercises,  throwing  the
whole  city  into  uproar  and  confusion,  and  when
some  of  his  father's  counsellors  repeated  the  advice
of  the  astrologers  he  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a
party  and.  entering  the  houses  of  the  counsellors,
dragged  them  forth  and  put  them  to  death.  For
this  he  was  seized  and  brought  before  his  father,
but  the  latter  contented  himself  with  bestowing  an
admonition  on  the  culprit.  As  he  grew  older  the
prince  took  an  active  part  in  the  wars  of  his  coun-
try, and  when  no  more  than  seventeen  years  old
had  won  for  himself  the  insignia  of  a  victorious
captain.  In  1516  Netzahualpilli  died,  and  the  suc-
cession was  contested  by  two  of  his  sons,  Caeama-
tzin  and  Ixtlilxochitl.  The  former  was  supported
by  Montezuma,  emperor  of  Mexico,  but  the  latter,
appealing  to  the  patriotic  sentiment  of  his  nation,
would  have  persuaded  them  that  his  brother  was
too  much  in  the  Mexican  interest  to  be  time  to  his
own  country.  A  civil  war  ensued,  and  ended  by  a
compromise,  by  which  one  half  of  the  kingdom,
with  the  capital,  remained  to  Cacamatzin  and  the
northern  part  to  his  brother.  Ixtlilxochitl  became
from  that  time  the  enemy  of  Montezuma.  On  the
arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  the  young  chieftain  sent
an  embassy  to  Cortes  while  he  was  at  Tlaxcala.  of-
fering him  his  services  and  asking  his  aid  in  re-
turn. Through  the  influence  of  Cortes,  Cacamatzin
was  deposed  and  Ixtlilxochitl  finally  placed  on  the
throne.  He  was  faithful  to  the  Spaniards,  and
fought  with  them  during  the  time  of  the  conquest.
As  years  passed  he  became  more  and  more  the
friend  of  the  conqueror  and  the  enemy  of  his
country  and  race.  His  important  services  have
been  commemorated  by  the  Spanish  historians,  who
have  given  him  the  melancholy  glory  of  contribut-
ing more  than  any  other  chieftain  of  America  to
enslave  his  countrymen.  After  the  submission  of
Mexico  he  was  baptized  and  took  the  name  of
Hernan  Cortes,  after  that  of  the  conqueror,  who
was  his  godfather  on  this  occasion.  Afterward  he
took  great  interest  in  the  propagation  of  Chris-
tianity, and  brought  in  a  bag  the  first  stones  to
build  the  church  of  the  convent  of  San  Francisco
in  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  accompanied  Cortes  on
his  expedition  to  Hibueras  in  1525.

IXTLILXOCHITL,  Fernando  de  Alba,Mexi-
can  historian,  b.  in  Texcoco  in  1570:  d.  therein
1649.  He  was  descended,  through  his  mother,
from  the  ancient  kings  of  Texcoco,  and.  on  the
death  of  his  eldest  brother  in  1602.  he  was  declared
by  a  royal  decree  heir  to  the  titles  and  possessions
of  his  family. The  property,  however,  does  not


372


IZARD


IZCOHUATL


appear  to  have  been  large,  as  he  complained  in
1608  of  the  deplorable  state  of  misery  to  which  the
posterity  of  the  kings  of  Texcoco  were  reduced.  At
this  time  he  was  employed  as  interpreter  by  the
viceroy,  which  appointment  he  owed  to  his  learn-
ing and  skill  in  explaining  the  hieroglyphic  pic-
tures of  the  ancient  Mexicans.  He  had  also  a  pro-
found knowledge  of  the  traditions  of  his  ancestors
which  were  preserved  in  the  national  songs,  and
was  intimate  with  several  old  Indians  famous  for
their  knowledge  of  Mexican  history.  He  turned
his  own  labors  and  those  of  his  friends  to  account
in  composing  works  on  the  history  of  his  country.
They  remained  unknown  until  their  importance
was  revealed  bv  Clavigero,  and  afterward  by  Hum-
boldt. The  former  says  that  they  were  written  in
Spanish  by  command  of  the  viceroy,  and  were  de-
posited in  the  library  of  the  Jesuits  in  Mexico.
There  were  copies  also  in  other  libraries.  The  his-
tory was  divided  into  thirteen  books  or  relations,
many  of  which  were  repetitions  of  the  former  rela-
tions, and  covered  the  period  from  the  most  ancient
times  to  the  destruction  of  the  Mexican  empire.
The  thirteenth  book  was  printed  under  the  title
"  Horribles  crueldades  de  los  conquistadores
de  Mexico  y  de  los  Indios,  que  los  ayudaron  en
subyugar  aquel  imperio  a  la  corona  de  Espana  "
(Mexico,  1829  :  translated  into  French  by  H.  Ter-
naux-Compans,  Paris,  1838).  Afterward  Ternaux-
Compans,  having  obtained  a  complete  copy  of  the
whole  thirteen  books  from  Madrid,  translated  them
into  French  under  the  title  "  Histoire  des  Chichi-
mecas  et  des  anciens  rois  de  Tezcuco"  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1840).  This  work  is  among  the  most  authen-
tic on  the  ancient  history  of  Mexico.  Both  in
style  and  critical  discrimination  it  is  superior  to
the  histories  of  Spanish  authors  and  it  is  free  from
their  digressions  and  displays  of  learning.  Pres-
cott  calls  the  author  the  Livius  of  Anahuac.

IZARD,  Ralph,  statesman,  b.  near  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1742 ;  d.  in  South  Bay,  near  Charleston,
30  May,  1804.  His  grandfather  was  one  of  the
founders  of  South  Carolina.  Ralph  inherited  a
large  estate  in  land  and
slaves,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Cambridge,  Eng-
land. He  then  returned
to  America,  took  pos-
session of  his  estate,  and
passed  much  of  his  time
in  New  York  in  the
society  of  Lieut.-Grov.
James  De  Lancey,  whose
niece,  Alice,  he  married.
In  1771  he  settled  in
London,  where  he  pos-
sessed the  friendship  of
Burke  and  other  distin-
guished men, and  thence
retired  to  the  continent
in  1774,  in  consequence
of  the  strained  relations
between  the  mother
country  and  the  Ameri-
can colonies.  While  in  England  his  friends  there
were  desirous  of  presenting  him  at  court,  but  he
always  declined  the  honor,  because  as  a  subject  it
would  have  been  necessary  for  him  to  bow  the
knee,  which  he  said  he  never  would  do  to  mortal
man.  On  30  Dec,  1776,  congress  appointed  him
a  commissioner  at  the  court  of  the  grand-duke  of
Tuscany.  He  resided  in  Paris  while  so  acting,  and
supported  Arthur  Lee  against  Silas  Deane,  Frank-
lin, and  other  American  agents  in  France.  Izard
returned  to  the  United  States  on  10  July,  1780,  and


/~/


$CL. )l/bT(L.


immediately  repaired  to  Gen.  Washington's  head-
quarters, where  he  happened  to  be  when  Arnold's
treachery  was  discovered.  He  was  instrumental  in
securing  Gen.  Greene's  appointment  to  the  south-
ern army,  and  pledged  his  large  estate  as  a  security
for  the  funds  required  for  the  purchase  of  ships-of-
war  in  Europe.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Conti-
nental congress  in  1782-3,  U.  S.  senator  from  South
Carolina  from  1789  till  1795,  and  was  president  of
the  senate  pro  tempore  during  the  first  session  of
the  3d  congress.  He  was  a  man  of  marked  abil-
ity and  eloquence,  and  honest  as  a  legislator,  but
his  hasty  temper  and  want  of  control  rendered
him  incompetent  as  a  diplomatist.  No  man  en-
joyed the  confidence  of  Gen.  Washington  in  a
higher  degree  than  he  did.  His  "  Correspondence
from  1774  to  1784,"  with  a  short  memoir,  was  pub-
lished by  his  daughter,  Anne  Izard  Deas  (Bos-
ton, 1844). — His  son,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  South
Carolina  in  1777;  d.in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  22  Nov.,
1828,  after  completing  a  collegiate  course  and  mak-
ing the  tour  of  Europe,  was  appointed  a  lieutenant
of  artillery,  2  June,  1794.  He  was  engineer  of  forti-
fications in  Charleston  harbor  in  1798,  became  cap-
tain in  July,  1799,  and  aide  to  Gen.  Hamilton
on  16  Dec,  1799,  but  resigned  in  1803.  He  was
reappointed  as  colonel  of  the  2d  artillery,  12
March,  1812,  became  brigadier-general,  12  March,
1813,  and  major-general,  24  Jan.,  1814.  He  was
governor  of  Arkansas  territory  from  March,  1825,
till  his  death.  He  published  "  Official  Correspond-
ence with  the  War  Department  in  1814  and  1815  "
(Philadelphia,  1816). — Another  son,  Ralph,  a  lieu-
tenant in  the  U.  S.  navy,  was  distinguished  in  the
war  with  Tripoli. — George's  son,  James  F.,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Pennsylvania  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Camp  Izard,
on  Withlacoochee  river,  Florida,  5  March,  1836,  was
graduated  at  the  IT.  S.  military  academy  in  1828,
and  appointed  2d  lieutenant  of  infantry.  He  was
in  garrison  at  Jefferson,  Mo.,  and  at  Fort  Niagara,
was  on  topographical  duty  in  1831-'2,  and  served
in  the  Black  Hawk  war  in  1832.  He  became  1st
lieutenant  of  dragoons  on  4  March,  1833,  and  served
in  the  Florida  war.  He  died  of  wounds  that  he
had  received  in  a  skirmish.

IZCOHUATL,  or  IZIOCATL  (iss-co-wat'tel),
emperor  of  Mexico,  b.  about  the  end  of  the  14th
century ;  d.  in  1436.  He  was  an  illegitimate  son
of  the  emperor  Acamapichill,  and  ascended  the
throne  of  Mexico  in  1427.  The  Mexicans  regarded
him  at  first  with  contempt,  because  his  mother
was  a  slave,  but  they  appreciated  him  at  last,  for
he  inherited  the  virtues,  prudence,  valor,  and  talent
of  his  father.  The  tyrant  Maxtla,  after  having
put  Izcohuatl's  brother,  Chimalpopoca,  to  death,
continued  to  oppress  the  Mexican  nation,  and  the
monarch  determined  to  shake  off  the  yoke.  At
that  time  Maxtla  had  also  usurped  the  kingdom  of
Texcoco,  and  the  legitimate  king,  Netzahualcoyotl,
was  a  fugitive  in  the  mountains  of  Tlaxcala,  and
as  the  king  of  Tlaltelolco  was  also  dissatisfied  with
the  tyrannical  rule  of  Maxtla,  Izcohuatl  formed  a
league  with  him,  and  visited  Netzahualcoyotl  to
offer  him  an  alliance  against  the  common  enemy.
The  war  continued  114  days,  during  which  time  the
allies  defeated  the  enemy  in  several  battles.  Maxtla
was  taken  prisoner  in  1431,  and  put  to  death  by  the
king  of  Texcoco.  In  five  years,  during  which  Izco-
huatl reigned  in  peace,  he  distinguished  himself  by
his  activity,  and  by  adopting  all  the  rules  of  Netza*
hualcoyotl,  the  king  of  Texcoco.  He  added  several
principalities  to  his  dominions,  and  was  the  first
ruler  of  the  Aztecs  to  adopt  the  title  of  emperor.
He  was  also  the  first  to  connect  the  islands  of  the
lake  of  Texcoco  with  the  mainland  by  causeways.


Etd>«abyFtBEoH  Sew'Bik


D  Aupleton  &  Co


JACINTHA DO  SAN JOSE


JACKSON


373


JACINTHA  DO  SAN  JOSE  (zhah-sin'-tah),
Brazilian  nun,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  15  Oct.,  1716 ;  d.  2
Oct.,  1768.  In  early  life  she  wished  to  enter  a  con-
vent ;  but  her  father  opposed  her  desire.  At  his
death  she  and  her  sister  Francisca  retired  to  a  hut
and  began  the  life  of  nuns  under  the  patronage  of
Santa  Teresa.  Though  the  two  sisters  were  at  first
unnoticed,  some  time  afterward  they  suffered  perse-
cution till  1748,  when  they  were  protected  by  the
governor,  Gomes  Freire  de  Andrada.  In  1749
Jacintha  built  a  convent,  assisted  by  the  generosity
of  the  governor.  As  neither  the  bishop  nor  the
home  government  had  approved  the  establishment
of  the  order,  she  went  to  Lisbon  and  thence  to
Rome,  in  1759,  and  in  both  places  the  establish-
ment of  the  convent  was  approved.  In  Lisbon
she  witnessed  the  earthquake  of  1759,  and  for  days
assisted  the  wounded,  until  she  herself  fell  sick
from  overwork.  In  1756  she  returned  and  founded
a  school  for  girls,  which  she  annexed  to  the  con-
vent, and  which  for  several  years  was  the  only  in-
stitution of  the  kind  in  Brazil.  Jacintha  then  be-
gan a  hospital  for  destitute  women ;  but  her  pro-
tector, Gomes  Freire,  dying  in  1763,  the  work  pro-
gressed slowly,  and  she  followed  him  before  the
day  appointed  for  its  public  consecration.  Jacin-
tha published  "  Devocionario,"  and  several  poetical
compositions  which  are  highly  esteemed.

JACKER,  Edward,  missionary,  b.  in  Swabia,
Germany,  about  1830 ;  d.  in  Red  Jacket,  Lake  Su-
perior, in  August,  1887.  He  received  a  thorough
education,  studied  theology,  was  ordained  a  priest
of  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  and  came  to  the
United  States  as  a  missionary  to  the  Indians,
among  whom  he  passed  his  life.  He  served  as
vicar-general  to  Frederic  Baraga,  bishop  of  Mar-
quette, and  was  the  bishop's  inseparable  companion
in  his  journeys  and  labors  for  several  years  before
the  latter's  death  in  1867.  He  was  mentioned  at
the  time  in  connection  with  the  vacant  bishopric.
but  his  tastes  led  him  to  avoid  official  power  and
responsibility.  He  was  thoroughly  conversant  with
the  Indian  languages,  especially  with  the  dialect
spoken  by  the  Chippewas.  and  wrote  in  the  latter
and  published  a  selection  of  hymns  and  other
works.  Father  Jacker  was  a  man  of  great  erudi-
tion, an  enthusiastic  worker,  and  a  delightful  com-
E  anion,  being  one  of  the  best  known  and  most
ighly  esteemed  missionaries  in  the  Lake  Superior
region.  He  contributed  various  interesting  arti-
cles on  the  Indian  tribes  to  the  Philadelphia
"  Catholic  Quarterly  Review."

JACKSON,  Abner,  clergyman,  b.  near  Wash-
ington, Pa.,  4  Nov.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
19  April,  1874.  He  studied  first  at  Washington
college,  Pa.,  and  was  graduated  at  Washington
(now  Trinity)  college,  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1837
with  the  valedictory.  He  immediately  received
an  appointment  as  tutor  in  the  college,  a  year  later
was  chosen  adjunct  professor  of  ancient  languages,
and  in  1840  was  appointed  the  first  professor  of
intellectual  and  moral  philosophy.  While  dis-
charging the  duties  of  this  chair  during  a  period
of  eighteen  years,  he  also  gave  instruction  in
Latin,  and  for  a  considerable  part  of  the  time  he
lectured  on  chemistry.  In  1858  Dr.  Jackson  ac-
cepted an  election  to  the  presidency  and  the  pro-
fessorship of  the  evidences  of  Christianity  at  Ho-
bart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.  From  this  post  he  was
recalled  to  Trinity  in  1867,  the  trustees  having
unanimously  chosen  him  to  be  president  and  pro-


'  fessor  of  ethics  and  metaphysics.  After  a  visit  to
Europe  he  entered  on  his  new  duties,  in  which  he
was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Trinity  col-
lege having  sold  its  grounds  to  the  city  of  Hart-
ford as  the  site  for  the  new  state-house  of  Con-
necticut, it  became  necessary  to  select  a  new  site
and  to  secure  plans  for  new  buildings.  Dr.  Jack-
son labored  at  this  task  diligently  and  with  much
enthusiasm,  and  spent  the  summers  of  1872  and
1873  in  England  in  the  study  of  architecture  and
the  preparation  of  elaborate  plans,  which  have
been  carried  out  only  in  part.  Dr.  Jackson  was
ordained  to  the  ministry  by  Bishop  Brownell  on
2  Sept.,  1838.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Trinity  in  1858,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia
in  1866.  A  volume  of  his  sermons  was  published
after  his  death  (New  York,  1875).

JACKSON,  Andrew,  seventh  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  the  Waxhaw  settlement  on  the
border  between  North  and  South  Carolina,  15
March,  1767;  d.  at  the  Hermitage,  near  Nashville,
Tenn.,  8  June,  1845.  His  father,  Andrew  Jackson,
came  over  from  Carrickfergus,  on  the  north  coast
of  Ireland,  in  1765.  His  grandfather,  Hugh  Jack-
son, had  been  a  linen-draper.  His  mother's  name
was  Elizabeth  Hutchinson,  and  her  family  were
linen-weavers.  Andrew  Jackson,  the  father,  died
a  few  days  before  the  birth  of  his  son.  The  log
cabin  in  which  the  future  president  was  born  was
situated  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  boundary
between  the  two  Carolinas,  and  the  people  of  the
neighborhood  do  not  seem  to  have  had  a  clear  idea
as  to  which  province  it  belonged.  In  a  letter  of
24  Dec,  1830,  in  the  proclamation  addressed  to  the
nullifiers,  in  1832,  and  again  in  his  will,  Gen.  Jack-
son speaks  of  himself  as  a  native  of  South  Carolina;
but  the  evidence  adduced  by  Parton  seems  to  show
that  the  birthplace  was  north  of  the  border.  Three
weeks  after  the  birth  of  her  son  Mrs.  Jackson  moved
to  the  house  of  her  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Crawford,
just  over  the  border  in  South  Carolina,  near  the
Waxhaw  creek,  and  there  his  early  years  were
passed.  His  education,  obtained  in  an  "  old-field
school,"  consisted  of  little  more  than  the  "  three
R's,"  and  even  in  that  limited  sphere  his  attain-
ments were  but  scanty.  He  never  learned,  in  the
course  of  his  life,  to  write  English  correctly.  His
career  as  a  fighter  began  early.  In  the  spring  and
early  summer  of  1780,  after  the  disastrous  surren-
der of  Lincoln's  army  at  Charleston,  the  whole  of
South  Carolina  was  overrun  by  the  British.  On  6
Aug..  Jackson  was  present  at  Hanging  Rock  when
Sumter  surprised  and  destroyed  a  British  regiment.
Two  of  his  brothers,  as  well  as  his  mother,  died
from  hardships  sustained  in  the  war.  In  after
years  he  could  remember  how  he  had  been  carried
as  prisoner  to  Camden  and  nearly  starved  there,
and  how  a  brutal  officer  had  cut  him  with  a  sword
because  he  refused  to  clean  his  boots:  these  remi-
niscences kept  alive  his  hatred  for  the  British,
and  doubtless  gave  unction  to  the  tremendous  blow
dealt  them  at  New  Orleans.  In  1781,  left  quite
alone  in  the  world,  he  was  apprenticed  for  a  while
to  a  saddler.  At  one  time  he  is  said  to  have  done
a  little  teaching  in  an  "  old-field  school."  At  the
age  of  eighteen  he  entered  the  law-office  of  Spruce
McCay,  in  Salisbury.  While  there  he  was  said  to
have  been  "  the  most  roaring,  rollicking,  game-
cocking,  horse-racing,  card-playing,  mischievous
fellow"  that  had  ever  been  seen  in  that  town.  Many
and  plentiful  were  the  wild-oat  crops  sown  at  that


374


JACKSON


JACKSON


time  and  in  that  part  of  the  country ;  and  in  such
sort  of  agriculture  young  Jackson  was  much  more
proficient  than  in  the  study  of  jurisprudence.  He
never  had  a  legal  tone  of  mind,  or  any  but  the
crudest  knowledge  of  law;  but  in  that  frontier
society  a  small  amount  of  legal  knowledge  went  a
good  way,  and  in  1788  he  was  appointed  public

ftrosecutor  for  the  western  district  of  North  Caro-
ina,  the  district  since  erected  into  the  state  of
Tennessee.  The  emigrant  wagon-train  in  which
Jackson  journeyed  to  Nashville  carried  news  of  the
ratification  of  the  Federal  constitution  by  the
requisite  two  thirds  of  the  states.  He  seems  soon
to  have  found  business  enough.  In  the  April  term
of  1790,  out  of  192  cases  on  the  dockets  of  the
county  court  at  Nashville,  Jackson  was  employed
as  counsel  in  42 ;  in  the  year  1794,  out  of  397  cases
he  acted  as  counsel  in  228  ;  while  at  the  same  time
he  was  practising  his  profession  in  the  courts  of
other  counties.  The  great  number  of  these  cases
is  an  indication  of  their  trivial  character.  As  a
general  rule  they  were  either  actions  growing  out
of  disputed  land-claims  or  simple  cases  of  assault
and  battery.  Court  day  was  a  great  occasion  in
that  wild  community,  bringing  crowds  of  men  into
the  county  town  to  exchange  gossip,  discuss  poli-
tics, drink  whiskey,  and  break  heads.  Probably
each  court  day  produced  as  many  new  cases  as  it
settled.  Amid  such  a  turbulent  population  the
public  prosecutor  must  needs  be  a  man  of  nerve
and  resource.  It  was  a  state  of  chronic  riot,  in
which  he  must  be  ever  ready  to  court  danger.
Jackson  proved  himself  quite  equal  to  the  task  of
introducing  law  and  order  in  so  far  as  it  depended
on  him.  "Just  inform  Mr.  Jackson,"  said  Gov.
Blount  when  sundry  malfeasances  were  reported
to  him ;  "  he  will  be  sure  to  do  his  duty,  and  the
offenders  will  be  punished."  Besides  the  lawless-
ness of  the  white  pioneer  population,  there  was  the
enmity  of  the  Indians  to  be  reckoned  with.  In  the
immediate  neighborhood  of  Nashville  the  Indians
murdered,  on  the  average,  one  person  every  ten
days.  From  1788  till  1795  Jackson  performed  the
journey  of  nearly  two  hundred  miles  between  Nash-
ville and  Jonesboro  twenty-two  times;  and  on
these  occasions  there  were  many  alarms  from  In-
dians, which  sometimes  grew  into  a  forest  cam-
paign. In  one  of  these  affairs,  having  nearly  lost
his  life  in  an  adventurous  feat,  Jackson  made  the
characteristic  remark :  "  A  miss  is  as  good  as  a
mile ;  you  see  how  near  I  can  graze  danger."  It
was  this  wild  experience  that  prepared  the  way  for
Jackson's  eminence  as  an  Indian-fighter.  In  the
autumn  of  1794  the  Cherokees  were  so  thoroughly
punished  by  Gen.  Robertson's  famous  Nickajack
expedition  that  henceforth  they  thought  it  best  to
leave  the  Tennessee  settlements  in  peace.  With
the  rapid  increase  of  the  white  population  which
soon  followed,  the  community  became  more  pros-
perous and  more  orderly.  In  the  general  pros-
perity Jackson  had  an  ample  share,  partly  through
the  diligent  practice  of  his  profession,  partly
through  judicious  purchases  and  sales  of  land.

With  most  men  marriage  is  the  most  important
event  of  their  life ;  in  Jackson's  career  his  marriage
was  peculiarly  important.  Rachel  Donelson  was
a  native  of  North  Carolina,  daughter  of  Col.  John
Donelson,  a  Virginia  surveyor  in  good  circum-
stances, who  in  1780  migrated  to  the  neighborhood
of  Nashville  in  a  very  remarkable  boat-journey  of
2,000  miles  down  the  Holston  and  Tennessee  rivers
and  up  the  Cumberland.  During  an  expedition  to
Kentucky  some  time  afterward,  the  blooming
Rachel  was  wooed  and  won  by  Capt.  Lewis  Robards.
She  was  an  active,  sprightly,  and  interesting  girl,


the  best  horsewoman  and  best  dancer  in  that
country ;  her  husband  seems  to  have  been  a  young
man  of  tyrannical  and  unreasonably  jealous  dispo-
sition. In  Kentucky  they  lived  with  Mrs.  Robards,
the  husband's  mother ;  and,  as  was  common  in  a  new
society  where  houses  were  too  few  and  far  between,
there  were  other  boarders  in  the  family — among
them  the  late  Judge  Overton,  of  Tennessee,  and  a
Mr.  Stone.  Presently  Robards  made  complaints
against  his  wife,  in  which  he  implicated  Stone.
According  to  Overton  and  the  elder  Mrs.  Robards,
these  complaints  were  unreasonable  and  groundless,
but  the  affair  ended  in  Robards  sending  his  wife
home  to  her  mother  in  Tennessee.  This  was  in
1788.  Col.  Donelson  had  been  murdered,  either  by
Indians  or  by  white  desperadoes,  and  his  widow,
albeit  in  easy  circumstances,  felt  it  desirable  to
keep  boarders  as  a  means  of  protection  against  the
Indians.  To  her  house  came  Andrew  Jackson  on
his  arrival  at  Nashville,  and  thither  about  the  same
time  came  Overton,  also  fresh  from  his  law  studies.
These  two  young  men  were  boarded  in  the  house
and  lodged  in  a  cabin  hard  by.  At  about  the  same
time  Robards  became  reconciled  with  his  wife,  and,
having  bought  land  in  the  neighborhood,  came  to
dwell  for  a  while  at  Mrs.  Donelson's.  Throughout
life  Jackson  was  noted  alike  for  spotless  purity  and
for  a  romantic  and  chivalrous  respect  for  the  fe-
male sex.  In  the  presence  of  women  his  manner
was  always  distinguished  for  grave  and  courtly
politeness.  This  involuntary  homage  to  woman
was  one  of  the  finest  and  most  winsome  features  in
his  character.  As  unconsciously  rendered  to  Mrs.
Robards,  it  was  enough  to  revive  the  slumbering
demon  of  jealousy  in  her  husband.  According  to
Overton's  testimony,  Jackson's  conduct  was  irre-
proachable, but  there  were  high  words  between
him  and  Robards,  and,  not  wishing  to  make  fur-
ther trouble,  he  changed  his  place  of  abode.  Af-
ter some  months  Capt.  Robards  left  his  wife  and
went  to  Kentucky,  threatening  by  and  by  to  return
and  "  haunt  her  and  make  her  miserable.  In  the
autumn  of  1790  rumors  of  his  intended  return
frightened  Mrs.  Robards,  and  determined  her  to
visit  some  friends  at  distant  Natchez  in  order  to
avoid  him.  In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  with  which
the  whole  neighborhood  seems  to  have  concurred,
she  went  down  the  river  in  company  with  the  ven-
erable Col.  Stark  and  his  family.  As  the  Indians
were  just  then  on  the  war-path,  Jackson  accompa-
nied the  party  with  an  armed  escort,  returning  to
Nashville  as  soon  as  he  had  seen  his  friends  safely
deposited  at  Natchez.  While  these  things  were
going  on,  the  proceedings  of  Capt.  Robards  were
characterized  by  a  sort  of  Machiavelian  astuteness.
In  1791  Kentucky  was  still  a  part  of  Virginia,  and,
according  to  the  code  of  the  Old  Dominion,  if  a
husband  wished  to  obtain  a  divorce  on  account  of
his  wife's  alleged  unfaithfulness,  he  must  procure
an  act  of  the  legislature  empowering  him  to  bring
the  case  before  a  jury,  and  authorizing  a  divorce
conditionally  upon  the  jury's  finding  a  verdict  of
guilty.  Early  in  1791  Robards  obtained  the  pre-
liminary act  of  the  legislature  upon  his  declaration,
then  false,  that  his  wife  had  gone  to  live  with
Jackson.  Robards  deferred  further  action  for
more  than  two  years.  Meanwhile  it  was  reported
and  believed  in  the  west  that  a  divorce  had  been
granted,  and,  acting  upon  this  report,  Jackson,
whose  chivalrous  interest  in  Mrs.  Robards's  mis-
fortunes had  ripened  into  sincere  affection,  went,
in  the  summer  of  1791,  to  Natchez  and  married
her  there,  and  brought  her  to  his  home  at  Nash-
ville. In  the  autumn  of  1793  Capt.  Robards,  on
the  strength  of  the  facts  that  undeniably  existed


JACKSON


JACKSON


375


since  the  act  of  the  Virginia  legislature,  brought
his  case  into  court  and  obtained  the  verdict  com-
pleting the  divorce.  On  hearing  of  this,  to  his
great  surprise,  in  December,  Jackson  concluded
that  the  best  method  of  preventing  future  cavil
was  to  procure  a  new  license  and  have  the  marriage
ceremony  performed  again  ;  and  this  was  done  in
January.  Jackson  was  certainly  to  blame  for  not
taking  more  care  to  ascertain  the  import  of  the  act
of  the  Virginia  legislature.  By  a  carelessness  pe-
culiarly striking  in  a  lawyer,  he  allowed  his  wife  to
be  placed  in  a  false  position.  The  irregularity  of
the  marriage  was  indeed  atoned  by  forty  years  of
honorable  and  happy  wedlock,  ending  only  with  Mrs.
Jackson's  death  in  December,  1831 ;  and  no  blame
was  attached  to  the  parties  in  Nashville,  where  the
circumstances  were  well  known.  But  the  story,
half  understood  and  maliciously  warped,  grew  into
scandal  as  it  was  passed  about  among  Jackson's  per-
sonal enemies  or  political  opponents ;  and  herein
some  of  the  bitterest  of  his  many  quarrels  had  their
source.  His  devotion  to  Mrs.  Jackson  was  intense,
and  his  pistol  was  always  ready  for  the  rash  man
who  should  dare  to  speak  of  her  slightingly.

In  January,  1796,  we  find  Jackson  sitting  in  the
convention  assembled  at  Knoxville  for  making  a
constitution  for  Tennessee,  and  tradition  has  it  that
he  proposed  the  name  of  the  "  Great  Crooked  River  "
as  the  name  for  the  new  state.  Among  the  rules
adopted  by  the  convention,  one  is  quaintly  signifi-
cant :  "  He  that  digresseth  from  the  subject  to  fall
on  the  person  of  any  member  shall  be  suppressed
by  the  speaker."  The  admission  of  Tennessee  to
the  Union  was  effected  in  June.  1796,  in  spite  of
earnest  opposition  from  the  Federalists,  and  in
the  autumn  Jackson  was  chosen  as  the  single
representative  in  congress.  When  the  house  had
assembled,  he  heard  President  Washington  deliver
in  person  his  last  message  to  congress.  He  was
one  of  twelve  who  voted  against  the  adoption  of
the  address  to  Washington  in  approval  of  his  ad-
ministration. Jackson's  chief  objections  to  Wash-
ington's government  were  directed  against  two  of  its
most  salutary  and  admirable  acts— "the  Jay  treaty
with  Great  Britain,  and  Hamilton's  financial  meas-
ures. His  feeling  toward  the  Jay  treaty  was  that
of  a  man  who  could  not  bear  to  see  anything  but
blows  dealt  to  Great  Britain.  His  condemnation
of  Hamilton's  policy  was  mingled  with  the  not  un-
reasonable feeling  of  distrust  which  he  had  already
begun  to  harbor  against  a  national  bank.  The
year  1797  was  a  season  of  financial  depression,
and  the  general  paralysis  of  business  was  ascribed
— no  doubt  too  exclusively — to  the  over-issue  of
notes  by  the  national  bank.  Jackson's  antipathy
to  such  an  institution  would  seem  to  have  begun
thus  early  to  show  itself.  Of  his  other  votes  in  this
congress,  one  was  for  an  appropriation  to  defray
the  expenses  of  Sevier's  expedition  against  the
Cherokees,  which  was  carried ;  three  others  were
eminently  wise  and  characteristic  of  the  man :  1.
For  finishing  the  three  frigates  then  building
and  destined  to  such  renown — the  "Constitution."
"Constellation,"  and  "  United  States."  2.  Against
the  further  payment  of  blackmail  to  Algiers.  3.
Against  removing  "  the  restriction  which  confined
the  expenditure  of  public  money  to  the.  specific
objects  for  which  each  sum  was  appropriated."
Another  vote,  silly  in  itself,  was  characteristic  of
the  representative  from  a  rough  frontier  com-
munity ;  it  was  against  the  presumed  extravagance
of  appropriating  $14,000  to  buy  furniture  for  the
newly  built  White  House.  Jackson's  course  was
warmly  approved  by  his  constituents,  and  in  the
following  summer  he  was  chosen  to  fill  a  vacancy


in  the  Federal  senate.  Of  his  conduct  as  senator
nothing  is  known  beyond  the  remark,  made  by
Jefferson  in  1824  to  Daniel  Webster,  that  he  had
often,  when  presiding  in  the  senate,  seen  the  passion-
ate Jackson  get  up  to  speak  and  then  choke  with
rage  so  that  he  could  not  utter  a  word.  As  Parton
very  happily  suggests,  one  need  not  wonder  at  this
if  one  remembers  what  was  the  subject  chiefly
before  the  senate  during  the  winter  of  1797-'8.
The  outrageous  insolence  of  the  French  Directory
was  enough  to  arouse  the  wrath  of  far  tamer  and
less  patriotic  spirits  than  Jackson's.  Yet  in  a
letter  written  at  that  time  he  seems  eager  to  see
the  British  throne  overturned  by  Bonaparte.  In
April,  1798,  he  resigned  his  seat  in  the  senate,  and
was  appointed  judge  in  the  supreme  court  of  Ten-
nessee. He  retained  this  office  for  six  years,  but
nothing  is  known  of  his  decisions,  as  the  practice
of  recording  decisions  began  only  with  his  succes-
sor, Judge  Overton.  During  this  period  he  was
much  harassed  by  business  troubles  arising  from
the  decline  in  the  value  of  land  consequent  upon
the  financial  crisis  of  1798.  At  length,  in  1804,  he
resigned  his  judgeship  in  order  to  devote  his  atten-
tion exclusively  to  his  private  affairs.  He  paid
up  all  his  debts  and  engaged  extensively  both  in
planting  and  in  trade.  He  was  noted  for  fair  and
honorable  dealing,  his  credit  was  always  excellent,
and  a  note  with  his  name  on  it  was  considered  as
good  as  gold.  He  had  a  clear  head  for  business,
and  was  never  led  astray  by  the  delusions  about
paper  money  by  which  American  frontier  com-
munities have  so  often  been  infested.  His  planta-
tion was  well  managed,  and  his  slaves  were  always
kindly  and  considerately  treated.

But  while  genial  and  kind  toward  his  inferiors,
he  was  among  his  fellow-citizens  apt  to  be  rough
and  quarrelsome.  In  1795  he  fought  a  duel  with
Avery,  an  opposing  counsel,  over  some  hasty  words
that  had  passed  in  the  court-room.  Next  year  he
quarrelled  with  John  Sevier,  governor  of  Tennessee,
and  came  near  shooting  him  "at  sight."  Sevier
had  alluded  to  the  circumstances  of  his  marriage.
Ten  years  afterward,  for  a  similar  offence,  though
complicated  with  other  matters  in  the  course  of  a
long  and  extremely  silly  quarrel,  he  fought  a  duel
with  Charles  Dickinson.  The  circumstances  were
revolting,  but  showed  Jackson's  wonderful  nerve
and  rare  skill  in  "  grazing  danger."  Dickinson
was  killed,  and  Jackson  received  a  wound  from  the
effects  of  which  he  never  recovered.  In  later
years,  when  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,
the  number  of  his  violent  quarrels  was  variously
reckoned  by  his  enemies  at  from  a  dozen  to  a  hun-
dred. In  1805  Jackson  was  visited  by  Aaron  Burr,
who  was  then  preparing  his  mysterious  south-
western expedition.  Burr  seems  to  have  wished,
if  possible,  to  make  use  of  Jackson's  influence  in
raising  troops,  but  without  indicating  his  purpose.
In  this  he  was  unsuccessful,  but  Jackson  appears
to  have  regarded  the  charge  of  treason  brought
against  Burr  as  ill-founded.  At  Richmond,  while
Burr's  trial  was  going  on,  Jackson  made  a  speech
attacking  Jefferson.  He  thus  made  himself  ob-
noxious to  Madison,  then  secretary  of  state,  and
afterward,  in  1808,  he  declared  his  preference  for
Monroe  over  Madison  as  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency. He  was  known  as  unfriendly  to  Madison's
administration,  but  this  did  not  prevent  him  from
offering  his  services,  with  those  of  2,500  men,  as
soon  as  war  was  declared  against  Great  Britain
in  1812.  Since  1801  he  had  been  commander-in-
chief  of  the  Tennessee  militia,  but  there  had  been
no  occasion  for  him  to  take  the  field.  Late  in
1812,  after  the  disasters  in  the  northwest,  it  was


376


JACKSON


JACKSON


feared  that  the  British  might  make  an  attempt
upon  New  Orleans,  and  Jackson  was  ordered  down
to  Natchez  at  the  head  of  2,000  men.  He  went  in
high  spirits,  promising  to  plant  the  American
eagle  upon  the  ramparts  of  Mobile,  Pensacola,  and
St.  Augustine,  if  so  directed.  On  6  Feb.,  as  it
had  become  evident  that  the  British  were  not
meditating  a  southward  expedition,  the  new  secre-
tary of  war,  Armstrong,  sent  word  to  Jackson  to
disband  his  troops.  This  stupid  order  reached  the
general  at  Natchez  toward  the  end  of  March,  and
inflamed  his  wrath.  He  took  upon  himself  the
responsibility  of  marching  his  men  home  in  a  body,
an  act  in  which  the  government  afterward  acqui-
esced and  reimbursed  Jackson  for  the  expense
involved.  During  this  march  Jackson  became  the
idol  of  his  troops,  and  his  sturdiness  won  him  the
nickname  of  "Old  Hickory,"  by  which  he  was
affectionately  known  among  his  friends  and  fol-
lowers for  the  rest  of  his  life.

Shortly  after  his  arrival  at  Nashville  there  oc-
curred an  affray  between  Jackson  and  Thomas  H.
Benton,  growing  out  of  an  unusually  silly  duel  in
which  Jackson  had  acted  as  second  to  the  antago-
nist of  Benton's  brother.  In  a  tavern  at  Nashville,
Jackson  undertook  to  horsewhip  Benton,  and  in  the
ensuing  scuffle  the  latter  was  pitched  down-stairs,
while  Jackson  got  a  bullet  in  his  left  shoulder
which  he  carried  for  more  than  twenty  years.
Jackson  and  Benton  had  formerly  been  friends.
After  this  affair  they  did  not  meet  again  until  1823,
when  both  were  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  Their  friend-
ship was  then  renewed.

The  war  with  Great  Britain  was  complicated
with  an  Indian  war  which  could  not  in  any  case
have  been  avoided.  The  westward  progress  of  the
white  settlers  toward  the  Mississippi  river  was
gradually  driving  the  red  man  from  his  hunting-
grounds  ;  and  the  celebrated  Tecumseh  had  formed
a  scheme,  quite  similar  to  that  of  Pontiac  fifty
years  earlier,  of  uniting  all  the  tribes  between
Florida  and  the  Great  Lakes  in  a  grand  attempt  to
drive  back  the  white  men.  This  scheme  was  par-
tially frustrated  in  the  autumn  of  1811  while  Te-
cumseh was  preaching  his  crusade  among  the
Cherokees,  Creeks,  and  Seminoles.  During  his  ab-
sence his  brother,  known  as  the  Prophet,  attacked
Gen.  Harrison  at  Tippecanoe  and  was  overwhelm-
ingly defeated.  The  war  with  Great  Britain  re-
newed Tecumseh's  opportunity,  and  his  services  to
the  enemy  were  extremely  valuable  until  his  death
in  the  battle  of  the  Thames.  Tecumseh's  princi-
pal ally  in  the  south  was  a  half-breed  Creek  chief-
tain named  Weathersford.  On  the  shore  of  Lake
Tensaw,  in  the  southern  part  of  what  is  now  Ala-
bama, was  a  stockaded  fortress  known  as  Fort
Mimms.  There  many  of  the  settlers  had  taken
refuge.  On  30  Aug.,  1813,  this  stronghold  was
surprised  by  Weathersford  at  the  head  of  1,000
Creek  warriors,  and  more  than  400  men,  women,
and  children  were  massacred.  The  news  of  this
dreadful  affair  aroused  the  people  of  the  southwest
to  vengeance.  Men  and  money  were  raised  by  the
state  of  Tennessee,  and,  before  he  had  fully  recov-
ered from  the  wound  received  in  the  Benton  affray,
Jackson  took  the  field  at  the  head  of  2,500  men.
Now  for  the  first  time  he  had  a  chance  to  show  his
wonderful  military  capacity,  his  sleepless  vigilance,
untiring  patience,  and  unrivalled  talent  as  a  leader
of  men.  The  difficulties  encountered  were  formida-
ble in  the  extreme.  In  that  frontier  wilderness
the  business  of  the  commissariat  was  naturally  ill
managed,  and  the  men,  who  under  the  most  favor-
able circumstances  had  little  idea  of  military  sub-
ordination, were  part  of  the  time  mutinous  from


hunger.  More  than  once  Jackson  was  obliged  to
use  one  half  of  his  army  to  keep  the  other  half
from  disbanding.  In  view  of  these  difficulties,  the
celerity  of  his  movements  and  the  force  with  which
he  struck  the  enemy  were  truly  marvellous.  The
Indians  were  defeated  at  Talluschatches  and  Tal-
ladega. At  length,  on  27  March,  1814,  having
been  re-enforced  by  a  regiment  of  U.  S.  infantry,
Jackson  struck  the  decisive  blow  at  Tohopeka,
otherwise  known  as  the  Horseshoe  Bend  of  the
Tallapoosa  river.  In  this  bloody  battle  no  quarter
was  given,  and  the  strength  of  the  Creek  nation
was  finally  broken.  Jackson  pursued  the  remnant
to  their  place  of  refuge  called  the  Holy  Ground,-
upon  which  the  medicine-men  had  declared  that
no  white  man  could  set  foot  and  live.  Such  of  the
Creek  chieftains  as  had  not  fled  to  Florida  now
surrendered.  The  American  soldiers  were  ready
to  kill  Weathersford  in  revenge  for  Fort  Mimms ;
but  Jackson,  who  was  by  no  means  wanting  in
magnanimity,  spared  his  life  and  treated  him  so
well  that  henceforth  he  and  his  people  remained  on
good  terms  with  the  white  men.  Among  the  offi-
cers who  served  under  Jackson  in  this  remarkable
campaign  were  two  who  in  later  years  played  an
important  part  in  the  history  of  the  southwest —
Samuel  Houston  and  David  Crockett.  The  Creek
war  was  one  of  critical  importance.  It  was  the
last  occasion  on  which  the  red  men  could  put  forth
sufficient  power  to  embarrass  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment. More  than  any  other  single  battle  that  of


Tohopeka  marks  the  downfall  of  Indian  power.
Its  immediate  effects  upon  the  war  with  Great
Britain  were  very  great.  By  destroying  the  only
hostile  power  within  the  southwestern  territory  it
made  it  possible  to  concentrate  the  military  force
of  the  border  states  upon  any  point,  however  re-
mote, that  might  be  threatened  by  the  British.
More  specifically,  it  made  possible  the  great  victory
at  New  Orleans.  Throughout  the  whole  of  this
campaign,  in  which  Jackson  showed  such  indomi-
table energy,  he  was  suffering  from  illness  such  as
would  have  kept  any  ordinary  man  groaning  in
bed,  besides  that  for  most  of  the  time  his  left  arm
had  to  be  supported  in  a  sling.  The  tremendous
pluck  exhibited  by  William  of  Orange  at  Neerwin-
den,  and  so  justly  celebrated  by  Macaulay,  was  no
greater  than  Jackson  showed  in  Alabama.  His
pluck  was  equalled  by  his  thoroughness.  Many
generals  after  victory  are  inclined  to  relax  their
efforts.  Not  so  Jackson,  who  followed  up  every
success  with  furious  persistence,  and  whose  admira-
ble maxim  was  that  in  war  "  until  all  is  done,  noth-
ing is  done."

On  31  May,  1814,  Jackson  was  made  major-gen-
eral in  the  regular  army,  and  was  appointed  to
command  the  Department  of  the  South.  It  was
then  a  matter  of  dispute  whether  Mobile  belonged
to  Spain  or  to  the  United  States.  In  August,  Jack-
son occupied  the  town  and  made  his  headquarters
there.  With  the  consent  of  Spain  the  British  used
Florida  as  a  base of operations and  established


JACKSON


JACKSON


377


themselves  at  Pensacola.  Jackson  wrote  to  Wash-
ington for  permission  to  attack  them  there;  but
the  government  was  loth  to  sanction  an  invasion
of  Spanish  territory  until  the  complicity  of  Spain
with  our  enemy  should  be  proved  beyond  cavil.
The  letter  from  Sec.  Armstrong  to  this  effect  did
not  reach  Jackson.  The  capture  of  Washington
by  the  British  prevented  his  receiving  orders  and
left  him  to  act  upon  his  own  responsibility,  a  kind
of  situation  from  which  he  was  never  known  to
flinch.  On  14  Sept.  the  British  advanced  against
Mobile ;  but  in  their  attack  upon  the  outwork,  Fort
Bowyer,  they  met  with  a  disastrous  repulse.  They
retreated  to  Pensacola,  whither  Jackson  followed
them  with  3,000  men.  On  7  Nov.  he  stormed  the
town.  His  next  move  would  have  been  against
Port  Barrancas,  six  miles  distant  at  the  mouth  of
the  harbor.  By  capturing  this  post  he  would  have
entrapped  the  British  fleet  and  might  have  forced
it  to  surrender ;  but  the  enemy  forestalled  him  by
blowing  up  the  fort  and  beating  a  precipitate  re-
treat. By  thus  driving  the  British  from  Florida —
an  act  for  which  he  was  stupidly  blamed  by  the
Federalist  press — Jackson  now  found  himself  free
to  devote  all  his  energies  to  the  task  of  defending
New  Orleans,  and  there,  after  an  arduous  journey,
he  arrived  on  2  Dec.  The  British  expedition  di-
rected against  that  city  was  more  formidable  than
any  other  that  we  had  to  encounter  during  that
war.  Its  purpose  was  also  more  deadly.  In  the
north  the  British  warfare  had  been  directed  chiefly
toward  defending  Canada  and  gaining  such  a  foot-
hold upon  our  frontier  as  might  be  useful  in  mak-
ing terms  at  the  end  of  the  war.  The  burning  of
Washington  was  intended  chiefly  for  an  insult
and  had  but  slight  military  significance  ;  but  the
expedition  against  New  Orleans  was  intended  to
make  a  permanent  conquest  of  the  lower  Missis-
sippi valley  and  to  secure  for  Great  Britain  the
western  bank  of  the  river.  The  fall  of  Napoleon
had  set  free  some  of  Wellington's  finest  troops
for  service  in  America,  and  in  December  a  force
of  12,000  men,  under  command  of  Wellington's
brother-in-law,  the  gallant  Sir  Edwafd  Pakenham,
was  landed  below  New  Orleans.  To  oppose  these
veterans  of  the  Spanish  peninsula.  Jackson  had
6,000  of  that  sturdy  race  whose  fathers  had  van-
quished Ferguson  at  King's  Mountain,  and  whose
children  so  nearly  vanquished  Grant  at  Shiloh.
After  considerable  preliminary  manoeuvring  and
skirmishing,  Jackson  intrenched  himself  in  a
strong  position  near  the  Bienvenu  and  Chalmette
plantations  and  awaited  the  approach  of  the  ene-
my. His  headquarters,  the  McCarte  mansion,  are
shown  in  the  illustration  on  page  376.  On  8
Jan.,  Pakenham  was  unwise  enough  to  try  to  over-
whelm him  by  a  direct  assault.  In  less  than  half
an  hour  the  British  were  in  full  retreat,  leav-
ing 2,600  of  their  number  killed  and  wounded.
Among  the  slain  was  Pakenham.  The  American
loss  was  eight  killed  and  thirteen  wounded.  Never,
perhaps,  in  the  history  of  the  world  has  a  battle
been  fought  between  armies  of  civilized  men  with
so  great  a  disparity  of  loss.  It  was  also  the  most
complete  and  overwhelming  defeat  that  any  Eng-
lish army  has  ever  experienced.  News  travelled  so
slowly  then  that  this  great  victory,  like  the  three
last  naval  victories  of  the  war,  occurred  after  peace
had  been  made  by  the  commissioners  at  Ghent.
Nevertheless,  no  American  can  regret  that  the  bat-
tle was  fought.  The  insolence  and  rapacity  of
Great  Britain  had  richly  deserved  such  castigation.
Moreover,  if  she  once  gained  a  foothold  in  the  Mis-
sissippi valley,  it  might  have  taken  an  armed  force
to  dislodge  her  in  spite  of  the  treaty,  for  in  the


matter  of  the  western  frontier  posts  after  1783  she
had  by  no  means  acted  in  good  faith.  Jackson's
victory  decided  that  henceforth  the  Mississippi
valley  belonged  indisputably  to  the  people  of  the
United  States.  It  was  the  recollection  of  that  vic-
tory, along  with  the  exploits  of  Hull  and  Decatur,
Perry  and  McDonough,  which  caused  the  Holy
Alliance  to  look  upon  the  Monroe  doctrine  as  some-
thing more  than  an  idle  threat.  All  over  the
United  States  the  immediate  effect  of  the  news
was  electric,  and  it  was  enhanced  by  the  news  of
peace  which  arrived  a  few  days  later.  By  this
"  almost  incredible  victory,"  as  the  "  National  In-
telligencer "  called  it,  the  credit  of  the  American
arms  upon  land  was  fully  restored.  Not  only  did
the  administration  glory  in  it,  as  was  natural,  but
the  opposition  lauded  it  for  a  different  reason,  as
an  example  of  what  American  military  heroism
could  do  in  spite  of  inadequate  support  from  gov-
ernment. Thus  praised  by  all  parties.  Jackson,
who  before  the  Creek  war  had  been  little  known
outside  of  Tennessee,  became  at  once  the  foremost
man  in  the  United  States.  People  in  the  north,
while  throwing  up  their  hats  for  him.  were  some-
times heard  to  ask :  "  Who  is  this  Gen.  Jackson  ?
To  what  state  does  he  belong?"  Henceforth  until
the  civil  war  he  occupied  the  most  prominent  place
in  the  popular  mind.

After  his  victory  Jackson  remained  three  months
in  New  Orleans,  in  some  conflict  with  the  civil  au-
thorities of  the  town,  which  he  found  it  necessary
to  hold  under  martial  law.  In  April  he  returned
to  Nashville,  still  retaining  his  military  command
of  the  southwest.  He  soon  became  involved  in  a
quarrel  with  Mr.  Crawford,  the  secretary  of  war,
who  had  undertaken  to  modify  some  provisions  in
his  treaty  with  the  Creeks.  Jackson  was  also  just-
ly incensed  by  the  occasional  issue  of  orders  from
the  war  department  directly  to  his  subordinate
officers ;  such  orders  sometimes  stupidly  thwarted
his  plans.  The  usual  course  for  a  commanding
general  thus  annoyed  would  be  to  make  a  private
representation  to  the  government :  but  here,  as  or-
dinarily, while  quite  right  in  his  position,  Jackson
was  violent  and  overbearing  in  his  methods.  He
published,  22  April,  1817,  an  order  forbidding  his
subordinate  officers  to  pay  heed  to  any  order  from
the  war  department  unless  issued  through  him.
Mr.  Calhoun,  who  in  October  succeeded  Crawford
as  secretary  of  war,  gracefully  yielded  the  point ;
but  the  public  had  meanwhile  been  somewhat  scan-
dalized by  the  collision  of  authorities.  In  private
conversation  Gen.  Scott  had  alluded  to  Jackson's
conduct  as  savoring  of  mutiny.  This  led  to  an
angry  correspondence  between  the  two  generals,
ending  in  a  challenge  from  Jackson,  which  Scott
declined  on  the  ground  that  duelling  is  a  wicked
and  unchristian  custom.

Affairs  in  Florida  now  demanded  attention.
That  country  had  become  a  nest  of  outlaws,  and
chaos  reigned  supreme  there.  Many  of  the  de-
feated Creeks  had  found  a  refuge  in  Florida,  and
runaway  negroes  from  the  plantations  of  Georgia
and  South  Carolina  were  continually  escaping
thither.  During  the  late  war  British  officers  and
adventurers,  acting  on  their  own  responsibility
upon  this  neutral  soil,  committed  many  acts  which
their  government  would  never  have  sanctioned.
They  stirred  up  Indians  and  negroes  to  commit
atrocities  on  the  United  States  frontier.  The
Spanish  government  was  at  that  time  engaged  in
warfare  with  its  revolted  colonies  in  South  America,
and  the  coasts  of  Florida  became  a  haunt  for  con-
traband traders,  privateers,  and  filibusters.  One
adventurer  would  announce  his  intention  to  make


378


JACKSON


JACKSON


Florida  a  free  republic ;  another  would  go  about
committing  robbery  on  his  own  account ;  a  third
would  set  up  an  agency  for  kidnapping  negroes  on
speculation.  The  disorder  was  hideous.  On  the
Appalachicola  river  the  British  had  built  a  fort,
and  amply  stocked  it  with  arms  and  ammunition,  to
serve  as  a  base  of  operations  against  the  United
States.  On  the  departure  of  the  British,  the  fort
was  seized  and  held  by  negroes.  This  alarmed  the
slave-owners  of  Georgia,  and  in  July,  1816,  United
States  troops,  with  permission  from  the  Spanish
authorities,  marched  in  and  bombarded  the  negro
fort.  A  hot  shot  found  its  way  into  the  magazine,
three  hundred  negroes  were  blown  into  fragments,
and  the  fort  was  demolished.  In  this  case  the
Spaniards  were  ready  to  leave  to  United  States
troops  a  disagreeable  work,  for  which  their  own
force  was  incompetent.  Every  day  made  it  plainer
that  Spain  was  quite  unable  to  preserve  order  in
Florida,  and  for  this  reason  the  United  States  en-
tered upon  negotiations  for  the  purchase  of  that
country.  Meanwhile  the  turmoil  increased.  White
men  were  murdered  by  Indians,  and  United  States
troops,  under  Col.  Twiggs,  captured  and  burned  a
considerable  Seminole  village,  known  as  Fowltown.
The  Indians  retorted  by  the  wholesale  massacre  of
fifty  people  who  were  ascending  the  Appalachicola
river  in  boats ;  some  of  the  victims  were  tortured
with  firebrands.  Jackson  was  now  ordered  to  the
frontier.  He  wrote  at  once  to  President  Monroe :
"  Let  it  be  signified  to  me  through  any  channel
(say  Mr.  John  Rhea)  that  the  possession  of  the
Floridas  would  be  desirable  to  the  United  States,
and  in  sixty  days  it  will  be  accomplished."  Mr.
Rhea  was  a  representative  from  Tennessee,  a  con-
fidential friend  of  both  Jackson  and  Monroe.  The
president  was  ill  when  Jackson's  letter  reached
him,  and  does  not  seetn  to  have  given  it  due  con-
sideration. On  referring  to  it  a  year  later  he  could
not  remember  that  he  had  ever  seen  it  before.
Rhea,  however,  seems  to  have  written  a  letter  to
Jackson,  telling  him  that  the  president  approved  of
his  suggestion.  As  to  this  point  the  united  testi-
mony of  Jackson,  Rhea,  and  Judge  Overton  seems
conclusive.  Afterward  Mr.  Monroe,  through  Rhea,
seems  to  have  requested  Jackson  to  burn  this  letter,
and  an  entry  on  the  general's  letter-book  shows  that
it  was  accordingly  burned,  12  April,  1819.  There
can  be  no  doubt  that,  whatever  the  president's  in-
tention may  have  been,  or  how  far  it  may  have,  been
correctly  interpreted  by  Rhea,  the  general  honestly
considered  himself  authorized  to  take  possession  of
Florida  on  the  ground  that  the  Spanish  government
had  shown  itself  incompetent  to  prevent  the  deni-
zens of  that  country  from  engaging  in  hostilities
against  the  United  States.  Jackson  acted  upon
this  belief  with  his  accustomed  promptness.  He
raised  troops  in  Tennessee  and  neighboring  states,
invaded  Florida  in  March,  1818,  captured  St.
Marks,  and  pushed  on  to  the  Seminole  headquar-
ters on  the  Suwanee  river.  In  less  than  three
months  from  this  time  he  had  overthrown  the  In-
dians and  brought  order  out  of  chaos.  His  meas-
ures were  praised  by  his  friends  as  vigorous,  while
his  enemies  stigmatized  them  as  high-handed.  In
one  instance  his  conduct  was  open  to  serious  ques-
tion. At  St.  Marks  his  troops  captured  an  aged
Scotch  trader  and  friend  of  the  Indians,  named
Alexander  Arbuthnot ;  near  Suwanee,  some  time
afterward,  they  seized  Robert  Ambrister,  a  young
English  lieutenant  of  marines,  nephew  of  the  gov-
ernor of  New  Providence.  Jackson  believed  that
these  men  had  incited  the  Indians  to  make  war
upon  the  United  States,  and  were  now  engaged  in
aiding  and  abetting  them  in  their  hostilities. They


were  tried  by  a  court-martial  at  St.  Marks.  On
very  insufficient  evidence  Arbuthnot  was  found
guilty  and  sentenced  to  be  hanged.  Appearances
were  somewhat  more  strongly  against  Ambrister.
He  did  not  make  it  clear  what  his  business  was  in
Florida,  and  threw  himself  upon  the  mercy  of  the
court,  which  at  first  condemned  him  to  be  shot,
but  on  further  consideration  commuted  the  sen-
tence to  fifty  lashes  and  a  year's  imprisonment.
Jackson  arbitrarily  revived  the  first  sentence,  and
Ambrister  was  accordingly  shot.  A  few  minutes
afterward  Arbuthnot  was  hanged  from  the  yard-
arm  of  his  own  ship,  declaring  with  his  last  breath
that  his  country  would  avenge  him.  In  this  lam-
entable affair  Jackson  doubtless  acted  from  a
sense  of  duty  ;  as  he  himself  said,  "  My  God  would
not  have  smiled  on  me,  had  I  punished  only  the
poor  ignorant  savages,  and  spared  the  white  men
who  set  them  on."  Here,  as  elsewhere,  however,
when  under  the  influence  of  strong  feeling,  he
showed  himself  utterly  incapable  of  estimating
evidence.  The  case  against  both  the  victims  was
so  weak  that  a  fair-minded  and  prudent  command-
er would  surely  have  pardoned  them ;  while  the
interference  with  the  final  sentence  of  the  court,
in  Ambrister's  case,  was  an  act  that  can  hardly  be
justified.  Throughout  life  Jackson  was  perpetu-
ally acting  with  violent  energy  upon  the  strength
of  opinions  hastily  formed  and  based  upon  inade-
quate data.  Fortunately,  his  instincts  were  apt  to
be  sound,  and  in  many  most  important  instances
his  violent  action  was  highly  beneficial  to  his
country ;  but  a  man  of  such  temperament  is  liable
to  make  serious  mistakes.

On  his  way  home,  hearing  that  some  Indians  had
sought  refuge  in  Pensacola,  Jackson  captured  the
town,  turned  out  the  Spanish  governor,  and  left  a
garrison  of  his  own  there.  He  had  now  virtually
conquered  Florida,  but  he  had  moved  too  fast  for
the  government  at  Washington.  He  had  gone
further,  perhaps,  than  was  permissible  in  tres-
passing upon  neutral  territory ;  and  his  summary
execution  of  two  British  subjects  aroused  furious
excitement  in  England.  For  a  moment  we  seemed
on  the  verge  of  war  with  Great  Britain  and  Spain
at  once.  Whatever  authority  President  Monroe
may  have  intended,  through  the  Rhea  letter,  to
confer  upon  Jackson,  he  certainly  felt  that  the
general  had  gone  too  far.  With  one  exception,  all
his  cabinet  agreed  with  him  that  it  would  be  best
to  disavow  Jackson's  acts  and  make  reparation  for
them.  But  John  Quincy  Adams,  secretary  of  state,
felt  equal  to  the  task  of  dealing  with  the  two  foreign
powers,  and  upon  his  advice  the  administration
decided  to  assume  the  responsibility  for  what  Jack-
son had  done.  Pensacola  and  St.  Marks  were  re-
stored to  Spain,  and  an  order  of  Jackson's  for
the  seizing  of  St.  Augustine  was  countermanded
by  the  president.  But  Adams  represented  to  Spain
that  the  American  general,  in  his  invasion  of  Flori-
da, was  virtually  assisting  the  Spanish  government
in  maintaining  order  there ;  and  to  Great  Britain
he  justified  the  execution  of  Arbuthnot  and  Am-
brister on  the  ground  that  their  conduct  had  been
such  that  they  had  forfeited  their  allegiance  and
become  virtual  outlaws.  Spain  and  Great  Britain
accepted  the  explanations ;  had  either  nation  felt
•in  the  mood  for  war  with  the  United  States,  it
might  have  been  otherwise.  As  soon  as  the  ad-
ministration had  adopted  Jackson's  measures,  they
were  for  that  reason  attacked  in  congress  by  Clay,
and  this  was  the  beginning  of  the  bitter  and  life-
long feud  between  Jackson  and  Clay.  In  1819  the
purchase  of  Florida  from  Spain  was  effected,  and
in  1821  Jackson  was  appointed  governor  of  that


JACKSON


JACKSON


379


territory.  In  1823  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate.  Some  of  his  friends,  under  the  lead  of
"William  B.  Lewis,  had  already  conceived  the  idea
of  making  him  president.  At  first  Oen.  Jackson
cast  ridicule  upon  the  idea.  "  Do  they  suppose,"
said  he,  "  that  I  am  such  a  d — d  fool  as  to  think
myself  fit  for  president  of  the  United  States  ?  No,
sir,  I  know  what  I  am  fit  for.  I  can  command  a
body  of  men  in  a  rough  way,  but  I  am  not  fit  to
be  president."  Such  is  the  anecdote  told  by  H.
M.  Braekenridge,  who  was  Jackson's  secretary  in
Florida.  In  1821  the  general  felt  old  and  weak,
and  had  made  up  his  mind  to  spend  his  remaining
days  in  peace  on  his  farm.  Of  personal  ambition,
as  ordinarily  understood,  Jackson  had  much  less
than  many  other  men.  But  he  was,  like  most
men,  susceptible  to  flattery,  and  the  discovery  of
his  immense  popularity  no  doubt  went  far  to  per-
suade him  that  he  might  do  credit  to  himself  as
{ (resident.  On  20  July,  1822,  he  was  nominated
or  that  office  by  the  legislature  of  Tennessee.  On
22  Feb.,  1824,  he  was  nominated  by  a  Federalist
convention  at  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  and  on  4  March
following  by  a  Republican  convention  at  the  same
place.  The  regular  nominee  of  the  congressional
caucus  was  W.  H.  Crawford,  of  Georgia.  The
other  candidates  were  J.  Q.  Adams  and  Henry
Clay.  There  was  a  general  agreement  upon  Cal-
houn for  the  vice-presidency.  All  the  candidates
belonged  to  the  Republican  party,  which  had  kept
the  presidency  since  Jefferson's  election  in  1800.
The  Federalists  were  hopelessly  discredited  by
their  course  in  the  war  of  1812-'15.  Of  the  four
candidates,  Adams  and  Clay  were  loose  construc-
tionists, while  Crawford  and  Jackson  were  strict
constructionists,  and  in  this  difference  was  fore-
shadowed a  new  division  of  parties.  At  the  elec-
tion in  November,  1824,  there  were  99  electoral
votes  for  Jackson,  84  for  Adams,  41  for  Crawford,
and  37  for  Clay.  As  none  of  the  candidates  had  a
majority,  it  was  left  for  the  house  of  representa-
tives to  choose  a  president  from  the  three  highest
names  on  the  list,  in  accordance  with  the  twelfth
amendment  to  the  constitution.  As  Clay  was  thus
rendered  ineligible,  there  was  naturally  some  schem-
ing among  the  friends  of  the  other  candidates  to
secure  his  powerful  co-operation.  Clay  and  his
friends  quite  naturally  supported  the  other  loose-
constructionist  candidate,  Adams,  with  the  result
that  13  states  voted  for  Adams,  7  for  Jackson,  and
4  for  Crawford.  Adams  thus  became  president,
and  Jackson's  friends,  in  their  disappointment,
hungered  for  a  "  grievance "  upon  which  they
might  vent  their  displeasure,  and  which  might
serve  as  a  "  rallying  cry  "  for  the  next  campaign.
Benton,  who  was  now  one  of  Jackson's  foremost
supporters,  went  so  far  as  to  maintain  that,  because
Jackson  had  a  greater  number  of  electoral  votes
than  any  other  candidate,  the  house  was  virtually
"  defying  the  will  of  the  people  "  in  choosing  any
name  but  his.  To  this  it  was  easily  answered  that
in  any  case  our  electoral  college,  which  was  one  of
the  most  deliberately  framed  devices  of  the  con-
stitution, gives  but  a  very  indirect  and  partial  ex-
pression of  the  "  will  of  the  people  "  ;  and  further-
more, if  Benton's  argument  was  sound,  why  should
the  constitution  have  provided  for  an  election  by
congress,  instead  of  allowing  a  simple  plurality  in
the  college  to  decide  the  election  f  The  extrava-
gance of  Benton's  objection,  coming  from  so  able
a  source,  is  an  index  to  the  bitter  disappointment
of  Jackson's  followers.  The  needed  "  grievance  "
was  furnished  when  Adams  selected  Clay  as  his
secretary  of  state.  Many  of  Jackson's  friends  in-
terpreted this  appointment  as  the  result  of  a  bar-


gain whereby  Clay  had  made  Adams  president  in
consideration  of  obtaining  the  first  place  in  the
cabinet,  carrying  with  it.  according  to  the  notion
then  prevalent,  a  fair  prospect  of  the  succession  to
the  presidency.  It  was  natural  enough  for  the
friends  of  a  disappointed  candidate  to  make  such
a  charge.  It  was  to  Benton's  credit  that  he  always
scouted  the  idea  of  a  corrupt  bargain  between
Adams  and  Clay.  Many  people,  however,  believed
it.  In  congress,  John  Randolph's  famous  allusion
to  the  "  coalition  between  Blifil  and  Black  George
— the  Puritan  and  the  blackleg  " — led  to  a  duel  be-
tween Randolph  and  Clay,  which  served  to  impress
the  matter  upon  the  popular  mind  without  enlight-
ening it ;  the  pistol  is  of  small  value  as  an  agent
of  enlightenment.  The  charge  was  utterly  with-
out support  and  in  every  way  improbable.  The
excellence  of  the  appointment  of  Clay  was  beyond
cavil,  and  the  sternly  upright  Adams  was  less  in-
fluenced by  what  people  might  think  of  his  actions
than  any  other  president  since  Washington.  But
the  appointment  was  no  doubt  ill-considered.  It
made  it  necessary  for  Clay,  in  many  a  public
speech,  to  defend  himself  against  the  cruel  impu-
tation. To  mention  the  charge  to  Jackson,  whose
course  in  Florida  had  been  censured  by  Clay,  was
enough  to  make  him  believe  it ;  and  he  did*  so  to
his  dying  day.

It  is  not  likely  that  the  use  made  of  this  "  griev-
ance "  had  much  to  do  with  Jackson's  victory  in
1828.  The  causes  at  work  lay  far  deeper.  The
population  west  of  the  Alleghanies  was  now  begin-
ning to  count  for  much  in  politics.  Jackson  was
our  first  western  president,  and  his  election  marks
the  rise  of  that  section  of  our  country.  The  demo-
cratic tendency  was  moreover  a  growing  one.
Heretofore  our  presidents  had  been  men  of  aristo-
cratic type,  with  advantages  of  wealth,  or  educa-
tion, or  social  training.  A  stronger  contrast  to
them  than  Jackson  afforded  cannot  well  be  im-
agined. A  man  with  less  training  in  statesmanship
would  have  been  hard  to  find.  In  his  defects  he
represented  average  humanity,  while  his  excellences
were  such  as  the  most  illiterate  citizen  could  ap-
preciate. In  such  a  man  the  ploughboy  and  the
blacksmith  could  feel  that  in  some  essential  re-
spects they  had  for  president  one  of  their  own  sort.
Above  all,  he  was  the  great  military  hero  of  the  day,
and  as  such  he  came  to  the  presidency  as  naturally
as  Taylor  and  Grant  in  later  days,  as  naturally  as  his
contemporary  Wellington  became  prime  minister
of  England.  A  man  far  more  politic  and  com-
plaisant than  Adams  could  not  have  won  the  elec-
tion of  1828  against  such  odds.  He  obtained  83
electoral  votes  against  178  for  Jackson.  Calhoun
was  re-elected  vice-president.  Jackson  came  to
the  presidency  with  a  feeling  that  he  had  at  length
succeeded  in  making  good  his  claim  to  a  violated
right,  and  he  showed  this  feeling  in  his  refusal  to
call  on  his  illustrious  predecessor,  who  he  declared
had  got  the  presidency  by  bargain  and  sale.

In  Jackson's  cabinet,  as  first  constituted,  Martin
Van  Buren,  of  New  York,  was  secretary  of  state ;
Samuel  D.  Ingham,  of  Pennsylvania,  secretary  of
the  treasury ;  John  H.  Eaton,  of  Tennessee,  secre-
tary of  war ;  John  Branch,  of  North  Carolina,  sec-
retary of  the  navy ;  John  M.  Berrien,  of  Georgia,
attorney-general ;  William  T.  Barry,  of  Kentucky,
postmaster-general.  As  compared  with  earlier  cabi-
nets— not  merely  with  such  men  as  Hamilton,
Madison,  or  Gallatin,  but  with  Pickering,  Wolcott,
Monroe,  or  even  Crawford — these  were  obscure
names.  The  innovation  in  the  personal  character
of  the  cabinet  was  even  more  marked  than  the  in-
novation in  the  presidency. The  autocratic  Jack-


380


JACKSON


JACKSON


son  employed  his  secretaries  as  clerks.  His  confi-
dential advisers  were  a  few  intimate  friends  who
held  no  important  offices.  These  men — W.  B.
Lewis,  Amos  Kendall,  Duff  Green,  and  Isaac  Hill —
came  to  be  known  as  the  "  kitchen  cabinet."  Lewis
had  had  much  to  do  with  bringing  Jackson  forward
as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  in  1821.  Green
and  Hill  were  editors  of  partisan  newspapers.  Ken-
dall was  a  man  of  considerable  ability  and  many
good  qualities,  but  a  "  machine  politician  "  of  the
worst  sort.  He  was  on  many  occasions  the  ruling
spirit  of  the  administration,  and  the  cause  of  some
of  its  most  serious  mistakes.  Jackson's  career  as
president  cannot  be  fully  understood  without  tak-
ing into  account  the  agency  of  Kendall ;  yet  it  is
not  always  easy  to  assign  the  character  and  extent
of  the  influence  which  he  exerted.

A  yet  more  notable  innovation  was  Jackson's
treatment  of  the  civil  service.  The  earlier  presi-
dents had  proceeded  upon  the  theory  that  public
office  is  a  public  trust,  and  not  a  reward  for  par-
tisan services.  They  conducted  the  business  of
government  upon  business  principles,  and  as  long
as  a  postmaster  showed  himself  efficient  in  distrib-
uting the  mail  they  did  not  turn  him  out  of  office
because  of  his  vote.  Between  30  April,  1789,  and
4  March,  1829,  the  total  number  of  removals  from
office  was  seventy-four,  and  out  of  this  number  five
were  defaulters.  Between  4  March,  1829,  and  22
March,  1830,  the  number  of  changes  made  in  the
civil  service  was  about  2,000.  This  was  the  in-
auguration upon  a  national  scale  of  the  so-called
"spoils  system."  The  phrase  originated  with
William  L.  Marcy,  of  New  York,  who  in  a  speech
in  the  senate  in  1831  declared  that  "  to  the  victors
belong  the  spoils."  The  system  had  been  per-
fected in  the  state  politics  of  New  York  and  Penn-
sylvania, and  it  was  probably  inevitable  that  it
should  sooner  or  later  be  introduced  into  the  sphere
of  national  politics.  The  way  was  prepared  in  1820
by  Crawford,  when  he  succeeded  in  getting  the  law
passed  that  limits  the  tenure  of  office  to  four  years.
This  dangerous  measure  excited  very  little  discus-
sion at  the  time.  People  could  not  understand  the
evil  until  taught  by  hard  experience.  Jackson  did
not  understand  that  he  was  laying  the  foundations
of  a  gigantic  system  of  corruption,  which  within  a
few  years  would  develop  into  the  most  serious  of
the  dangers  threatening  the  continuance  of  Ameri-
can freedom.  He  was  very  ready  to  believe  ill  of
political  opponents,  and  to  make  generalizations
from  extremely  inadequate  data.  Democratic  news-
papers, while  the  campaign  frenzy  was  on  them,
were  full  of  windy  declamation  about  the  whole-
sale corruption  introduced  into  all  parts  of  the  gov-
ernment by  Adams  and  Clay.  Nothing  was  too
bad  for  Jackson  to  believe  of  these  two  men,  and
when  the  fourth  auditor  of  the  treasury  was  found
to  be  delinquent  in  his  accounts  it  was  easy  to  sup-
pose that  many  others  were,  in  one  way  or  another,
just  as  bad.  In  his  wholesale  removals  Jackson
doubtless  supposed  he  was  doing  the  country  a  ser-
vice by  "  turning  the  rascals  out."  The  immediate
consequence  of  this  demoralizing  policy  was  a
struggle  for  control  of  the  patronage  between  Cal-
houn and  Van  Buren,  who  were  rival  aspirants  for
the  succession  to  the  presidency.  A  curious  affair
now  came  in  to  influence  Jackson's  personal  rela-
tions to  these  men.  Early  in  1829  Eaton,  secretary
of  war,  married  a  Mrs.  Timberlake,  with  whose
reputation  gossip  had  been  busy.  It  was  said  that
he  had  shown  her  too  much  attention  during  the
lifetime  of  her  first  husband.  Jackson  was  always
slow  to  believe  charges  against  a  woman.  His  own
wife,  who  had  been  outrageously  maligned  by  the


Whig  newspapers  during  the  campaign,  had  lately
died,  and  there  was  just  enough  outward  similarity
between  Eaton's  marriage  and  his  own  to  make
him  take  Mrs.  Eaton's  part  with  more  than  his
customary  vehemence.  Mrs.  Calhoun  and  the
wives  of  the  secretaries  would  not  recognize  Mrs.
Eaton.  Mrs.  Donelson,  wife  of  the  president's
nephew,  and  mistress  of  ceremonies  at  the  White
House,  took  a  similar  stand.  Jackson  scolded  his
secretaries  and  sent  Mrs.  Donelson  home  to  Ten-
nessee ;  but  all  in  vain.  He  found  that  vanquish-
ing Wellington's  veterans  was  a  light  task  com-
pared with  that  of  contending  against  the  ladies  in
an  affair  of  this  sort.  Foremost  among  those  who
frowned  Mrs.  Eaton  out  of  society  was  Mrs.  Cal-
houn. On  the  other  hand,  Van  Buren,  a  widower,
found  himself  able  to  be  somewhat  more  complai-
sant, and  accordingly  rose  in  Jackson's  esteem.  The
fires  were  fanned  by  Lewis  and  Kendall,  who  saw
in  Van  Buren  a  more  eligible  ally  than  Calhoun.
Presently  intelligence  was  obtained  from  Crawford,
who  hated  Calhoun,  to  the  effect  that  the  latter,  as
member  of  Monroe's  cabinet,  had  disapproved  of
Jackson's  conduct  in  Florida.  This  was  quite  true,
but  Calhoun  had  discreetly  yielded  his  judgment  to
that  of  the  cabinet  led  by  Adams,  and  thus  had
officially  sanctioned  Jackson's  conduct.  These
facts,  as  handled  by  Eaton  and  Lewis,  led  Jackson
to  suspect  Calhoun  of  treacherous  double-dealing,
and  the  result  was  a  quarrel  which  broke  up  the
cabinet.  In  order  to  get  Calhoun's  friends — Ing-
ham, Branch,  and  Berrien — out  of  the  cabinet,  the
other  secretaries  began  by  resigning.  This  device
did  not  succeed,  and  the  ousting  of  the  three  secre-
taries entailed  further  quarrelling,  in  the  course  of
which  the  Eaton  affair  and  the  Florida  business
were  beaten  threadbare  in  the  newspapers,  and
evoked  sundry  challenges  to  deadly  combat.  In
the  spring  and  summer  of  1831  the  new  cabinet
was  formed,  consisting  of  Edward  Livingston,  sec-
retary of  state ;  Louis  McLane,  treasury ;  Lewis
Cass,  war ;  Levi  Woodbury,  navy ;  Roger  B.  Taney,
attorney-general ;  in  post-office  no  change.  On
Van  Buren's  resignation,  Jackson  at  once  appoint-
ed him  minister  to  England,  but  there  was  a  warm
dispute  in  the  senate  over  his  confirmation,  and  it
was  defeated  at  length  by  the  casting-vote  of  Cal-
houn. This  check  only  strengthened  Jackson's
determination  to  have  Van  Buren  for  his  successor
in  the  presidency.  The  progress  of  this  quarrel
entailed  a  break  in  the  "  kitchen  cabinet,"  in  which
Duff  Green,  editor  of  the  "  Telegraph  "  and  friend
of  Calhoun,  was  thrown  out.  His  place  was  taken
by  Francis  Preston  Blair,  of  Kentucky,  a  man  of
eminent  ability  and  earnest  patriotism.  To  him
and  his  sons,  as  energetic  opponents  of  nullification
and  secession,  our  country  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude
which  can  hardly  be  overstated.  Blair's  indignant
attitude  toward  nullification  brought  him  at  once
into  earnest  sympathy  with  Jackson.  In  Decem-
ber, 1830,  Blair  began  publishing  the  "  Globe,"  the
organ  henceforth  of  Jackson's  party.  For  a  period
of  ten  years,  until  the  defeat  of  the  Democrats  in
1840,  Blair  and  Kendall  were  the  ruling  spirits  in
the  administration.  Their  policy  was  to  re-elec
Jackson  to  the  presidency  in  1832,  and  make  Var
Buren  his  successor  in  1836.

During  Jackson's  administration  there  came
about  a  new  division  of  parties.  The  strict  con-
structionists, opposing  interna]  improvements,  pre
tective  tariff,  and  national  banks,  retained  the  name
of  Democrats,  which  had  long  been  applied  to  mem-
bers of  the  old  Republican  party.  The  term  Re-
publican fell  into  disuse.  The  loose  construction-
ists, under  the  lead  of  Clay,  took  the  name  of


JACKSON


JACKSON


381


Whigs,  as  it  suited  their  purposes  to  describe  Jack-
son as  a  kind  of  tyrant ;  and  they  tried  to  dis-
credit their  antagonists  by  calling  them  Tories,  but
the  device  found  little  favor.  On  strict  construc-
tionist grounds  Jackson  in  1829  vetoed  the  bill
for  a  government  subscription  to  the  stock  of  the
Maysville  turnpike  in  Kentucky,  and  two  other
similar  bills  he  disposed  of  by  a  new  method,  which
the  Whigs  indignantly  dubbed  a  "pocket  veto."
The  struggle  over  the  tariff  was  especially  impor-
tant as  bringing  out  a  clear  expression  of  the  doc-
trine of  nullification  on  the  part  of  South  Carolina.
Practically,  however,  nullification  was  first  at-
tempted by  Georgia  in  the  case  of  the  disputes
with  the  Cherokee  Indians.  Under  treaties  with
the  Federal  government  these  Indians  occupied
lands  that  were  coveted  by  the  white  people.
Adams  had  made  himself  very  unpopular  in
Georgia  by  resolutely  defending  the  treaty  rights
of  these  Indians.  Immediately  upon  Jackson's
election,  the  state  government  assumed  jurisdic-
tion over  their  lands,  and  proceeded  to  legislate
for  them,  passing  laws  that  discriminated  against
them.  Disputes  at  once  arose,  in  the  course  of
which  Georgia  twice  refused  to  obey  the  supreme
court  of  the  United  States.  At  the  request  of  the
governor  of  Georgia,  Jackson  withdrew  the  Fed-
eral troops  from  the  Cherokee  country,  and  refused

to  enforce  the
rights  that
had  been

guaranteed  to
the  Indians
by  the  United
States.  His
feelings  to-
ward Indians
were  those
of  a  frontier
fighter,  and
he  asked,  with
telling  force,
whether  an
eastern  state,  such  as  New  York,  would  endure  the
nuisance  of  an  independent  Indian  state  within  her
own  boundaries.  In  his  sympathy  with  the  people
of  Georgia  on  the  particular  question  at  issue,  he
seemed  to  be  conniving  at  the  dangerous  principle
of  nullification.  These  events  were  carefully  noted
by  the  politicians  of  South  Carolina.  The  protec-
tionist policy,  which  since  the  peace  of  1815  had
been  growing  in  favor  at  the  north,  had  culminated
in  1828  in  the  so-called  "  tariff  of  abominations."
This  tariff,  the  result  of  a  wild  helter-skelter
scramble  of  rival  interests,  deserved  its  name  on
many  accounts.  It  discriminated,  with  especial
unfairness,  against  the  southern  people,  who  were
very  naturally  and  properly  enraged  by  it.  A  new-
tariff,  passed  in  1832,  modified  some  of  the  most
objectionable  features  of  the  old  one,  but  still
failed  of  justice  to  the  southerners.  Jackson  was
opposed  to  the  principle  of  protective  tariffs,  and
from  his  course  with  Georgia  it  might  be  argued
that  he  would  not  interfere  with  extreme  measures
on  the  part  of  the  south.  During  the  whole  of
Jackson's  first  term  there  was  more  or  less  vague
talk  about  nullification.  The  subject  had  a  way  of
obtruding  itself  upon  all  sorts  of  discussions,  as  in
the  famous  debates  on  Foot's  resolutions,  which
lasted  over  five  months  in  1830,  and  called  forth
Webster's  immortal  speech  in  reply  to  Hayne.  A
few  weeks  after  this  speech,  at  a  public  dinner
in  commemoration  of  Jefferson's  birthday,  after
sundry  regular  toasts  had  seemed  to  indicate  a  drift
of  sentiment  in  approval  of  nullification,  Jackson


^^p^^p,;


suddenly  arose  with  a  volunteer  toast,  "  Our  Fed-
eral Union :  it  must  be  preserved."  Calhoun  was
prompt  to  reply  with  a  toast  and  a  speech  in  be-
half of  "  Liberty,  dearer  than  the  Union,"  but  the
nullifiers  were  greatly  disappointed  and  chagrined.
In  spite  of  this  warning,  South  Carolina  held  a
convention,  19  Nov.,  1832,  and  declared  the  tariffs
of  1828  and  1832  to  be  null  and  void  in  South
Carolina ;  all  state  officers  and  jurors  were  required
to  take  an  oath  of  obedience  to  this  edict ;  appeals
to  the  Federal  supreme  court  were  prohibited
under  penalties ;  and  the  Federal  government  was
warned  that  an  attempt  on  its  part  to  enforce  the
revenue  laws  would  immediately  provoke  South
Carolina  to  secede  from  the  Union.  The  ordinance
of  nullification  was  to  take  effect  on  1  Feb.,  1833,
and  preparations  for  war  were  begun  at  once.  On
16  Dec.  the  president  issued  a  proclamation,  in
which  he  declared  that  he  should  enforce  the  laws
in  spjte  of  any  and  all  resistance  that  might  be
made,  and  he  showed  that  he  was  in  earnest  by
forthwith  sending  Lieut.  Farragut  with  a  naval
force  to  Charleston  harbor,  and  ordering  Gen.  Scott
to  have  troops  ready  to  enter  South  Carolina  if
necessary.  In  the  proclamation,  which  was  written
by  Livingston,  the  president  thus  defined  his  po-
sition :  "  I  consider  the  power  to  annul  a  law  of  the
United  States,  assumed  by  one  state,  incompatible
with  the  existence  of  the  Union,  contradicted  ex-
pressly by  the  letter  of  the  constitution,  unauthor-
ized by  its  spirit,  inconsistent  with  every  principle
on  which  it  was  founded,  and  destructive  of  the
great  object  for  which  it  was  formed."  Gov.  Hayne,
of  South  Carolina,  issued  a  counter-proclamation,
and  a  few  days  afterward  Calhoun  resigned  the
vice-presidency,  and  was  chosen  to  succeed  Hayne
in  the  senate.  Jackson's  determined  attitude  was
approved  by  public  opinion  throughout  the  country.
By  the  southern  people  generally  the  action  of
South  Carolina  was  regarded  as  precipitate  and  un-
constitutional. Even  in  that  state  a  Union  con-
vention met  at  Columbia,  and  announced  its  inten-
tion of  supporting  the  president.  In  January,  Cal-
houn declared  in  the  senate  that  his  state  was  not
hostile  to  the  Union,  and  had  not  meditated  an
armed  resistance ;  a  "  peaceable  secession,"  to  be  ac-
complished by  threats,  was  probably  the  ultimatum
really  contemplated.  In  spite  of  Jackson's  warning,
the  nullifiers  were  surprised  by  his  unflinching  atti-
tude, and  quite  naturally  regarded  it  as  inconsist-
ent with  his  treatment  of  Georgia.  When  the  1st
of  February  came,  the  nullifiers  deferred  action.
In  the  course  of  that  month  a  bill  for  enforcing
the  tariff  passed  both  houses  of  congress,  and  at  the
same  time  Clay's  compromise  tariff  was  adopted,
providing  for  the  gradual  reduction  of  the  duties
until  1842,  after  which  all  duties  were  to  be  kept
at  20  per  cent.  This  compromise  enabled  the  nul-
lifiers to  claim  a  victory,  and  retreat  from  their
position  with  colors  flying.

During  the  nullification  controversy  Jackson
kept  up  the  attacks  upon  the  U.  S.  bank  which
he  had  begun  in  his  first  annual  message  to
congress  in  1829.  The  charter  of  the  bank  would
expire  in  1836,  and  Jackson  was  opposed  to  its  re-
newal. The  grounds  of  his  opposition  were  partly
sound,  partly  fanciful.  There  was  a  wholesome
opposition  to  paper  currency,  combined  with  great
ignorance  of  the  natural  principles  of  money  and
trade,  as  illustrated  in  a  willingness  to  tolerate  the
notes  of  local  banks,  according  to  the  chaotic  sys-
tem prevalent  between  Jackson's  time  and  Lincoln's.
There  was  something  of  the  demagogue's  appeal
to  the  prejudice  that  ignorant  people  are  apt  to
cherish  against  capitalists  and  corporations,  though


382


JACKSON


JACKSON


Jackson  cannot  be  accused  of  demagogy  in  this
regard,  because  he  shared  the  prejudice.  Then
there  was  good  reason  for  believing  that  the  bank
was  in  some  respects  mismanaged,  and  for  fear-
ing that  a  great  financial  institution,  so  intimately
related  to  the  government,  might  be  made  an
engine  of  political  corruption.  Furthermore,  the
correspondence  between  Sec.  Ingham  and  Nicholas
Biddle,  president  of  the  bank,  in  the  summer  of
1829,  shows  that  some  of  Jackson's  friends  wished
to  use  the  bank  for  political  purposes,  and  were
enraged  at  Biddle's  determination  in  pursuing  an
independent  course.  The  occasion  was  duly  im-
proved by  the  "  kitchen  cabinet "  to  fill  Jackson's
ears  with  stories  tending  to  show  that  the  influ-
ence of  the  bank  was  secretly  exerted  in  favor
of  the  opposite  party.  Jackson's  suggestions  with
reference  to  the  bank  in  his  first  message  met
with  little  favor,  especially  as  he  coupled  them
with  suggestions  for  the  distribution  of  the  surplus
revenue  among  the  states.  He  returned  to  the  at-
tack in  his  two  following  messages,  until  in  1832
the  bank  felt  obliged  in  self-defence  to  apply,  some-
what prematurely,  for  a  renewal  of  its  charter  on
the  expiration  of  its  term.  Charges  brought
against  the  bank  by  Democratic  representatives
were  investigated  by  a  committee,  which  returned
a  majority  report  in  favor  of  the  bank.  A  minori-
ty report  sustained  the  charges.  After  prolonged
discussion,  the  bill  to  renew  the  charter  passed
both  houses,  and  on  10  July,  1832,  was  vetoed  by
the  president.  An  attempt  to  pass  the  bill  over
the  veto  failed  of  the  requisite  two-third  majority.
Circumstances  had  already  given  a  flavor  of  per-
sonal contest  to  Jackson's  assaults  upon  the  bank.
There  was  no  man  whom  he  hated  so  fiercely  as
Clay,  who  was  at  the  same  time  his  chief  political
rival.  Clay  made  the  mistake  of  forcing  the  bank
question  into  the  foreground,  in  the  belief  that  it
was  an  issue  upon  which  he  was  likely  to  win  in
the  coming  presidential  campaign.  Clay's  move-
ment was  an  invitation  to  the  people  to  defeat
Jackson  in  order  to  save  the  bank  ;  and  this  natu-
rally aroused  all  the  combativeness  in  Jackson's
nature.  His  determined  stand  impressed  upon  the
popular  imagination  the  picture  of  a  dauntless
"tribune  of  the  people  fighting  against  the
"  monster  monopoly."  Clay  unwisely  attacked  the
veto  power  of  the  president,  and  thus  gave  Benton
an  opportunity  to  defend  it  by  analogies  drawn
from  the  veto  power  of  the  ancient  Roman  tribune,
which  in  point  of  fact  it  does  not  at  all  resemble.
The  discussion  helped  Jackson  more  than  Clay.
It  was  also  a  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  Whig
leader  to  risk  the  permanence  of  such  an  institu-
tion as  the  U.  S.  bank  upon  the  fortunes  of  a
presidential  canvass.  It  dragged  the  bank  into
politics  in  spite  of  itself,  and,  by  thus  affording
justification  for  the  fears  to  which  Jackson  had
appealed,  played  directly  into  his  hands.  In  this
canvass  all  the  candidates  were  for  the  first  time
nominated  in  national  conventions.  There  were
three  conventions — all  held  at  Baltimore.  In  Sep-
tember, 1831,  the  Anti-Masons  nominated  Will-
iam Wirt,  of  Virginia,  in  the  hope  of  getting  the
national  Republicans  or  Whigs  to  unite  with  them ;
but  the  latter,  in  December,  nominated  Clay.  In
the  following  March  the  Democrats  nominated
Jackson,  with  Van  Buren  for  vice-president.  Dur-
ing the  year  1832  the  action  of  congress  and  presi-
dent with  regard  to  the  bank  charter  was  virtually
a  part  of  the  campaign.  In  the  election  South
Carolina  voted  for  candidates  of  her  own — John
Floyd,  of  Virginia,  and  Henry  Lee,  of  Massachu-
setts. There  were  219  electoral  votes  for  Jackson,


49  for  Clay,  11  for  Floyd,  and  7  for  Wirt.  Jack-
son interpreted  this  overwhelming  victory  as  a
popular  condemnation  of  the  bank  and  approval  of
all  his  actions  as  president.  The  enthusiastic  ap-
plause from  all  quarters  which  now  greeted  his
rebuke  of  the  nullifiers  served  still  further  to
strengthen  his  belief  in  himself  as  a  "  saviour  of
society"  and  champion  of  "the  people."  Men
were  getting  into  a  state  of  mind  in  which  ques-
tions of  public  policy  were  no  longer  argued  upon
their  merits,  but  all  discussion  was  drowned  in
cheers  for  Jackson.  Such  a  state  of  things  was
not  calculated  to  check  his  natural  vehemence  and
disposition  to  override  all  obstacles  in  carrying  his
point.  He  now  felt  it  to  be  his  sacred  duty  to  de-
molish the  bank.  In  his  next  message  to  congress
he  created  some  alarm  by  expressing  doubts  as  to
the  bank's  solvency  and  recommending  an  investi-
gation to  see  if  the  deposits  of  public  money  were
safe.  In  some  parts  of  the  country  there  were  in-
dications of  a  run  upon  the  branches  of  the  bank.
The  committee  of  ways  and  means  investigated
the  matter,  and  reported  the  bank  as  safe  and
sound,  but  a  minority  report  threw  doubt  upon
these  conclusions,  so  that  the  public  uneasiness
was  not  allayed.  The  conclusions  of  the  members
of  the  committee,  indeed,  bore  little  reference  to
the  evidence  before  them,  and  were  determined
purely  by  political  partisanship.  Jackson  made  up
his  mind  that  the  deposits  must  be  removed  from
the  bank.  The  act  of  1816,  which  created  that  in-
stitution, provided  that  the  public  funds  might  be
removed  from  it  by  order  of  the  secretary  of  the
treasury,  who  must,  however,  inform  congress  of
his  reasons  for  the  removal.  As  congress  resolved,
by  heavy  majorities,  that  the  deposits  were  safe  in
the  bank,  the  spring  of  1833  was  hardly  a  time
when  a  secretary  of  the  treasury  would  feel  himself
warranted,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions
of  the  act,  to  order  their  removal.  Sec.  McLane
was  accordingly  unwilling  to  issue  such  an  or-
der. In  what  followed,  Jackson  had  the  zeal-
ous co-operation  of  Kendall  and  Blair.  In  May,
McLane  was  transferred  to  the  state  department,
and  was  succeeded  in  the  treasury  by  William  J.
Duane,  of  Pennsylvania.  The  new  secretary,  how-
ever, was  convinced  that  the  removal  was  neither
necessary  nor  wise,  and,  in  spite  of  the  president's
utmost  efforts,  refused  either  to  issue  the  order  or
to  resign  his  office.  In  September,  accordingly,
Duane  was  removed  and  Roger  B.  Taney  was
appointed  in  his  place.  Taney  at  once  ordered
that  after  the  1st  of  October  the  public  revenues
should  no  longer  be  deposited  with  the  national
bank,  but  with  sundry  state  banks,  which  soon
came  to  be  known  as  the  "  pet  banks."  Jackson
alleged,  as  one  chief  reason  for  this  proceeding,
that  if  the  bank  were  to  continue  to  receive  pub-
lic revenues  on  deposit,  it  would  unscrupulously
use  them  in  buying  up  all  the  members  of  congress
and  thus  securing  an  indefinite  renewal  of  its
charter.  This,  he  thought,  would  be  a  death-blow
to  free  government  in  America.  His  action  caused
intense  excitement  and  some  commercial  distress,
and  prepared  the  way  for  further  disturbance.  In
the  next  session  of  the  senate  Clay  introduced  a
resolution  of  censure,  which  was  carried  after  a  de-
bate which  lasted  all  winter.  It  contained  a  decla-
ration that  the  president  had  assumed  "  authority
and  power  not  conferred  by  the  constitution  and
laws,  but  in  derogation  of  both."  Jackson  pro-
tested against  the  resolution,  but  the  senate  refused
to  receive  his  protest.  Many  of  his  appointments
were  rejected  by  the  senate,  especially  those  of  the
directors  of  the  bank,  and  of  Taney  as  secretary  of


JACKSON


JACKSON


383


the  treasury.  An  attempt  was  made  to  curtail  the
president's  appointing  power.  On  the  other  hand,
many  of  the  president's  friends  declaimed  against
the  senate  as  an  aristocratic  institution,  which
ought  to  be  abolished.  Benton  was  Jackson's  most
powerful  and  steadfast  ally  in  the  senate.  Benton
was  determined  that  the  resolution  of  censure
should  be  expunged  from  the  records  of  the  senate,
and  his  motion  continued  to  be  the  subject  of
acrimonious  debate  for  two  years.  The  contest
was  carried  into  the  state  elections,  and  some  sena-
tors resigned  in  consequence  of  instructions  re-
ceived from  their  state  legislatures.  At  length,  on
16  Jan.,  1837.  a  few  weeks  before  Jackson's  retire-
ment from  office,  Benton's  persistency  triumphed,
and  the  resolution  of  censure  was  expunged.
Meanwhile  the  consequences  of  the  violent  method
with  which  the  finances  had  been  handled  were
rapidly  developing.  Many  state  banks,  including
not  a  few  of  the  "wildcat"  species,  had  been
formed,  to  supply  the  paper  currency  that  was
supposed  to  be  needed.  The  abundance  of  paper,
together  with  the  rapid  westward  movement  of
population,  caused  reckless  speculation  and  an  in-
flation of  values.  Extensive  purchases  of  public
lands  were  paid  for  in  paper  until  the  treasury
scented  danger,  and  by  the  president's  order,  in
July,  1836,  the  "specie  circular"  was  issued,
directing  that  only  gold  or  silver  should  be  re-
ceived for  public  lands.  This  caused  a  demand  for
coin,  which  none  but  the  "  pet  banks  "  could  hope
to  succeed  in  meet-
ing. But  these  banks
were  at  the  same
time  crippled  by
orders  to  surren-
der, on  the  following
New- Year's  clay,  one
fourth  of  the  surplus
revenues  deposited
with  them,  as  it  was
to  be  distributed  as
a  loan  among  the
states.  '  The  "  pet
banks  "  had  regarded
the  deposits  as  capi-
tal to  be  used  in  loans,
and  they  were  now
suddenly  obliged  to
i:  call  in  these  loans.
These  events  led  to
the  great  panic  of  1837,  which  not  only  scattered
thousands  of  private  fortunes  to  the  winds,  but
wrecked  Van  Buren's  administration  and  prepared
the  way  for  the  Whig  victory  of  1840.

In  foreign  affairs  Jackson's  administration  won.
great  credit  through  its  enforcement  of  the  French
spoliation  claims.  European  nations  which  had
claims  for  damages  against  France  on  account  of
spoliations  committed  by  French  cruisers  during
the  Napoleonic  wars  had  found  no  difficulty  after
the  peace  of  1815  in  obtaining  payment ;  but  the
claims  of  the  United  States  had  been  superciliously
neglected.  In  1831,  after  much  fruitless  negotia-
tion, a  treaty  was  made  by  which  France  agreed  to
pay  the  United  States  $5,000,000  in  six  annual  in-
stalments. The  first  payment  was  due  on  2  Feb.,
1833.  A  draft  for  the  amount  was  presented  to
the  French  minister  of  finance,  and  payment  was
refused  on  the  ground  that  no  appropriation  for
that  purpose  had  been  made  by  the  chambers.
Louis  Philippe  brought  the  matter  before  the
chambers,  but  no  appropriation  was  made.  Jack-
son was  not  the  man  to  be  trifled  with  in  this  way.
In  his  message  of  December,  1834,  he  gravely  rec-


a^-y^e^u^  Jo^^i^


ommended  to  congress  that  a  law  be  passed  author-
izing the  capture  of  French  vessels  enough  to
make  up  the  amount  due.  The  French  govern-
ment was  enraged,  and  threatened  war  unless  the
president  should  apologize :  not  a  hopeful  sort  of
demand  to  make  of  Andrew  Jackson.  Here  Great
Britain  interposed  with  good  advice  to  Francer
which  led  to  the  payment  of  the  claim  without
further  delay.  The  effect  of  Jackson's  attitude
was  not  lost  upon  European  governments,  while  at
home  the  hurrahs  for  "  Old  Hickory  "  were  louder
than  ever.  The  days  when  foreign  powers  could
safely  insult  us  were  evidently  gone  by.

The  period  of  Jackson's  presidency  was  one  of
the  most  remarkable  in  the  history  of  the  world,
and  nowhere  more  remarkable  than  in  the  United
States.  It  was  signalized  by  the  introduction  and
rapid  development  of  railroads,  of  ocean  naviga-
tion through  Ericsson's  invention  of  the  screw-
propeller,  of  agricultural  machines,  anthracite  coal,
and  friction  matches,  of  the  modern  type  of  daily
newspaper,  of  the  beginnings  of  such  cities  as  Chi-
cago, of  the  steady  immigration  from  Europe,  of
the  rise  of  the  Abolitionists  and  other  reformers,,
and  of  the  blooming  of  American  literature  when
to  the  names  of  Bryant,  Cooper,  and  Irving  were
added  those  of  Longfellow,  Whittier,  Prescott,
Holmes,  and  Hawthorne.  The  rapid  expansion  of
the  country  and  the  extensive  changes  in  ideas  and
modes  of  living  brought  to  the  surface  much  crude-
ness  of  thought  and  action.  As  the  typical  popular
hero  of  such  a  period,  Andrew  Jackson  must  always
remain  one  of  the  most  picturesque  and  interesting
figures  in  American  history.  His  ignorance  of  the
principles  of  statesmanship,  the  crudeness  of  his
methods,  and  the  evils  that  have  followed  from
some  of  his  measures,  are  obvious  enough  and  have
often  been  remarked  upon.  But  in  having  a  presi-
dent of  this  type  and  at  such  a  time  we  were  fortu-
nate in  securing  a  man  so  sound  in  most  of  his  im-
pulses, of  such  absolute  probity,  truthfulness,  and
courage,  and  such  unflinching  loyalty  to  the  Union.
Jackson's  death,  in  the  year  in  which  Texas  was
annexed  to  the  United  States,  marks  in  a  certain
sense  the  close  of  the  political  era  in  which  he  had
played  so  great  a  part.  From  the  year  1845  the
Calhoun  element  in  the  Democratic  party  became
more  and  more  dominant  until  1860,  while  the  ele-
ments more  congenial  with  Jackson  and  variously
represented  by  Benton,  Blair,  and  Van  Buren,
went  to  form  an  important  part  of  the  force  of
Republicans  and  War  Democrats  that  finally  si-
lenced the  milliners  and  illustrated  the  maxim  that
the  Union  must  be  preserved.

Jackson  died  at  his  home,  "The  Hermitage,"
near  Nashville,  a  view  of  which  is  given  on  page
381.  The  principal  biographies  of  him  are  by
James  Parton  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1861)  and  Will-
iam G.  Sumner  (Boston.  1882).  Other  biographies
are  by  John  H.  Eaton  (Philadelphia,  1817);  Will-
iam Cobbett  (New  York,  1834);  Amos  Kendall
(1843) ;  P.  A.  Goodwin  (Hartford,  1832).  For  ac-
counts of  his  administration  see,  in  general,  Ben-
ton's "  Thirty  Years'  View."  the  memoirs  of  John
Q.  Adams,  the  histories  of  the  United  States  by
Schouler  and  Von  Hoist,  and  the  biographies  of
Clay,  Webster,  Adams,  Calhoun.  Benton,  and  Ed-
ward Livingston.  See,  also,  Mayo's  "  Political
Sketches  of  Eight  Years  in  Washington  "  (Balti-
more, 1839).  The  famous  "  Letters  of  Major  Jack
Downing  "  (New  York,  1834),  a  burlesque  on  Jack-
son's administration,  were  wonderfully  popular  in
their  day.  The  accompanying  picture,  taken  from
a  miniature  made  much  earlier  in  life  than  the
steel  portrait  that  appears  with  this  article,  was


384


JACKSON


JACKSON


painted  by  Valle,  a  French  artist,  and  presented
by  Jackson  to  his  friend  Livingston,  with  the  fol-
lowing note,  written  at  his  headquarters,  New  Or-
leans. 1  May,  1815 :  "  Mr.  E.  Livingston  is  requested
to  accept  this  picture  as  a  mark  of  the  sense  I  en-
tertain of  his  public  services,  and  as  a  token  of  my
private  friendship  and  esteem."  The  full-length
portrait  from  a  painting  by  Earl,  prefixed  to  Par-
ton's  third  volume,  is  said  to  be  the  best  represen-
tation of  Jackson  as  he  appeared  upon  the  street. —
His  wife,  Rachel,  b.  in  1767 ;  d.  at  the  Hermitage,
Tenn.,  22  Dec.,  1828,  was  the  daughter  of  Col.  John
Donelson,  a  wealthy  Virginia  surveyor,  who  owned
extensive  iron-works  in  Pittsylvania  county,  Va.,
but  sold  them  in  1779  and  settled  in  French  Salt
Springs,  where  the  city  of  Nashville  now  stands.
He  kept  an  account  of  his  journey  thither,  entitled
"  Journal  of  a  Voyage,  intended  by  God's  Permis-
sion, in  the  Good  Boat  '  Adventure,'  from  Fort
Patrick  Henry,  on  Holston  River,  to  the  French
Salt  Springs,  on  Cumberland  River,  kept  by  John
Donelson."  Subsequently  he  removed  to  Ken-
tucky, where  he  had  several  land-claims,  and,  after
his  daughter's  marriage  to  Capt.  Lewis  Robards,
he  returned  to  Tennessee,  where  he  was  murdered
by  unknown  persons  in  the  autumn  of  1785.  (For
an  account  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  her
marriage  to  Jackson,  see  page  374.)  Mrs.  Jack-
son went  to  New  Orleans  after  the  battle,  and
was  presented  by  the  ladies  of  that  city  with  a  set
of  topaz  jewelry.  In  her  portrait  at  the  Hermit-
age, painted  by
Earle,  she  wears
the  dress  in  which
she  appeared  at
the  ball  that  was
given  in  New  Or-
leans in  honor  of
her  husband,  and
of  which  the  ac-


^fcor-^t^  fetcK*Q4*S


companying  vig-
nette is  a  copy.
She  went  with
Gen.  Jackson  to
Florida  in  1821,
to  Washington
and  Charleston  in
1824,  and  to  New
Orleans  in  1828.
For  many  years
she  had  suffered
from  an  affection
of  the  heart,  which  was  augmented  by  various  re-
ports that  were  in  circulation  regarding  her  pre-
vious career,  and  her  death  was  hastened  by  over-
hearing a  magnified  account  of  her  experiences.
She  was  possessed  of  a  kind  and  attractive  man-
ner, was  deeply  religious  and  charitable,  and  ad-
verse to  public  life.  —  Their  niece,  Emily,  b.  in
Tennessee ;  d.  there  in  December,  1836,  was  the
youngest  daughter  of  Capt.  John  Donelson  and  the
wife  of  Andrew  J.  Donelson  (q.  v.).  She  presided
in  the  White  House  during  the  administration  of
President  Jackson,  who  always  spoke  of  her  as
"  my  daughter."  During  the  Eaton  controversy
(see  Eaton,  Margaret)  she  received  Mrs.  Eaton  on
public  occasions,  but  refused  to  recognize  her  so-
cially. —  His  daughter-in-law,  Sarah  York,  the
wife  of  his  adopted  son,  Andrew  Jackson,  b.  in
1806;  d.  at  the  Hermitage,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  23
Aug.,  1887,  also  presided  at  the  White  House  dur-
ing President  Jackson's  administration.  Her  son,
Andrew,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1858,  and  served  in  the  Confederate  army,
in  which  he  was  a  colonel.


JACKSON,  Charles  Davis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  15  Dec,  1811 ;  d.  in  Westchester,
N.  Y.,  28  June,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1833,  and  at  Andover  theological  semi-
nary in  1838.  He  then  became  professor  of  Latin
and  Greek  in  Lane  seminary,  Ohio,  was  afterward
head  of  a  classical  school  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  taught
at  Flushing,  L.  I.,  and  in  1842  was  ordained  priest
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He  officiated
as  rector  of  St.  Luke's  church,  Rossville,  Staten
Island,  and  at  St.  Peter's,  Westchester,  N.  Y.,  from
1843  till  1871,  and  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Norwich  university  in  1859.  He  published  a  series
of  articles  on  popular  education  in  the  "  Church
Review,"  and  he  is  the  author  of  "  Suffering  Here,
Glory  Hereafter  "  (New  York,  1872).

JACKSON,  Charles  Loring,  chemist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  4  April,  1847.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1867,  and  in  1868  was  appointed  as-
sistant in  chemistry  there.  Three  years  later  he
became  assistant  professor  of  chemistry,  and  in
1881  was  made  full  professor.  Meanwhile  he  vis-
ited Germany,  and  in  1873  studied  in  Heidelberg
under  Bunsen,  and  later  in  Berlin  under  Hof  mann.
He  is  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences,  and  in  1883  was  elected  to  member-
ship in  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  His
original  investigations  began  in  1874,  while  in  Ber-
lin, with  researches  on  the  organic  selenium  com-
pounds. From  1875  till  1883  he  was  engaged  in
work  on  the  substituted  benzyl  compounds,  which
he  described  in  a  series  of  about  twelve  papers.
During  1882-'3  he  was  engaged  in  the  study  of  cer-
tain compounds  obtained  from  turmeric,  compris-
ing the  determination  of  the  composition  of  curcu-
mine,  the  coloring  principle,  and  its  relation  to
vanillin  with  the  discovery  of  turmerol,  the  alco-
hol to  which  turmeric  owes  its  taste  and  smell.
He  discovered  in  1883-'4  a  new  method  for  the
preparation  of  borneol  from  camphor,  which  is
considered  the  best  method  that  has  been  found  as
yet.  In  1885  he  published  a  new  method  for  pre-
paring organic  fluorine  compounds,  and  in  1887
his  researches  included  a  new  and  simple  method
of  making  the  higher  sulphonic  acids.  The  pres-
ent knowledge  of  the  haloid  benzyl  compounds  is
due  almost  exclusively  to  his  investigations,  which
have  been  variously  published,  and  includes  some
thirty-eight  titles  in  all.  His  "  Lecture  Notes  in
Chemistry  "  (1878)  have  been  printed  privately.

JACKSON,  Charles  Thomas,  scientist,  b.  in
Plymouth,  Mass.,  21  June,  1805 ;  d.  in  Somerville,
Mass.,  28  Aug.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Harvard  medical  college  in  1829,  but  previously,
with  Francis  Alger,  had  made  a  geological  and
mineralogical  survey  of  Nova  Scotia,  of  which  he
published  a  preliminary  account  in  1827  and  a
fuller  description  in  1829.  Dr.  Jackson  then  went
to  Europe  and  pursued  medical  and  scientific
studies  in  Paris,  where  he  met  many  distinguished
men,  including  Elie  de  Beaumont,  the  geologist,
with  whom  he  maintained  a  life-long  friendship.
In  1831  he  made  a  pedestrian  tour  through  central
Europe,  and,  visiting  Vienna  during  the  preva-
lence of  the  cholera,  he  assisted  in  the  dissection
of  the  bodies  of  two  hundred  victims  of  that
disease.  In  1832  he  published  a  detailed  account
of  his  observations  in  the  "  Boston  Medical  Jour-
nal." While  in  Paris  his  attention  was  directed  to
recent  discoveries  in  electricity  and  magnetism,  and
accordingly  experimented  with  a  view  to  the  utili-
zation of  electricity  for  telegraphy.  On  his  home-
ward voyage,  in  1832,  he  communicated  his  ideas
to  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse,  who,  as  it  was  afterward
shown,  had  no  previous  acquaintance  with  the  sub-


JACKSON


JACKSON


385


^/i^f.  <y  <7A^r-c


ject  of  electricity.  In  1834  he  constructed,  success-
fully worked,  and  exhibited  to  his  friends,  a  tele-
graphic apparatus,  similar  to  the  model  that  was
patented  a  year  later
by  Mr.  Morse,  prior-
ity over  which  was  al-
ways claimed  by  Dr.
Jackson.  Meanwhile
he  settled  in  Boston,
where  he  practised
medicine,  but  soon
abandoned  that  pro-
fession, and  in  1838
opened  a  laboratory
for  instruction  and
research  in  analyti-
cal chemistry,  which
was  the  first  of  its
kind  in  the  United
States.  In  1836  he
was  appointed  state
geologist  of  Maine  and  surveyor  of  public  lands,
and  he  spent  three  years  in  the  execution  of  this
work,  publishing  three  annual  "  Reports  on  the
Geology  of  the  State  of  Maine  "  (Augusta,  1837-'9),
and  two  "  Reports  on  the  Geology  of  the  Pub-
lic Lands  belonging  to  the  Two  States  of  Massa-
chusetts and  Maine"  (Boston,  1837  and  1838).
He  was  appointed  state  geologist  of  Rhode  Isl-
and in  1839,  and  published  in  that  connection
"  Report  on  the  Geological  and  Agricultural  Sur-
vey of  Rhode  Island  "  (Providence,  1840).  Subse-
Suently  he  was  engaged  on  a  geological  survey  of
few  Hampshire,  and  during  the  three  years  spent
in  this  work  issued  "Reports  of  the  Geology  of
New  Hampshire  "  (Concord,  1841-4).  About  this
time  he  drew  up  a  plan  for  the  geological  survey
of  New  York,  which  was  adopted.  Dr.  Jackson
explored  the  southern  shores  of  Lake  Superior  in
1844,  and  was  the  first  to  call  attention  to  the
mineral  resources  of  that  country.  In  the  follow-
ing year  he  returned  to  the  same  region,  opened
copper  mines,  and  also  discovered  iron  mines.  In
1847  he  was  appointed  by  congress  t6  survey  the
mineral  lands  of  Michigan,  but  two  years  later  was
displaced  in  consequence  of  political  changes  in
the  National  government,  and  published  a  "  Re-

Sort  on  the  Mineral  Lands  of  the  United  States  in
[ichigan  "  (1849).  His  name  has  been  prominent-
ly mentioned  in  connection  with  the  discovery  of
the  anaesthetic  properties  of  ether  and  nitrous  ox-
ide, to  which  claim  has  been  laid  by  Dr.  William
T.  G.  Morton  and  Dr.  Horace  Wells,  two  physi-
cians who  had  studied  with  him.  Dr.  Jackson's
claims  for  priority  were  substantially  as  follows:
He  had  already  experimented  on  the  anaesthetic
properties  of  chloroform  and  of  nitrous-oxide  gas,
and  previous  to  the  winter  of  1841-'2,  having  re-
ceived some  perfectly  pure  sulphuric  ether,  he  tried
its  effects  upon  himself,  administering  it  with  a
mixture  of  atmospheric  air,  and  inhaled  it  to  such
an  extent  as  to  lose  all  consciousness,  without  suf-
fering any  of  the  dangerous  or  disagreeable  con-
sequences that  had  hitherto  attended  the  inhala-
tion of  impure  sulphuric  ether  unmingled  with
atmospheric  air.  In  the  winter  of  1841-'2  he  in-
haled ether  vapor  for  relief  from  the  very  severe
pain  occasioned  by  the  accidental  inhalation  of
chlorine.  The  relief  he  experienced  led  him  to  in-
fer "  that  a  surgical  operation  could  be  performed
on  a  patient  under  the  full  influence  of  sulphuric-
ether  without  giving  him  any  pain."  The  first
practical  use  of  anaesthesia  produced  by  ether  was
in  1846,  when  it  was  administered  to  a  patient  from
whose  jaw  a  tumor  was  removed  by  Dr.  John  C.
vol.  in. — 25


Warren  at  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital.  In
1852  a  memorial  was  presented  to  congress,  signed
by  143  physicians  of  Boston  and  its  vicinity,  ascrib-
ing the  discovery  exclusively  to  Dr.  Jackson.
About  the  same  time  the  question  was  investigated
by  a  committee  of  the  French  academy  of  sciences,
and  on  their  report  the  academy  decreed  a  prize  of
2,500  francs  to  Dr.  Jackson,  and  another  of  2,500
francs  to  Dr.  Morton.  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont  re-
marked in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Jackson,  dated  17  May,
1852 :  "  In  point  of  fact,  the  Academy  of  sciences
decreed  one  of  the  Montyon  prizes  of  2,500  francs
to  you  for  the  discovery  of  etherization,  and  it  has
decreed  a  prize  of  2,500  francs  to  Mr.  Morton  for
the  application  of  this  discovery  to  surgical  op-
erations." He  published  a  "  Manual  of  Etheriza-
tion, with  a  History  of  its  Discovery"  (Boston,
1861).  Dr.  Jackson  received,  besides  various  or-
ders and  decorations  from  the  governments  of
France,  Sweden,  Turkey,  and  Sardinia,  that  of  the
red  eagle,  from  the  king  of  Prussia,  on  the  recom-
mendation of  Humboldt.  His  scientific  discov-
eries were  very  numerous,  and  included  a  pow-
erful blast-lamp  for  alkaline  fusions,  which  was
very  serviceable  prior  to  the  introduction  of  illu-
minating gas  into  laboratories.  He  first  demon-
strated by  his  analysis  of  the  meteoric  iron  of  Ala-
bama the  presence  of  chlorine  in  that  class  of  bodies
and  discovered  the  deposits  of  emery  in  Chester,
Mass.  Dr.  Jackson  was  one  of  the  early  members
and  long  vice-president  of  the  Boston  society  of
natural  history.  His  separate  papers  comprise  very
nearly  100  titles,  and  were  contributed  to  scientific
journals  both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  In
1873  his  mind  became  deranged  by  the  constant
anxiety  and  worry  incidental  to  the  controversies
in  which  he  was  engaged,  and  the  remainder  of  his
life  was  passed  in  retirement.

JACKSON,  Claiborne  Fox,  statesman,  b.  in
Fleming  county,  Ky.,  4  April,  1807 ;  d.  in  Little
Rock,  Ark.,  6  Dec,  1862.  He  emigrated  to  Mis-
souri in  1822,  raised  a  volunteer  company,  and
served  as  its  captain  in  the  Black  Hawk  war.  For
twelve  years  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,
was  speaker  of  the  house  for  one  term,  was  one  of
the  originators  of  the  present  banking-house  sys-
tem of  Missouri,  and  for  several  years  was  bank-
commissioner.  In  1860  he  was  elected  governor,
and,  his  sympathies  being  with  the  south,  he  en-
deavored to  draw  Missouri  into  secession.  When
Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon  broke  up  the  secessionist  ren-
dezvous at  Camp  Jackson,  Gov.  Jackson  called  out
5,000  militia  and  ordered  them  "  to  defend  the  state
from  invasion."  On  the  approach  of  Lyon  and  his
command,  Jackson  was  forced  to  quit  St.  Louis,
and  in  July,  1861,  was  deposed  by  the  legislature.
He  then  entered  the  Confederate  army  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  but  was  soon  compelled
by  failing  health  to  resign.

JACKSON,  Conrad  Faeger,  soldier,  b.  in
Pennsylvania,  11  Sept.,  1813;  d.  in  Fredericks-
burg, Va.,  13  Dec,  1862.  Before  the  civil  war  he
had  been  connected  with  the  Pennsylvania  and
Reading  railroad.  He  joined  the  army  early  in
1861,  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  9th  regiment  of
Pennsylvania  reserves,  which  he  commanded  at
the  battle  of  Dranesville,  Va.,  and  served  under
Gen.  George  A.  McCall  in  the  Peninsula  campaign.
In  July,  1862,  he  was  made  brigadier-general,  and
commanded  the  3d  brigade  of  McCall's  division,
participated  in  the  battles  of  South  Mountain  and
Antietara,  and  was  killed  at  Fredericksburg  while
at  the  head  of  the  column  of  attack.

JACKSON,  David,  physician,  b.  in  Oxford.
Chester  eo.,  Pa.,  about  1747 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,


•S8Q


JACKSON


JACKSON


Pa.,  in  1801.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the
College  of  Pennsylvania  in  1768,  and  practised  in
Philadelphia.  On  3  Dec,  1776,  he  was  appointed
paymaster  of  the  2d  battalion  of  Philadelphia  mili-
tia, and  on  23  Oct.,  1779,  became  quartermaster  of
the  militia  in  the  field.  He  was  appointed  hospital
physician  and  surgeon,  30  Sept.,  1780,  and  was  in
service  at  Yorktown  when  Cornwallis  surrendered,
19  Oct.,  1781.  From  18  April  till  11  Nov.,  1785,
he  was  a  delegate  to  congress,  after  which  he  re-
tired from  public  life  and  became  an  apothecary
in  Philadelphia. — His  son,  Samuel,  physician,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  22  March,  1787;  d.  there,  4  April,
1872,  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment in  1808.  For  several  years  he  conducted  his
father's  drug-store,  and  during  this  period  became
a  member  of  the  1st  troop  of  city  cavalry,  and
served  as  a  private  in  Delaware  and  Maryland  dur-
ing the  campaign  of  1814.  In  1815  he  began  to
practise  medicine  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1820  be-
came president  of  the  board  of  health,  making  a
special  study  of  yellow  fever.  In  1821  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  materia  medica  in  the  Phila-
delphia college  of  pharmacy,  of  which  he  was  a
founder,  and  served  until  1826.  In  1827  he  was
chosen  assistant  to  Prof.  Nathaniel  Chapman  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1832,  in  an-
ticipation of  an  epidemic  of  Asiatic  cholera,  Dr.
Jackson  was  placed  at  the  head  of  a  commission  of
physicians  that  visited  Canada,  where  the  disease
first  appeared,  and  his  reports  were  published  in
pamphlet-form.  During  its  prevalence  in  Phila-
delphia, he  had  charge  of  City  cholera  hospital,
No.  5.  He  was  appointed  professor  of  the  insti-
tutes of  medicine  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  held  this  office  from  1835  till  1863,
when  he  resigned,  and  was  afterward  emeritus  pro-
fessor till  his  death.  He  was  known  in  Philadel-
phia as  "  Professor "  Samuel  Jackson,  to  distin-
guish him  from  another  physician  in  practice  at
the  same  time  known  as  Dr.  Samuel  Jackson  "  of
Northumberland."  Prof.  Jackson  made  some  repu-
tation as  a  lecturer,  and  read  before  the  Academy
of  sciences  in  Paris,  in  1818,  a  paper  upon  "  Medi-
ate Auscultation."  He  was  the  author  of  "  Princi-
ples of  Medicine  "  (Philadelphia,  1832) ;  "  Discourse
Commemorative  of  Prof.  Nathaniel  Chapman"
(1854);  an  introduction  to  J.  Cheston  Morris's
"  Translation  of  Lehmann's  Chemical  Physiology  "
(1855) ;  and  "  Medical  Essays."

JACKSON,  Edward  Payson,  author,  b.  in
Erzeroum,  Turkey,  15  March,  1840.  His  parents
were  American  missionaries  in  Turkey.  Edward
came  to  the  United  States  in  1845,  and  was  gradu-
ated in  1870  at  Amherst,  where  he  was  poet  of  his
class.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  45th
Massachusetts  regiment.  Since  1877  Mr.  Jackson
has  been  master  in  the  Boston  Latin-school.  He
has  published  "  Mathematic  Geography "  (New
York,  1873);  "A  Demi-God  "  (Boston,  1886) ;  and
"  The  Earth  in  Space  "  (1887).

JACKSON,  Francis,  reformer,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  7  March,  1789  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  14  Nov.,
1861.  His  father,  Maj.  Timothy  Jackson,  who  died
in  1814  at  the  age  of  fifty-eight,  was  an  officer
in  the  Revolution.  The  son  became  a  well-known
citizen  of  Boston,  was  at  one  time  a  member  of  the
city  government,  for  many  years  was  president  of
the  Anti-slavery  society,  and  was  the  originator  of
various  public  improvements  in  Boston.  He  pub-
lished a  "  History  of  Newton  "  (Newton,  1854).

JACKSON,  George,  Canadian  member  of  par-
liament, b.  in  Hatton,  Yorkshire,  England,  in  De-
cember, 1809 ;  d.  in  Durham,  Ont,  6  March,  1885.


/Yl^^^V^Lz*^--


He  was  engaged  in  business  in  the  city  of  Durham,
England,  and  in  1844  came  to  Canada,  where  he
purchased  the  mills  and  estate  at  Nottavvasaira,
near  Collingwood.  He  remained  there  until  1848,
when  he  was  appointed  crown  lands  agent  for  the
counties  of  Bruce  and  Grey.  In  1854  he  was
elected  the  first  representative  for  Grey  in  the
Canada  assembly,  re-elected  in  1861,  and  in  1867
chosen  to  the  Dominion  parliament,  but  was  de-
feated in  1873.  He  was  again  elected  for  that  con-
stituency in  1878,  and  continued  to  represent  it  till
1882,  when  he  finally  retired  from  politics.  He  was
also  for  many  years  warden  of  his  county.  Mr.
Jackson  began  his  political  career  as  a  Liberal,  and
then  became  a  Liberal-Conservative  and  a  follower
of  Sir  John  Macdonald.

JACKSON,  Helen  Maria  Fiske,  author,  b.  in
Amherst,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1831 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  12  Aug.,  1885.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Prof.
Nathan  W.  Fiske,
of  Amherst,  and
was  educated  at  the
Ipswich,  Mass.,  fe-
male seminary.  In
October,  1852,  she
married  Capt.  Ed-
ward B.  Hunt  (q.
v.).  She  had  be-
come known  as  a
contributor  to  pe-
riodical literature,
under  the  signa-
ture of  "  H.  H.,"
when  in  October,
1875,  she  married
William  S.  Jack-
son, and  thereafter
spent  much  of  her
time  in  Colorado  Springs,  where  her  husband  was  a
banker.  She  became  actively  interested  in  the  treat-
ment of  the  Indians  by  the  U.  S.  government  in
1879,  and  strove  to  better  the  condition  of  that  race.
In  1883  she  was  appointed  special  commissioner  to
examine  into  the  condition  of  the  Mission  Indians
of  California,  and  while  thus  engaged  she  studied
the  history  of  the'  early  Spanish  missions.  From
her  death-bed  she  wrote  to  the  president  a  pathetic
appeal  with  reference  to  "  righting  the  wrongs  of
the  Indian  race."  Her  published  works  include
"  Verses  "  (Boston,  1870 ;  enlarged  ed.,  1874) ;  "  Bits
of  Travel "  (1872) ;  "  Bits  of  Talk  about  Home  Mat-
ters "  (1873) ;  "  Bits  of  Talk  for,  Young  People  "
(1876) ;  "  Bits  of  Travel  at  Home  "  (1878) ;  "  Nelly's
Silver-Mine  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Story  of  Boon  "  (1879) ;
"  Letters  from  a  Cat "  (1880)  * "  A  Century  of  Dis-
honor," referring  to  the  Indians  (New  York,  1881) ;
"Mammy  Tittleback  and  her  Family"  (1881);
"  The  Training  of  Children  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Hunter
Cats  of  Connorloa"  (1884);  "Ramona"  (1884);
"  Zeph  "  (1886)  ;  "  Glimpses  of  Three  Coasts  ""
(1886) :  "  Sonnets  and  Lyrics  "  (1886) ;  "  Between
Whiles  "  (1887) ;  also  "  Mercy  Philbrick's  Choice  "
(1876)  and  "  Hetty's  Strange  History  "  (1877),  con-
tributed to  the  "No-Name  Series."  The  stories
published  under  the  pen-name  of  Saxe  Holm  have
been  attributed  to  her.

JACKSON,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston  in  Oc-
tober, 1747 ;  d.  there,  4  Jan.,  1809.  He  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  16th  Massachusetts  regi-
ment, 12  Jan.,  1777,  commanded  the  9th  or  Boston
regiment  in  1779-'82,  and  fought  in  Rhode  Island
in  1778,  and  at  Springfield,  N.  J.,  in  June,  1780.
He  afterward  commanded  the  4th  Massachusetts
regiment,  and  was  major-general  of  Massachusetts
militia  from  1772  till  1796.


JACKSON


JACKSON


387


JACKSON,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  16  June,  1798 ;  d.  near  East  Green-
wich, R.  I.,  2  March,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1817,  studied  one  term  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary,  was  ordained  as  the  pastor  of  the
1st  Baptist  church  of  Charlestown.  Mass.,  in  1822,
labored  there  fourteen  years,  and  founded  the
Charlestown  female  seminary.  From  1837  till  1845
he  was  successively  settled  over  churches  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  and  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  and  from
1847  till  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  Central  Bap-
tist church  in  Newport,  R.  I.  He  was  a  founder
and  trustee  of  Newton  (Mass.)  theological  semi-
nary, a  member  of  the  corporation  of  Brown,  from
which  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1845,  and
made  bequests  to  both  institutions.  He  published
"  Account  of  the  Churches  of  Rhode  Island "
(Providence,  1854)  and  "  Anniversary  Discourse  be-
fore the  Central  Baptist  Church,  Newport "  (1854).

JACKSON,  Howell  Edmunds,  jurist,  b.  in
Paris,  Tenn.,  8  April,  1832.  In  1840  he  removed
with  his  parents  to  Jackson,  Tenn.,  was  graduated
at  the  West  Tennessee  college  in  1848,  and  then
passed  two  years  in  the  University  of  Virginia.  In
1856  he  was  graduated  at  the  Lebanon  law-school,
and  began  practice  at  Jackson.  In  1859  he  re-
moved to  Memphis,  and  was  twice  appointed  a
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court.  He  returned  to
Jackson  in  1876,  and  was  elected  a  representative
in  the  legislature  in  1880.  He  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  Tennessee  for  the  term  beginning  4
March,  1881,  but  resigned  in  1886,  and  in  March
of  that  year  was  appointed  by  President  Cleveland
U.  S.  district  judge  for  the  western  district  of  Ten-
nessee.— His  brother,  William  Hicks,  soldier,  b.
in  Paris,  Tenn.,  7  Oct.,  1835,  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856,  and  assigned
to  the  mounted  riflemen.  He  served  at  the  cav-
alry school,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  in  1856-'7,  and  after-
ward, among  other  services,  was  engaged  in  a  skir-
mish with  the  Kiowa  Indians  near  Fort  Craig,
N.  M.,  7  Dec,  1857,  in  scouting  in  the  Navajo
country  in  1859  and  in  the  Comanche^  and  Kiowa
expedition  in  1860.  He  resigned,  16  May,  1861,
and  entered  the  Confederate  army.  During  the
civil  war  he  served  in  the  southwest,  fought
against  Grant  at  Vicksburg  and  Sherman  at  At-
lanta, and  attained  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.
Since  the  war  he  has  been  mainly  engaged  in  stock-
raising,  and  is  the  proprietor  of  the  Belle  Meade
stock  farm,  in  the  blue-grass  region  of  Tennessee.

JACKSON,  Isaac  W.,  educator,  b.  in  Cornwall,
N.  Y.,  in  1805  ;  d.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  28  July,
1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1826,
and  remained  in  that  institution  from  that  date,
first  as  a  tutor,  and  soon  afterward  as  a  professor.
He  was  instrumental  in  developing  the  art  of  land-
scape gardening  and  horticulture,  and  by  means
of  his  garden  contributed  largely  to  the  introduc-
tion, perfecting,  and  distribution  of  the  choicest
flowers.  He  was  a  successful  educator,  and  the  au-
thor of  "  Elements  of  Conic  Sections "  (Albany,
new  ed.,  Schenectady,  1854),  and  a  "Treatise  on
Optics  "  (Albany,  new  ed.,  Schenectady,  1854).

JACKSON,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Moreton-
Hampstead,  Devonshire,  England,  21  Sept.,  1757  ;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  16  March.  1806.  He  came
to  this  country  in  1772,  and  studied  law  in  Savan-
nah, Ga.  He  was  active  in  repelling  the  British
from  Savannah  in  March,  1776,  and  commanded
a  company  until  the  Florida  expedition  of  Gen.
Howe.  He  was  made  brigade-major  of  Georgia
militia  in  1778,  and  was  wounded  in  the  skirmish
at  Midway,  Ga.,  in  which  Gen.  James  Screven  was
killed. He  took  part  in  the  defence  of  Savannah,


'*Zs.


and  when  it  was  captured,  29  Dec,  1778,  he  fled  to
South  Carolina,  where  he  joined  Gen.  Moultrie.
His  appearance  was  so  wretched  while  in  his  flight
that  he  was  arrested  by  a  party  of  Whigs,  tried
and  condemned  as  a  spy,  and  was  about  to  be  exe-
cuted when  a  reputable  citizen  of  Georgia,  who
knew  him,  identi-
fied and  saved  him.
In  March,  1780,
he  fought  a  duel
with  Lieut.  *  Gov.
Wells,  and  killed
his  antagonist,  but
was  wounded.  He
joined  Col.  Elijah
Clark  in  August,
1780,  was  volunteer
aide  to  Sumter  at
Blackstocks,  and  in
1781  was  brigade-
major  to  Gen.  Pick-
ens, sharing  in  the
victory  of  the  Cow-
pens.  At  the  battle
of  Long  Cane,  when
Col.  Clark  was  dis-
abled, Jackson  saved

his  company  from  dispersion,  was  at  the  siege
of  Augusta,  and  left  in  charge  of  the  garrison
after  the  expulsion  of  the  British.  He  next  com-
manded a  legionary  corps,  with  which  he  did  ex-
cellent service.  At  the  close  of  the  war  the  as-
sembly of  the  state  of  Georgia  presented  him  with
a  house  and  lot  in  Savannah.  He  engaged  suc-
cessfully in  the  practice  of  law,  was  made  a  briga-
dier-general in  1786,  and  was  elected  governor  of
Georgia  in  1788,  but  declined  to  serve,  pleading
youth  and  inexperience.  He  was  a  member  of  the
convention  that  adopted  the  first  constitution  of
Georgia,  and  was  elected  a  representative  in  the
1st  congress,  serving  from  20  April,  1789,  till  3
March,  1791.  He  was  afterward  chosen  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  Georgia,  and  served  from  2  Dec.  1793,
till  1795,  when  he  resigned.  He  was  governor  of
Georgia  in  1798-1801,  and  was  again  elected  a
senator,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1801,  till  his  death.
While  in  congress  he  strongly  opposed  the  bill  for
the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade. — His  brother,
Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Moreton-Hampstead,  Dev-
onshire, England.  7  July,  1778;  d.  near  Athens,
Ga.,  26  April,  1840,  came  to  the  United  States  at
the  age  of  twelve,  and  was  educated  by  James.
He  was  graduated  in  the  Medical  college  of  Phila-
delphia, and  in  1811  was  appointed  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Georgia.  He  filled  this  chair  until  his
appointment  in  1814  as  secretary  of  legation  in
France,  and  on  the  return  of  the  U.  S.  minister,
William  H.  Crawford,  remained  as  charge  d'affaires
until  1817.  After  his  return  he  resumed  his  du-
ties as  professor,  and  continued  to  discharge  them
till  1828,  when  he  retired.  He  was  admired  for
his  talents,  and  esteemed  for  his  virtues  and  amia-
ble qualities. — Henry's  son,  Henry  Rootes,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  24  June,  1820,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1839.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Georgia  in  1840,  appointed  U.  S.  district
attorney  for  the  state  in  1843,  and  was  colonel
of  a  Georgia  regiment  in  the  Mexican  war.  In
1848-'9  he  was  editor  and  part  owner  of  the  Sa-
vannah "  Georgian."  He  was  judge  of  the  superior
court  of  Georgia  from  December,  1849,  till  the
summer  of  1853,  when  he  resigned  to  become  U.S.
charge  d'affaires  at  the  court  of  Austria,  and  was
minister  resident  there  from  the  summer  of  1854


388


JACKSON


JACKSON


till  the  summer  of  1858,  when  he  resigned.  Shortly
after  his  return  to  Savannah  he  was  appointed  by
the  U.  S.  government  associate  counsel  with  the
district  attorney  for  Georgia  in  the  prosecution  of
the  persons  connected  with  the  importation  of
slaves  on  "  The  Wanderer,"  and  was  actively  en-
gaged for  two  years  in  this  work.  In  December,
1858,  he  was  elected  chancellor  of  the  University
of  Georgia,  but  after  some  correspondence  retired
from  the  office.  He  was  appointed  major-general
to  command  the  forces  of  Georgia  after  the  passage
of  the  ordinance  of  secession,  and  was  judge  of
Confederate  courts  from  20  March,  1861,  till  17
Aug.,  1861,  when  he  retired  to  accept  the  commis-
sion of  brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate  army.
In  December,  1861,  he  was  appointed  major-general
of  a  division  of  Georgia  troops  in  the  field,  was  re-
appointed brigadier  -  general  in  the  Confederate
army  in  1863,  and  assigned  a  command  on  the  up-
per Potomac.  He  was  under  Hood  in  his  expedi-
tion to  Tennessee  in  the  autumn  of  1864.  partici-
pated in  the  battles  of  Franklin  and  Nashville,
and  was  taken  prisoner,  with  his  entire  command,
at  the  latter  place.  As  a  prisoner  of  war  he  was
taken  first  to  Johnson's  island,  and  then  to  Fort
Warren,  where  he  remained  till  the  end  of  the  war.
After  his  liberation  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law
at  Savannah.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to
Mexico  on  23  March,  1885,  but  resigned,  30  June,
1885,  and  withdrew  from  office  in  the  following
October.  He  has  been  president  of  the  Georgia
historical  society,  Savannah,  trustee  of  Telfair
academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in  that  city,  and  on
8  Oct.,  1875,  was  made  a  trustee  of  the  Peabody
education  fund.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Tallulah,
and  Other  Poems  "  (Savannah,  1851). —  James's
grandson,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Jefferson  county,
Ga.,  18  Oct.,  1819  ;  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  13  Jan.,  1887,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1837,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.
He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1840-'l,  and  was
elected  secretary  of  the  senate  of  Georgia,  which
office  he  held  for  one  year.  He  was  elected  judge
of  the  superior  court  in  1846,  and  remained  on  the
bench  till  1859,  when  he  resigned,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  where  he  served
until  Georgia  withdrew  from  the  Union.  He  was
then  made  judge-advocate  of  Stonewall  Jackson's
corps  of  the  Confederate  army,  and  served  until
the  close  of  the  civil  war.  He  afterward  practised
law  at  Macon,  was  appointed  associate  justice  of
the  supreme  court  of  Georgia  in  August,  1875,  and
chief  justice  in  1879,  which  office  he  held  till  his
death.  He  was  a  delegate  to  every  conference  of
the  Methodist  church  after  the  admission  of  lay
delegates,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  oecumenical
conference  in  London.  Judge  Jackson  was  a  strong
advocate  of  the  union  of  the  northern  and  south-
ern Methodist  churches.  He  was  for  many  years  a
trustee  of  the  University  of  Georgia.

JACKSON,  James  Caleb,  author,  b.  in  Manlius,
Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  March,  1811.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Chittenango  polytechnic  institute,  and
was  a  farmer  till  1838,  when  he  entered  the  service
of  the  Massachusetts  anti-slavery  society  as  a  lec-
turer. In  1840  he  left  the  field  to  become  corre-
sponding secretary  of  this  society,  which  place  he
held  till  1842,  becoming  in  that  year  editor  of  the
"  Madison  County  Abolitionist,"  at  Cazenovia,
N.  Y.  In  the  autumn  of  1844,  together  with  Abel
Brown,  of  Troy,  he  purchased  the  Albany  "  Patri-
ot," and  he  edited  and  managed  it  till  1847,  when
failing  health  compelled  him  to  relinquish  journal-
ism. In  the  autumn  of  1847  he  founded  a  hydro-
pathic institute  at  the  head  of  Skaneateles  lake,


N.  Y.,  and  until  1858  was  its  principal  proprietor
and  physician.  In  that  year  he  founded  "  Our
Home  Hygienic  Institute  at  Dansville,  Living-
ston co.,  N.  Y.,  which  claims  to  be  the  largest  in-
stitution of  the  kind  in  the  world.  Dr.  Jackson
has  had  under  his  care  fully  20,000  patients.  He  is
the  author  of  "  The  Sexual  Organization  and  its
Healthy  Management"  (Dansville,  1861);  "Con-
sumption: How  to  prevent  It,  and  How  to  cure
It "  (1862) ;  "  How  to  treat  the  Sick  without  Medi-
cine "  (1870) ;  "  American  Womanhood :  Its  Pecul-
iarities and  Necessities  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Training  of
Children  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Debilities  of  Our  Boys  "
(1872) ;  "  Christ  as  a  Physician  "  (1875) ;  "  Morning
Watches  "  (1882) ;  and  several  monographs.

JACKSON,  James  Streshley,  soldier,  b.  in
Fayette  county,  Ky..  27  Sept.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Perry-
ville,  Ky.,  8  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Jef-
ferson college,  Pa.,  and  in  law  at  Transylvania
university,  in  1845,  and  began  practice.  At  the
beginning  of  the  Mexican  war  he  raised  a  regi-
ment of  volunteers,  and  served  for  a  time  as  lieu-
tenant. While  in  Mexico  he  had  a  difficulty  with
Col.  Thomas  F.  Marshall,  which  resulted  in  a  duel,
and  he  resigned  to  avoid  trial  by  court-martial.
He  then  resumed  practice  first  at  Greenupsburg,
and  afterward  at  Hopkinsville,  Ky.,  and  in  1860
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Unionist,  but  resigned
his  seat  in  autumn,  1861,  and  organized  for  the
National  government  the  3d  Kentucky  cavalry,  of
which  he  became  colonel.  He  took  an  active  part
in  the  battles  of  Shiloh,  Corinth,  Iuka,  and  Athens,
and  on  16  July,  1862,  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  commanded  a  division
of  McCook's  corps,  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  at  the
battle  of  Perryville,  where  he  was  killed.  Gen.
Jackson  possessed  great  personal  attractions,  and
his  impetuosity  led  him  into  several  duels  in  addi-
tion to  the  one  above  mentioned.

JACKSON,  John  Adams,  sculptor,  b.  in  Bath,
Me.,  5  Nov.,  1825;  d.  in  Pracchia,  Tuscany,  30
Aug.,  1879.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  machinist  in
Boston,  where  he  gave  evidence  of  talent  by  model-
ling a  bust  of  Thomas  Buchanan  Read.  He  stud-
ied linear  and  geometrical  drawing  in  Boston,  gave
much  time  to  crayon  portraits,  and  then  went  to
Paris,  where  he  studied  under  Suisse.  In  1858  he
went  to  New  York,  and  remained  there  till  1860,
when  he  returned  to  Florence,  which  was  afterward
his  home.  His  portrait  busts  include  those  of
Daniel  Webster  (1851) ;  Adelaide  Phillips  (1853) ;
and  Wendell  Phillips  (1854).  His  ideal  produc-
tions are  noted  for  their  anatomical  accuracy  and
graceful  treatment.  These  include  "  Eve  and  the
Dead  Abel"  (1862);  "Autumn";  "Cupid  String-
ing his  Bow  " ;  "  Titania  and  Nick  Bottom  " :  "  The
Culprit  Fav  "  (many  times  repeated) ;  "  Dawn  "  (re-
peated) ;  "  Peace  " ;  "  Cupid  on  a  Swan  "  ;  "  The
Morning  Glory"  (a  medallion  repeated  fourteen
times) ;  "  Reading  -  Girl  "  (1869) ;  "  Musidora  "
(Vienna  Exposition,  1873);  "Hylas"  (1875);  and
"  II  Pastorello,"  an  Abruzzi  peasant-boy  with  his
goat.  He  designed  a  statue  of  Dr.  Elisha  K.  Kane,
the  arctic  explorer,  for  the  Kane  monument  asso-
ciation (1860) ;  a  group  for  the  southern  gate-house
of  the  reservoir  in  Central  park,  N.  Y.  (1867) ;  and
the  soldiers'  monument  at  Lynn,  Mass.  (1874).

JACKSON,  John  Davis,  physician,  b.  in  Dan-
ville, Ky.,  12  Dec,  1834;  d.  there,  8  Dec,  1875.
He  was  graduated  at  Centre  college  in  1854,  and  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1857,  and  began  to  practise  in  Danville.
He  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  a  surgeon,
served  with  the  Army  of  Tennessee  during  the  first
year,  and  subsequently  with  the  Army  of  Northern


JACKSON


JACKSON


389


Virginia.  During  this  service  he  made  a  report  on
vaccination  among  the  troops,  which  was  pub-
lished, by  order  of  the  surgeon-general,  at  Rich-
mond. At  the  close  of  the  war  he  resumed  prac-
tice at  Danville,  and  was  eminently  successful.  In
1872  he  visited  England  as  a  delegate  from  the
American  medical  association  to  the  British  asso-
ciation. In  1873,  while  engaged  in  an  autopsy,  he
made  an  abrasion  on  his  finger,  which  finally  re-
sulted in  his  death.  Dr.  Jackson  was  a  member  of
various  medical  organizations,  and  was  to  deliver
the  address  before  the  alumni  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  at  the  date  of  his  death.  He  trans-
lated Farabeuf  s  "  Manual  on  the  Ligation  of  Ar-
teries "  (Philadelphia,  1874) ;  and  was  the  author  of
a  biography  of  Dr.  Ephraim  McDowell,  the  first
operator  for  ovariotomy  (1873);  and  various  con-
tributions to  medical  literature.

JACKSON,  John  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1774;  d.  in  Clarksburg,  Va.,  29  March,
1825.  He  was  appointed  a  surveyor  of  public
lands  in  1793  in  what  is  now  the  state  of  Ohio.
From  1797  till  1801,  and  again  in  1811,  he  was  a
member  of  the  Virginia  house  of  representatives,
and  was  also  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  in  1795-'7,  in  1799-1801,  in  1807-9,  and
in  1813-'17.  In  1819  he  was  appointed  judge  of
the  U.  S.  court  for  the  western  district  of  Virginia,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.

JACKSON,  John  King,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  8  Feb.,  1828;  d.  in  Milledgeville,  Ga.,  27  Feb.,
1866.  He  was  graduated  with  honors  at  the  Co-
lumbia university,  South  Carolina,  in  1846,  and
practised  law  till  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.
He  then  raised  the  1st  Georgia  infantry  and  the
Augusta  volunteer  battalion  for  the  Confederate
army,  was  made  colonel  of  the  5th  Georgia  regi-
ment in  1861,  and  subsequently  brigadier-general.
He  commanded  a  brigade  in  Bragg's  corps  at
Shiloh,  and  in  August,  1864,  took  charge  of  the
Department  of  Florida.  After  the  war  he  resumed
his  law  practice  in  Augusta.

JACKSON,  Jonathan,  statesman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  4  June,  1743;  d.  there.  5  March,  1810.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1761,  and  became  a
merchant  in  Newburyport.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Provincial  congress  in  1775,  a  representative  in
1777,  a  member  of  congress  in  1782,  and  state  sena-
tor in  1789,  when  he  became  U.  S.  marshal,  and
held  this  office  till  1791.  He  was  treasurer  of
Massachusetts  from  1802  till  1806,  was  also  presi-
dent of  the  state  bank,  and  was  treasurer  of  Har-
vard from  1807  till  his  death.  He  was  the  author
of  M  Thoughts  upon  the  Political  Situation  of  the
United  States"  (Worcester,  1788). — His  eldest  son,
Charles,  jurist,  b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  31  May,
1775 ;  d.  in  Boston,  13  Dec,  1855,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1793  with  the  highest  honors.  He
studied  law  in  the  office  of  Chief-Justice  Theophilus
Parsons,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  his  na-
tive place  in  1796.  In  1803  he  removed  to  Boston,
where  he  became  a  partner  of  Judge  Samuel  Hub-
bard, and  attained  a  high  rank  at  the  bar.  From
1813  till  1824  he  was  judge  of  the  Massachusetts
supreme  court,  and  in  1820  he  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitutional  convention.  He  was  chair-
man of  a  commission  to  codify  the  state  laws  in
1833,  and  drew  up  the  second  part  of  the  "  Revised
Statutes."  He  aided  in  introducing  several  im-
portant reforms  into  Massachusetts  legislation,  es-
pecially in  reference  to  debt  and  credit.  He  pub-
lished a  treatise  on  "Pleadings  and  Practice  in
Real  Actions,"  which  is  a  recognized  authority  on
the  law  of  property  (Boston,  1828). — Another  son,
James,  physician, b. in Newburyport,  Mass.,  3


Oct.,  1777 ;  d.  in  Boston,  27  Aug.,  1867,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1796,  and,  after  teaching  for  a
year  in  Leicester  academy,  was  employed  until
December,  1 797,  as  a  clerk  for  his  father,  who  was
then  an  officer  of  the  government.  After  studying
medicine  in  Salem  for  two  years,  he  sailed  for  Lon-
don, where  he  became  a  "  dresser "  in  St.  Thom-
as's hospital,  and  attended  lectures.  He  returned
to  Boston  in  1800,  and  began  practice,  which  he
continued  till  1866.  In  1803  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society,  and  in
1810  he  proposed  with  Dr.  John  C.  Watson  the
establishment  of  a  hospital  and  an  asylum  for  the
insane.  The  asylum  was  soon  founded  in  Somer-
ville,  and  afterward  the  Massachusetts  general
hospital  was  begun  in  Boston,  of  which  he  was  the
first  physician,  till  he  resigned  in  1835.  In  1810
he  was  chosen  professor  of  clinical  medicine  in  the
medical  department  of  Harvard,  and  in  1812  pro-
fessor of  theory  and  pcactice.  which  post  he  held
till  1836,  and  was  afterward  professor  emeritus
till  his  death.  He  published  "  On  the  Brunomian
System"  (1809);  "Remarks  on  the  Medical  Ef-
fects of  Dentition  "  (1812) ;  "  Eulogv  on  Dr.  John
Warren"  (1815);  "Syllabus  of  Lectures"  (1816);
"  Text  -  Book  of  Lectures  "  (1825-'7) ;  a  memoir
of  his  son,  James  Jackson,  Jr.,  who  died  in  1834 ;
"  Letters  to  a  Young  Physician  "  (1855 ;  4th  ed.,
1856) ;  and  numerous  contributions  to  the  Boston
"  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal "  and  other  peri-
odicals. He  also  published  articles  in  the  "  Trans-
actions "  of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society,  of
which  he  was  president. — Another  son,  Patrick
Tracy,  merchant,  b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  14
Aug.,  1780  ;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass,  12  Sept.,  1847,
was  apprenticed  to  a  merchant  of  Newbury-
port, and  subsequently  established  himself  in
Boston  in  the  India  trade,  in  which  he  acquired
a  large  fortune.  In  1812,  at  the  invitation  of  his
brother-in-law,  Francis  C.  Lowell,  who  had  exam-
ined the  process  of  cotton-manufacture  in  Eng-
land, he  engaged  in  a  project  to  introduce  into
the  United  States  the  power-loom,  then  newly  in-
vented, and  also  its  mode  of  construction,  which
was  kept  secret.  As  communication  with  Eng-
land was  prevented  by  the  war,  they  were  forced
to  invent  a  power-loom  themselves,  and  after  many
failures  succeeded,  in  the  latter  part  of  1812,  in
producing  a  model  from  which  a  machine  was  con-
structed by  Paul  Moody,  an  ingenious  machinist.
In  1813  they  built  a  mill  in  Waltham,  near  Boston,
which  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  that  combined
all  the  operations  for  converting  raw  cotton  into
finished  cloth.  He  made  large  purchases  of  land
on  the  Merrimack  river,  near  Pawtucket  canal,  in
1821,  and  several  mills  were  constructed  there  by
the  Merrimack  manufacturing  company,  which  was
organized  under  his  auspices.  This  settlement
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  city  of  Lowell.  He
superintended  the  formation  of  another  company
in  the  same  place,  and  in  1830  procured  a  charter
for  a  railroad  between  Lowell  and  Boston,  the  con-
struction of  which  he  directed  till  its  comple-
tion in  1835.  This  was  then  one  of  the  finest
works  of  its  kind  in  the  country.  Having  met
with  pecuniary  losses  in  1837,  he  took  charge  of
the  locks  and  canal  company  of  Lowell,  and  sub-
sequently of  the  Great  Falls  manufacturing  com-
pany at  Somersworth,  N.  H.  He  labored  zealously
to  promote  the  moral  and  intellectual  improve-
ment of  the  operatives  in  his  mills.

JACKSON,  Joseph  Cooke,  lawyer,  b.  in  New-
ark, N.  J.,  5  Aug.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1857,  and  subsequently  studied  law  at
Newark  and  at  the  law-schools  of  Harvard  and


390


JACKSON


JACKSON


New  York  university.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1860,  and  began  practice  in  New  York,
city,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  was  ap-
pointed aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Robert  Anderson,
and  ordered  to  Kentucky.  Subsequently  he  was
commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  New  Jersey
regiment,  and  appointed  aide  to  Gen.  Philip  Kear-
ny. While  serving  on  the  latter's  staff  he  declined
the  colonelcy  of  the  61st  New  York  regiment.  In
December,  1861,  he  was  ordered  to  join  the  divis-
ion staff  of  Gen.  William  B.  Franklin.  In  the
summer  of  1862  he  was  promoted  to  captain  for
gallant  conduct  during  the  seven  days'  conflict  be-
fore Richmond,  and  assigned  to  the  staff  of  the
6th  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  the
following  December  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  6th  New  Jersey  volunteers,  and  was
brevetted  colonel  for  "  meritorious  conduct "  at
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  in  the  same  month.
He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  13  March,  1865.  At  the  close  of  his  term  of
service,  he  was  appointed  by  the  War  department
a  commissioner  of  the  U.  S.  naval  credits,  and  suc-
ceeded in  having  1,900  naval  enlistments  from
New  Jersey  credited  to  the  quota  of  troops  enlisted
from  that  state,  thus  rendering  a  draft  unneces-
sary. Gov.  Joel  Parker  said,  in  a  message  to  the
legislature,  that  the  state  had  in  consequence  been
saved  the  expenditure  of  nearly  $1,000,000.  Gen.
Jackson  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  New  York
city,  and  in  1870  was  appointed  assistant  district-
attorney  for  the  southern  district  of  New  York.

JACKSON,  Mercy  Bisbee,  physician,  b.  in
Hardwick,  Mass.,  17  Sept.,  1802;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  Dec,  1877.  She  was  graduated  at  the
New  England  female  medical  college  in  1860,  hav-
ing previously  practised  medicine  in  Plymouth,
Mass.,  for  twenty  years  and  in  Boston  for  fifteen
years.  She  was  the  first  woman  that  was  admitted
to  the  American  institute  of  homoeopathy  in  Phila-
delphia, in  June,  1871,  became  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  homoeopathic  society,  and  of  the
Boston  homoeopathic  society  in  1873,  and  in  that
year  was  made  professor  of  diseases  of  children  in
the  Boston  university  school  of  medicine,  which
office  she  held  until  her  death.  She  was  twice  mar-
ried, her  first  husband  being  the  Rev.  John  Bisbee,
and  her  second,  Capt.  Daniel  Jackson,  of  Plymouth,
Mass.  She  was  an  active  worker  for  the  cause  of
temperance  and  woman  suffrage,  addressed  large
audiences,  and  contributed  frequently  to  the  "  Wo-
man's Journal,"  published  in  Boston.

JACKSON,.  Michael,  soldier,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  18  Dec,  1734;  d.  there,  10  April,  1801.  He
was  a  lieutenant  in  the  French  war,  and  afterward
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  where  he
served  as  major  of  Gardner's  regiment,  and  killed
a  British  officer  in  a  personal  encounter.  After-
ward he  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  Bond's  regiment,
and  was  wounded  in  the  thigh  at  Montressor's  isl-
and in  1776.  He  was  colonel  of  the  8th  Massa-
chusetts regiment  of  the  Continental  line  from
January,  1777,  till  the  close  of  the  war.  His  five
brothers  and  five  sons  were  also  in  the  army.

JACKSON,  Mortimer  Melville,  jurist,  b.  in
Rensselaerville,  Albany  eo.,  N.  Y.,  5  March,  1814.
He  was  educated  in  Flushing  and  New  York  city,
and  entered  a  counting-house,  where  he  remained
several  years,  also  studying  law.  In  1838  he  re-
moved to  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  and  in  the  following
spring  he  settled  in  Mineral  Point,  Iowa  co.,  where
he  acquired  a  good  law  practice.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  territorial  convention  that  was  held  in
Madison  soon  after  the  election  of  Harrison  to  the
presidency,  when  the  Whig  party  was  first  organ-


ized in  Wisconsin.  As  chairman  of  the  commit-
tee, he  prepared  and  reported  the  resolutions  em-
bodying the  platform  of  that  organization,  and
strongly  opposed  the  extension  of  slavery  in  the
territories.  From  1842  till  1847  he  was  attorney-
general,  and  during  his  term  conducted  many  im-
portant cases.  He  was  a  member  of  the  commit-
tee that  was  appointed  by  an  educational  conven-
tion in  Madison  in  1846,  and  prepared  a  plan  lor
improvement  in  common-school  education,  a  part
of  which  was  subsequently  incorporated  in  the
state  constitution.  He  was  interested  in  the  efforts
made  in  western  Wisconsin  to  have  the  reserved
mineral  lands,  which  were  held  by  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment, brought  into  market,  and  addressed  a
memorial  to  President  Polk  on  this  subject,  which
was  adopted  by  the  legislature.  On  the  admission
of  Wisconsin  to  the  Union,  he  was  elected  the  first
circuit  judge  for  the  5th  judicial  circuit,  serving
also  in  the  supreme  court  till  the  organization  of  a
separate  supreme  court  in  1853,  when  he  resumed
his  law  practice.  He  subsequently  united  with  the
Republican  party,  and  in  1861  was  appointed  by
President  Lincoln  U.  S.  consul  at  Halifax,  Nova
Scotia.  While  there  he  caused  the  seizure  from
Confederates  of  about  $3,000,000  worth  of  war  ma-
terial, and  advised  the  government  of  suspected
vessels.  In  1870,  at  the  request  of  the  secretary  of
state,  he  made  a  report  to  congress  on  the  fisheries
and  fishery  laws  of  Canada,  in  which  he  examined
and  discussed  the  controversy  between  Great  Brit-
ain and  the  United  States.  Judge  Jackson  also
addressed  a  communication  to  the  secretary  of
state,  reviewing  the  action  of  the  fishery  commis-
sion in  1877,  and  saying  that  the  sum  of  $5,500,000
that  had  been  awarded  to  Great  Britain  was  un-
warranted and  excessive.  He  resigned  his  consul-
ship in  1882  and  returned  to  Madison,  Wis.

JACKSON,  Nathaniel  James,  soldier,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  about  1825.  He  became  colo-
nel of  the  1st  Maine  regiment  in  June.  1861,  and
afterward  was  made  colonel  of  the  5th  Maine  regi-
ment. He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  24  Sept.,  1862,  commanded  the  2d
brigade,  2d  division  of  the  12th  corps,  and  served
through  the  campaigns  of  McClellan  and  Pope  in
Virginia,  being  wounded  at  Gaines's  Mills.  In  the
autumn  of  1864  he  commanded  the  1st  division  of
the  20th  corps,  taking  part  in  Sherman's  march  to
the  sea  and  in  the  invasion  of  the  Carolinas.  He
was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  at  the
close  of  the  war,  and  mustered  out,  24  Aug.,  1865.

JACKSON,  Robert  Montgomery  Smith,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Alexandria,  Pa.,  20  April,  1815 ;  d.  in
Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  28  Jan.,  1865.  He  was  a  resi-
dent of  Cresson,  Pa.,  where  he  practised  medicine
for  several  years,  and  was  known  for  his  scientific
attainments,  especially  as  a  botanist  and  geologist.
He  was  medical  inspector  of  the  23d  army  corps,
and  acting  medical  director  of  the  Department  of
the  Ohio.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
geological  commission,  of  the  American  philosophi-
cal society,  and  other  learned  bodies.  Dr.  Jackson
was  an  enthusiastic  mountaineer,  and  published  a
work  entitled  "  The  Mountain  "  (Philadelphia,  1860).

JACKSON,  Sheldon,  missionary,  b.  in  Mina-
ville,  Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  May,  1834.  He
was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1855,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1858,  where  he
was  ordained,  and  went  to  Spencer  academy.  Indi-
an territory,  as  a  missionary.  He  was  home  mis-
sionary for  western  Wisconsin  and  southern  Min-
nesota from  1859  till  1864,  and  in  that  year  became
pastor  of  a  church  in  Rochester,  Minn.,  with  an
oversight  of  the  mission  work  in  southern  Minne-


I


JACKSON


sota.  In  1869  he  was  made  superintendent  of  mis-
sions for  northern  and  western  Iowa,  Dakota,
Nebraska,  and  other  territories,  and  removed  to
Council  Bluffs,  giving  especial  attention  to  the  or-
ganization of  churches  in  this  region  and  along
the  Union  Pacific  railway.  In  1870  he  became
superintendent  of  missions  for  the  Rocky  mountain
territories,  and  settled  in  Denver,  Col.,  with  charge
of  the  country  from  British  America  to  Mexico.
He  remained  there  till  1882,  when  he  was  removed
to  the  mission  house  in  New  York  city  and  made
business-manager  of  the  "  Presbyterian  Home  Mis-
sionary." In  1879  and  1880  he  was  commissioned
by  the  general  government  to  bring  Indian  chil-
dren from  New  Mexico  and  Arizona  to  the  train-
ing-schools for  Indians  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  and  Hamp-
ton, Va.  In  1885  he  was  appointed  by  the  secre-
tary of  the  interior  U.  S.  general  agent  of  education
in  Alaska,  and  became  the  founder  of  the  public-
school  system  of  that  territory.  He  has  organized
more  than  100  churches  and  synods  in  the  far  west,
and  delivered  more  than  1.900  mission  addresses  in
the  east  between  1869  and  1882.  In  1872  he  es-
tablished an  illustrated  monthly  paper,  entitled
'•The  Rocky  Mountain  Presbyterian,  at  Denver,
Col.,  of  which  he  was  editor  and  proprietor  for  ten
years.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Hanover  college  in  1874.  His  publications  are
"Alaska  and  Missions  on  the  North  Pacific  Coast"
(New  York,  1880);  "Education  in  Alaska"  (Wash-
ington, 1881) ;  and  "  First  Annual  Report  on  Edu-
cation in  Alaska  "  (1886).

JACKSON,  Thomas  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in
Clarksburg,  West  Va.,  21  Jan.,  1824:  d.  at  Guinea
station,  Va.,  10  May,  1863.  His  great-grand-
father emigrated  from  London  in  1748  to  Mary-
land. Here  he  married  Elizabeth  Cummins,  and
shortlv  afterward  re-
moved to  West  Vir-
ginia, where  he  found-
ed a  large  family.  At
seven  years  of  age
Thomas  Jonathan,
whose  father  had  been
a  lawyer,  became  an
orphan,  and  he  was
brought  up  by  a  bach-
elor uncle.  Cummins
Jackson.  Young  Jack-
son's constitution  was
weak,  but  the  rough
life  of  a  West  Virginia
farm  strengthened  it,

^f  rfsf?/ y?  ant*  ne  Decame  a  con_

/. ^L^*^V^2^  stable  for  the  county.

He  was  appointed  a
cadet  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  at  the  age  of  eighteen.  His  prepara-
tion was  poor,  and  he  never  reached  a  high  grade.
On  his  graduation  in  1846  he  was  ordered  to  Mexi-
co, became  a  lieutenant  in  Magruder's  battery,  and
took  part  in  Gen.  Scott's  campaign  from  Vera  Cruz
to  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  was  twice  brevetted  for
•od  conduct  at  Churubusco  and  Chapultepec.
iter  the  Mexican  war  he  was  for  a  time  on  duty  at
Fort  Hamilton,  New  York  harbor,  and  subsequent-
ly was  sent  to  Fort  Meade,  Florida.  He  resigned
from  the  army  in  1851,  on  his  election  as  professor
of  philosophy  and  artillery  tactics  in  Virginia  mili-
tary institute.  He  was  noted  for  the  faithfulness
with  which  he  performed  his  duties  and  his  ear-
nestness in  matters  of  religion  (he  was  a  member
and  officer  of  the  Presbyterian  church);  but  his
success  as  a  teacher  was  not  great.  He  took  much
interest  in  the  improvement  of  the  slaves  and  con-


JACKSON


391


ducted  a  Sunday-school  for  their  benefit,  which
continued  in  operation  a  generation  after  his  death.
A  few  days  after  the  secession  of  Virginia  he  took
command  of  the  troops  that  were  collecting  at  Har-
per's Ferry,  and,  when  Virginia  joined  the  Con-
federacy a  few  weeks  later,  he  was  relieved  by  Gen.
Joseph  E.  Johnston,  and  then  became  commander
of  a  brigade  in  Johnston's  army,  which  rank  he
held  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  In  that  action
the  left  of  the  Confederate  line  had  been  turned
and  the  troops  holding  it  driven  back  for  some
distance.  Disaster  to  the  Confederates  was  immi-
nent, and  Johnston  was  hurrying  up  troops  to  sup-
port his  left.  Jackson's  brigade  was  the  first  to
get  into  position,  and  checked  the  progress  of  the
National  forces.  The  broken  troops  rallied  upon
his  line,  other  re-enforcements  reached  the  left,
the  Confederates  took  the  aggressive,  and  in  a
short  time  gained  a  victory-.  In  the  crisis  of  the
fight,  Gen.  Bernard  E.  Bee,  in  rallying  his  men,
said :  "  See,  there  is  Jackson  standing  like  a  stone
wall ;  rally  on  the  Virginians ! "  Bee  fell  a  few
moments  after,  but  his  exclamation  gave  Jackson
a  new  name.  For  his  conduct  at  Bull  Run,  Jackson
was  made  major-general,  and  in  November,  1861,
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  district  that
included  the  Shenandoah  valley  and  the  portion  of
Virginia  northwest  of  it.  In  the  course  of  the
winter  he  drove  the  National  troops  from  his  dis-
trict, but  the  weather  compelled  him  to  return  to
winter  quarters  at  Winchester.  Early  in  March  he
was  at  Winchester  with  5,000  men,  while  Gen.
Nathaniel  P.  Banks  was  advancing  against  him
from  the  Potomac.  Jackson's  instructions  were  to
detain  as  large  a  hostile  force  as  possible  in  the
valley,  without  risking  the  destruction  of  his  own
troops.  He  fell  back  forty  miles  before  Banks;
but  as  soon  as  the  latter  returned  to  Winchester
and  began  to  send  his  troops  away,  Jackson  with
3,500  men  made  a  forced  march  toward  Winches-
ter, and  on  23  March  attacked  the  troops  still
left  in  the  valley  with  great  vigor.  In  this  battle
(at  Kernstown)  he  was  defeated ;  but  so  fierce  and
unexpected  was  the  attack  that  Banks,  with  all  the
troops  within  reach,  returned  to  the  valley.  Jack-
son retreated  up  the  Shenandoah  and  took  position
at  Swift  Run  Gap  in  the  Blue  Ridge  mountains.

At  the  end  of  April,  1862,  he  entered  upon  a
new  campaign  in  the  valley.  While  McClellan's
great  army  was  pushing  up  the  peninsula  toward
Richmond,  Gen.  Irvin  McDowell  with  30,000  men
lay  on  the  Rappahannock  and  threatened  Rich-
mond from  the  north.  Banks  with  20.000  men  oc-
cupied Harrisonburg  and  was  watching  Jackson,
while  Fremont  was  gathering  a  column  of  15,000
men  on  the  upper  Potomac  and  moving  toward
Staunton.  Jackson  was  given  control  of  all  the
Confederate  troops  in  northern  Virginia,  with  in-
structions to  do  the  best  he  could  to  hamper  the
operations  of  the  National  armies  in  that  region.
His  troops  consisted  of  his  own  division  of  8,000
men,  Gen.  Richard  S.  EwelFs  division  of  about  the
same number,  and Gen.  Edward Johnson's  bri-

fade  of  3,000  men,  which  was  in  Fremont's  front,
ackson,  having  united  his  own  division  with
Johnson's  brigade  by  a  circuitous  march,  struck
the  head  of  Fremont's  column  at  the  village  of
McDowell  on  8  May,  and  damaged  it  so  as  to  para-
lyze it  for  some  weeks.  He  then  returned  rapidly
to  the  Shenandoah  valley  and  concentrated  all  his
forces  against  Banks,  who,  having  sent  half  his
troops  to  Gen.  McDowell  on  the  Rappahannock,
had  taken  position  at  Strasburg  and  tront  Royal.
Jackson  surprised  him,  overwhelmed  the  detach-
ment at  Front  Royal  on  23  May,  and  on  the  25th


392


JACKSON


JACKSON


defeated  Banks  at  Winchester  and  drove  him  be-
yond the  Potomac,  making  large  captures  of  pris-
oners and  stores.  The  National  government  took
possession  of  the  railroads,  and  recalled  McDowell
from  Fredericksburg  and  Fremont  from  West  Vir-
ginia to  fall  upon  Jackson's  rear,  while  Banks  and
Sigel  were  to  'move  from  the  Potomac.  On  the
night  of  30  May,  Jackson  at  Winchester  seemed
about  to  be  surrounded ;  but,  making  a  rapid
march  next  morning,  he  placed  himself  at  Stras-
burg  directly  between  his  principal  antagonists,
McDowell  and  Fremont,  and  kept  one  of  them  at
bay  by  a  show  of  force,  and  bewildered  the  other
by  the  rapidity  of  his  movements,  until  his  prison-
ers and  captured  stores  had  been  sent  to  the  rear.
He  then  retreated  up  the  valley,  pursued  by  Shields's
division  of  McDowell's  forces  and  by  Fremont,
whom  he  kept  apart  by  burning  the  bridges  over
the  Shenandoah.  He  turned  at  bay  at  Port  Re-
public on  8  June,  repelled  Fremont  at  Cross  Keys,
and,  crossing  the  Shenandoah  during  the  night
and  the  early  morning,  threw  himself  unexpectedly
upon  the  head  of  McDowell's  column  near  Port
Republic,  which  he  routed  and  drove  from  the  bat-
tle-field before  Shields  with  the  main  body  of  his
division  could  get  up  or  Fremont  could  render  as-
sistance from  the  other  side  of  the  river.  The  Na-
tional forces  retreated  to  the  lower  Shenandoah.
Jackson  now  hastened  by  forced  marches  to  Rich-
mond to  unite  with  Gen.  Lee  in  attacking  McClel-
lan.  Here,  on  27  June,  Jackson  turned  the  scale
in  the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills,  where  Fitz-John
Porter  was  overthrown.  He  also  took  part  in  the
subsequent  operations  during  McClellan's  retreat.
About  the  middle  of  July,  Lee  detached  Jackson  to
Gordonsville  to  look  after  his  old  adversaries  of
the  Shenandoah  valley,  who  were  again  gathering
under  Gen.  John  Pope.  On  9  Aug.,  Jackson,  hav-
ing crossed  the  Rapidan,  defeated  Banks  at  Cedar
Run.  A  week  later  Lee  arrived  with  Longst  reefs
corps,  and  the  campaign  against  Pope  began  in
earnest.  On  25  Aug.,  Jackson  was  sent  from  the
Rappahannock  with  25,000  men  to  pass  around
Pope's  right  flank,  seize  his  depot  at  Manassas,  and
break  up  his  communications  ;  and  this  movement
was  successful,  and  Pope  was  forced  to  let  go  the
Rappahannock.  Jackson  kept  his  opponent  at  bay
by  stubborn  fighting,  and  kept  him  on  the  ground
until  Lee  with  the  rest  of  the  Confederate  army  ar-
rived, when  Pope  was  defeated  in  the  battle  of  30
Aug.,  1862,  known  as  the  second  battle  of  Manas-
sas, Groveton,  or  Bull  Run.

In  the  Maryland  campaign  two  weeks  later  Gen.
Jackson  had  charge  of  the  operations  that  resulted
in  the  investment  and  capture  of  the  post  at  Har-
per's Ferry,  15  Sept.,  with  13,000  prisoners  and
seventy  cannon,  while  Lee  held  back  McClellan  at
South  Mountain  and  along  the  Antietam.  By  a
severe  night  march,  Jackson  reached  Sharpsburg
on  16  Sept.,  and  the  next  day  commanded  the  left
wing  of  the  Confederate  army,  against  which  Mc-
Clellan hurled  in  succession  Hooker's,  Mansfield's,
and  Sumner's  corps.  With  thinned  lines,  Jackson
maintained  himself  throughout  the  day  near  the
Dunker  church,  while  one  of  his  divisions — A.  P.
Hill's,  which  had  been  left  at  Harper's  Ferry —
reached  the  field  late  in  the  day  and  defeated
Burnside's  corps,  which  was  making  rapid  progress
against  the  Confederate  right  flank.  At  Freder-
icksburg, 13  Dec,  1862,  Jackson,  who  meantime
had  been  promoted  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-gen-
eral, commanded  the  right  wing  of  the  Confederate
army,  which  repelled  the  attack  of  Franklin's  di-
vision. When,  in  the  spring  of  1863,  Hooker's
movement  upon  Chancellorsville  was  fully  devel-


oped, Lee  ordered  Jackson's  corps  to  move  up  to
meet  him.  On  the  morning  of  1  May,  Jackson  met
Hooker  emerging  from  the  wilderness  that  sur-
rounds Chancellorsville.  and  at  once  assumed  the
aggressive  so  fiercely  that  Hooker  withdrew  into
the  wilderness  and  established  lines  of  defence.
As  these  offered  no  favorable  opportunity  for  at-
tack, Lee  ordered  Jackson  to  make  a  flank  move-
ment around  the  right  of  the  National  army.  At
sunrise,  2  May,  Jackson  was  on  the  march,  and  all
day  he  pursued  his  way  through  the  wilderness.
When  his  movement  was  discovered,  and  Gen.
Daniel  E.  Sickles  attacked  some  of  his  trains,  Jack-
son sent  back  a  brigade  to  cover  his  rear  and  con-
tinued his  march.  Late  in  the  evening  he  had
reached  the  old  turnpike,  upon  the  fiank  and  rear
of  Gen.  O.  0.  Howard's  corps,  which  held  the  right
of  Hooker's  army.  Quickly  forming  his  command
into  three  lines  of  battle,  Jackson  attacked  furi-
ously. He  routed  Howard's  corps  in  half  an  hour,
and  pressed  the  troops  sent  to  its  assistance  back
to  the  vicinity  of  Chancellorsville,  when  his  own
forces  were  checked  by  a  powerful  artillery  fire
from  batteries  hastily  brought  into  line.  (See
Pleasonton,  Alfred.)  Between  eight  and  nine
o'clock  Jackson  with  a  small  party  rode  for-
ward beyond  his  own  lines  to  reconnoitre.  As
he  turned  to  ride  back,  his  party  was  mistaken  for
National  cavalry,  and  a  volley  was  poured  into
it  by  Lane's  brigade.  Several  of  the  party  were
killed,  and  Jackson  received  three  wounds,  two  in
the  left  arm  and  one  through  the  right  hand.
When  he  had  been  assisted  from  his  horse  and  the
flow  of  blood  stanched,  it  was  some  minutes  before
he  could  be  conveyed  within  his  own  lines,  so
fierce  was  the  artillery  fire  that  swept  the  field.
This  fire  struck  down  one  of  the  litter-bearers,  and
the  general  was  badly  injured  by  the  fall.  His
left  arm  was  amputated,  and  for  some  days  he
seemed  to  be  doing  well :  but  on  7  May  he  was  at-
tacked by  pneumonia,  which  left  him  too  exhausted
to  rally.  His  remains  were  taken  to  Richmond,
whence,  after  a  public  funeral,  they  were  removed
to  Lexington.  Jackson  was  a  tall,  spare  man,  of
polite  but  constrained  address  and  few  words.  He
was  twice  married,  first  to, Miss  Eleanor  Junkin,
and  secondly  to  Miss  Mary  Ann  Morrison.  The
latter,  with  one  daughter,  survives  him.  A  bronze
statue  of  Gen.  Jackson,  paid  for  by  English  sub-
scriptions, was  unveiled  in  Richmond,  Va.,  in  1875.
His  life  has  been  written  by  Robert  L.  Dabney
(New  York,  1863)  and  by  John  Esten  Cooke  (1866).

JACKSON,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  1732;
d.  in  1813.  He  studied  theology  with  clergymen
of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church,  and  in  1753  was
called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  congregations  of  Ber-
gen, N.  J.,  and  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,  on  the  condi-
tion that  he  should  complete  his  studies  in  Hol-
land at  their  expense.  In  1757,  having  been  or-
dained by  the  classis  of  Amsterdam,  he  returned
and  took  charge  of  the  churches.  He  preached
in  the  Dutch  language,  and  was  a  celebrated  field-
preacher,  besides  being  esteemed  for  his  learning
and  literary  attainments.  About  1783  his  mind
became  affected,  but  his  ministry  was  not  termi-
nated till  1789,  when  insanity  of  a  pronounced
type  had  been  developed.

JACKSON,  William,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Londongrove  township,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  14  July,
1746;  d.  there,  10  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  descended
from  an  English  Quaker  family,  and  first  appeared
as  a  minister  in  1775.  After  his  marriage  in  1778
he  removed  to  Westbury,  L.  I.,  his  wife's  home,
but  returned  with  her  to  Pennsylvania  in  1790.
He  preached  at  the  New  Garden  monthly  meetings,


JACKSON


JACOB


393


and  at  the  yearly  meetings  in  New  York  and
Philadelphia,  and  in  1802  visited  Great  Britain
and  Ireland  on  a  religious  mission. In  the  latter

Sart  of  his  life  he  attended  the  yearly  meetings  of
iaryland  and  Virginia,  as  well  as  those  of  Penn-
sylvania, New  York,  and  New  England.  He  was
an  impressive,  though  not  a  frequent,  preacher,  and
a  strong  advocate  of  frugal  living  and  primitive
simplicity  in  attire  and  furniture. — His  wife,  Han-
nah, b.  in  Westbury,  L.  I.,  in  1748 ;  d.  25  Dec.,
1833,  also  became  a  minister  in  1792.

JACKSON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Cumber-
land, England,  9  March,  1759 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  17  Dec,  1828.  He  was  left  an  orphan,  and
brought  at  an  early  age  to  Charleston,  S.  C.  where
he  received  a  good  education.  He  was  appointed
a  lieutenant  in  the  1st  South  Carolina  regiment  in
June,  1775,  served  as  aide  to  Gen.  Benjamin  Lin-
coln in  the  fight  at  Stono  in  June,  1779,  was  en-
gaged in  the  repulse  at  Savannah,  and  taken  pris-
oner at  Charleston  in  May,  1780.  In  1781  he  acted
as  secretary  to  Col.  John  Laurens,  who  was  special
envoy  to  France,  and  he  subsequently  served  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Washington,  with  the  rank
of  major.  In  1782-'3  he  was  assistant  secretary  of
war  under  Gen.  Lincoln.  After  a  visit  to  Europe
he  practised  law  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  secre-
tary to  the  convention  that  framed  the  U.  S.  con-
stitution in  1787,  and  took  private  notes  of  the  de-
bates and  proceedings,  which  are  preserved  by  his
descendants.  During  President  Washington's  first
administration  he  was  his  aide  and  private  secre-
tary. He  next  spent  two  years  in  Europe,  and
upon  his  return  was  appointed  surveyor  of  the
port  of  Philadelphia  in  1796.  This  office  he  held
until  he  was  removed  by  President  Jefferson  in
1801,  after  which  he  began  the  publication  of  a
daily  newspaper  in  Philadelphia,  called  the  "  Politi-
cal and  Commercial  Register,"  which  was  con-
tinued till  1815.  From  1800  till  his  death  he  was
secretary  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  In  1820
he  became  a  solicitor  of  Revolutionary  pensions.

JACKSON,  William,  financier,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1783  ;  d.  there,  26  Feb.,  1855.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  and  was
trained  to  mercantile  life.  He  was  a  member  of
the  state  house  of  representatives  from  1829  till
1832,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig.  He  was  re-elected  for  the  following
term,  but  declined  a  second  re-nomination.  He
was  one  of  the  earliest  promoters  of  railroads  in
Massachusetts,  delivering  an  address  to  the  legis-
lature in  favor  of  the  new  method  of  locomotion,
which  was  derisively  received.  Subsequently  he
delivered  the  address  in  various  cities  of  New  Eng-
land, awakening  an  interest  in  railroads,  and  when
their  construction  was  begun  superintended  the
works  on  the  Boston  and  Worcester,  Boston  and
Albany,  and  other  lines.  He  was  a  pioneer  in  the
temperance  movement  and  an  early  opponent  of
slavery,  being  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Liberty
party,  which  was  afterward  merged  into  the  Free-
soil  party.  From  1848  till  his  death  he  was  the
president  of  the  Newton  bank.

JACKSON,  William  Lowther,  soldier,  b.  in
Clarksburg,  Va.,  3  Feb.,  1825;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  26  March,  1890.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1847,  and  served  as  commonwealth's  at-
torney, was  twice  in  the  Virginia  house  of  dele-
gates, twice  second  auditor  and  superintendent  of
the  State  literary  fund,  once  lieutenant-governor,
and  was  elected  judge  of  the  19th  judicial  district
of  the  state  in  1860.  In  1861  he  entered  the  Con-
federate army  in  command  of  the  31st  Virginia
regiment,  and  in  1862  became  one  of  the  staff  of


his  cousin,  "Stonewall"  Jackson,  whom  he  fol-
lowed through  the  campaign  and  battles  around
Richmond,  Cedar  Run,  Harper's  Ferry,  and  An-
tietam.  With  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  he
recruited  in  northwestern  Virginia  a  brigade  of
cavalry,  which  he  led  in  the  subsequent  campaigns
of  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania.  In
May,  1865,  he  disbanded  his  troops  at  Lexington,
being  among  the  last  to  give  his  parole.  He  re-
tired to  Mexico  for  a  time,  and  on  his  return,  find-
ing that  a  statute  of  West  Virginia  debarred  him
from  the  practice  of  his  profession,  removed  to
Louisville,  Ky.,  and  pursued  the  law  until  1872,
when  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  circuit  court.
He  was  re-elected  from  term  to  term.

JACKSON,  William  Walrond,  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  Barbadoes  in  1810.  He  was  educated
at  Codrington  college,  Barbadoes.  and  was  a  licen-
tiate in  theology  of  that  institution.  He  was  at
one  time  chaplain  to  the  troops  in  the  islands,  and
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Antigua  in  1860.  His
episcopal  jurisdiction  includes  the  islands  of  An-
tigua, Nevis,  St.  Christopher,  Montserrat,  the  Vir-
gin islands,  and  Dominica.

JACOB,  Edwin,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in  Glou-
cestershire, England,  in  1794;  d.  in  Cardigan,
York  co.,  New  Brunswick,  31  July,  1868.  He
studied  in  Lincoln  college,  Oxford,  was  ordained
in  Gloucester  cathedral,  emigrated  to  New  Bruns-
wick, and  was  principal  and  professor  of  classics
at  King's  college  from  1828  till  1860.  The  degree
of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Oxford  univer-
sity. He  published  a  volume  of  sermons.

JACOB,  Louis  Leon  (zhah-kobe'),  French  naval
officer,  b.  in  Tonnay,  France,  11  Nov.,  1768 ;  d.  in
Paris,  16  March,  1854.  He  entered  the  navy  in
1784,  and  made  several  voyages  to  the  West  Indies
and  South  America.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant
in  1790,  served  during  the  troubles  in  Santo  Do-
mingo, and  in  1795  was  brevetted  commander
after  a  successful  combat  in  the  waters  of  the
island  against  several  English  men-of-war.  Three
years  later  he  assumed  command  of  the  station  of
Santo  Domingo,  where  he  rendered  great  services
in  protecting  the  whites  against  the  negro  insur-
gents. He  invented  in  1803  signals  that  are  yet
used  in  the  French  navy,  and  was  promoted  rear-
admiral  in  1812.  He  commanded  the  station  of
Martinique  in  1821,  and  again  rendered  great  ser-
vices to  the  white  population  of  Hayti.  He  gov-
erned Guadaloupe  from  1823  till  1826,  and  sup-
pressed several  negro  insurrections  in  that  island.
He  was  commissioned  vice-admiral  in  1827,  and
created  count  and  peer  of  France  in  1831.  Jacob
was  also  secretary  of  the  navy  from  1834  till  1836.
He  published  "  Les  signaux  metaphoriques  "  (Paris,
1806),  and  several  other  works.

JACOB,  Richard  Taylor,  soldier,  b.  in  Old-
ham county,  Ky.,  in  1825.  He  studied  law,  and
travelled  in  South  America.  Visiting  Califor-
nia in  1846,  he  raised  a  company  of  cavalry,  and
joined  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont  in  his  military
operations  there  until  its  conquest.  Returning
home,  he  was  soon  afterward  called  to  Washington
as  a  witness  for  Gen.  Fremont,  and  while  there
married  Sarah,  third  daughter  of  Thomas  H.
Benton.  He  has  filled  the  offices  of  legislator  and
judge  for  his  county,  and  has  been  active  in  poli-
tics. Though  a  supporter  of  Breckinridge  and
Lane  in  1860,  he  resisted  with  boldness  and  effi-
ciency the  effort  to  take  Kentucky  out  of  the
Union,  in  the  legislature  and  before  the  people.
In  1862,  at  the  request  of  Gen.  Boyle,  military
commandant,  he  opened  camp  at  Eminence,  Ky.,
in  ten  days  had  raised  a  regiment  of  1,244  cavalry,


394


JACOBI


JACOBS


and  in  ten  days  more  was  mounted  and  in  the
field.  He  rendered  active  and  valuable  services,
especially  to  BuelPs  army  in  Kentucky,  and  was
engaged  in  several  severe  skirmishes  and  battles,
receiving  two  disabling  wounds.  His  regiment
was  engaged  in  resisting  Morgan's  raid,  and  fol-
lowed him  until  his  capture  at  Buffington  island.
In  1863  Col.  Jacob  was  elected  lieutenant-governor
on  the  ticket  with  Thomas  B.  Bramlette.  Col.
Jacob  fiercely  assailed  the  emancipation  proclama-
tion as  an  act  of  violated  faith  toward  the  friends
of  the  Union  cause,  and  of  injustice  to  the  owners
of  property  in  slaves  in  a  loyal  state.  He  advo-
cated the  election  of  Gen.  McClellan  to  the  presi-
dency in  1864,  and  censuring  the  administration
in  unsparing  terms,  while  canvassing  the  state,
was  arrested  by  order  of  Gen.  Burbridge,  and  sent
through  the  Confederate  lines  to  Richmond.  He
afterward  received  an  unconditional  release  from
Mr.  Lincoln,  and  returned  to  Kentucky,  where  he
now  (1887)  resides  in  Oldham  county.

JACOBI,  Abraham,  physician,  b.  in  Hartum,
Westphalia,  6  May,  1 830.  He  studied  at  the  uni-
versities of  Greifswald,  Gottingen,  and  Bonn,  and
received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  at  the  last  named  in
1851.  He  became  involved  in  the  revolutionary
movement  in  Germany,  was  held  in  detention  at
Berlin  and  Cologne  in  1851,  convicted  of  trea-
son, and  confined  in  the  prisons  of  Minden  and
Bielefeld  till  the  summer  of  1853.  After  his  dis-
charge he  went  to  England,  and  in  the  following
autumn  sailed  for  New  York,  where  he  settled  as  a
practising  physician.  In  1861  he  became  professor
of  diseases  of  children  in  the  New  York  medical
college,  held  the  same  chair  in  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York
in  1867-70,  and  in  1870  became  clinical  professor
of  the  diseases  of  children  in  the  College  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons.  He  has  been  president  of  the
New  York  pathological  and  obstetrical  societies,
and  twice  of  the  Medical  society  of  the  county  of
New  York,  visiting  physician  to  the  German  hos-
pital since  1857,  to  Mount  Sinai  hospital  since
1860,  to  the  Hebrew  orphan  asylum  and  the  in-
fant hospital  on  Randall's  island  since  1868,  and
to  Bellevue  hospital  since  1874.  In  1882  he  was
president  of  the  New  York  state  medical  society,
and  in  1885  became  president  of  the  New  York
academy  of  medicine.  In  1868-'71  he  was  joint
editor  of  the  "  American  Journal  of  Obstetrics  and
Diseases  of  Women  and  Children."  He  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Contributions  to  Midwifery  and  Diseases
of  Women  and  Children"  (New  York,  1859),
jointly  with  E.  Noeggerath ;  "  Dentition  and  its
Derangements  "  (1862);  "  The  Raising  and  Educa-
tion of  Abandoned  Children  in  Europe "  (1870) ;
"  Infant  Diet "  (1874)  ;  and  of  a  "  Treatise  on
Diphtheria "  (1880).  He  contributed  chapters  on
the  care  and  nutrition  of  children,  diphtheria,  and
dysentery  to  Gerhardt's  "  Handbuch  der  Kinder-
krankheiten  "  (Tubingen,  1877),  and  on  diphtheria,
rachitis,  and  laryngitis  to  Pepper's  "System  of
Practical  Medicine "  (Philadelphia),  and  has  pub-
lished lectures  and  reports  on  midwifery  and  fe-
male and  infantile  disease,  and  articles  in  medi-
cal journals.  His  "Sarcoma  of  the  Kidney  in
the  Foetus  and  Infant "  is  printed  in  the  "  Trans-
actions" of  the  International  medical  congress
at  Copenhagen. — His  wife,  Mary  Putnam,  phy-
sician, b.  in  London,  England,  31  Aug.,  1842,  is
a  daughter  of  George  P.  Putnam.  She  studied
in  the  Philadelphia  woman's  medical  college,  then
in  the  New  York  college  of  pharmacy,  of  which
she  was  the  first  woman  graduate,  and  in  1868
went  to  Paris,  and  was  the  first  woman  admitted


to  the  Ecole  de  medecine,  where  she  was  graduate!
in  1871.  She  married  in  1873  and  has  had  three
children.  She  was  for  twelve  years  dispensary  phy-
sician in  Mount  Sinai  hospital,  became  professor  of
materia  medica  in  the  Woman's  medical  college  of
the  New  York  infirmary,  and  later  a  professor  in
the  New  York  post-graduate  medical  school.  In
1876  she  was  elected  president  of  the  Association
for  the  advancement  of  the  medical  education  of
women.  She  is  the  author  of  "  The  Question  of
Rest  for  Women  during  Menstruation,  an  essay
that  won  the  Boylston  prize  at  Harvard  univer-
sity in  1876 ;  "  The  Value  of  Life  "  (New  York,
1879);  "Cold  Pack  and  Anaemia "(1880);  "Studies
in  Endometritis  "  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Ob-
stetrics "  (1885) ;  the  articles  on  "  Infantile  Paral-
ysis "  and  "  Pseudo-Muscular  Hypertrophy "  in
Pepper's  "  Archives  of  Medicine  " ;  and  "  Hysteria,
and  other  Essays  "  (1888).

JACOBS,  Ferris,  soldier,  b.  in  Delhi,  N.  Y.,  20
March,  1836 ;  d.  in  White  Plains,  N.  Y.,  31  Aug.,
1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1856,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859,  and
practised  in  Delhi.  Joining  a  New  York  regi-
ment of  volunteer  cavalry,  he  served  through  the
civil  war,  rising  to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  at  its
close  was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  He  subse-
quently served  two  terms  as  district  attorney  of
Delaware  county,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1880  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican.

JACOBS,  George,  clergyman,'  b.  in  Kingston,
Jamaica,  24  Sept.,  1834.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1854,  and  in  1857  was  chosen  minister  of
a  Richmond  synagogue.  In  1869  he  was  called  to
the  pastorate  of  a  Philadelphia  synagogue,  where
his  influence  was  felt  in  educational  and  charitable
work.  He  wrote  several  Sunday-school  books,  and
was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  Jewish  press.

JACOBS,  John  Adamson,  educator,  b.  in
Leesburg,  Va.,  19  Aug.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Danville,  Ky.,
27  Nov.,  1869.  He  was  taken  by  his  parents  in
infancy  to  Kentucky,  was  left  an  orphan  at  thir-
teen years  of  age,  and  assisted  by  an  uncle  to
obtain  an  education.  He  studied  in  Centre  col-
lege, Ky.,  and  at  eighteen  years  of  age  was  made
superintendent  and  teacher  of  the  deaf  and  dumb
in  the  institution  that  had  been  recently  estab-
lished under  state  auspices  in  Danville.  To  fit
himself  for  this  service  he  spent  eighteen  months  in
the  deaf-mute  institution  at  Hartford,  Conn.  Until
1854  he  was  allowed  any  profits  that  might  accrue
on  the  boarding  department  proceeds :  but  in  that
year  he  voluntarily  gave  it  up,  thus  saving  at  the
time  $2,500  per  annum  to  the  state.  He  died
after  forty-five  years  of  service  in  the  institution.
Mr.  Jacobs  published  a  manual  of  lessons  for  his

Kupils  (1834),  and  "Primary  Lessons  for  Deaf-
lutes,"  which  received  many  commendations  on
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  (2  vols..  1859). — His
nephew,  John  Adamson,  educator,  b.  in  Cass
county,  Mich.,  6  Nov.,  1839,  was  educated  in  Mis-
souri, and  removed  to  Danville,  Ky.,  where,  at
twenty  years  of  age,  he  was  appointed  assistant
teacher  in  the  deaf  and  dumb  asylum.  In  1862  he
entered  the  National  army,  and  served  through
the  civil  war,  taking  part  in  many  campaigns  and
battles.  In  1865  he  resumed  his  position  as  teacher
in  the  asylum,  and  in  1869,  on  the  death  of  his
uncle,  he  was  unanimously  chosen  by  the  trustees
to  succeed  him  as  superintendent  of  the  institution.
JACOBS,  Michael,  educator,  b.  in  Waynesbor-
ough,  Pa.,  18  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  22
July,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college
in  1828,  and,  after  teaching  in  Maryland,  went  to
Gettysburg  to  assist  his  brother  David  in  1829,  tak-


JACOBS


JACOBSON


395


!ng  the  professorship  of  mathematics  and  natural
sciences.  On  the  organization  of  Pennsylvania
college  in  1832,  he  became  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  science,  in  which  post  he  con-
tinued until  1865,  when  he  resigned  the  chair  of
natural  science.  A  year  later  he  was  made  emeri-
tus professor.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1834.
and  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Jefferson
and  Wittenberg  colleges  in  1858.  He  invented  a
process  of  canning  fruit  about  1845.  In  1846  he
read  a  paper  on  "  Indian  Summer "  before  the
Society  for  the  advancement  of  science.  He  pub-
lished "  Notes  on  the  Rebel  Invasion  of  Maryland
and  Pennsylvania,  and  the  Battle  of  Gettysburg "
(Philadelphia,  1863),  contributed  an  article  on  the
same  subject  to  the  "United  Service  Magazine,"
published  articles  on  theological  subjects  in  the
Evangelical  Review,"  and  scientific  papers  in  the
"  Linnsean  Record  and  Journal,"  edited  the  last-
named  periodical  for  two  years,  was  for  more  than
thirty  years  a  contributor  to  the  publications
of  the  Franklin  institute  in  Philadelphia  and  the
Smithsonian  institution  in  Washington,  and  left
manuscript  "  Lectures  on  Meteorology,"  containing
the  fruits  of  his  independent  observations  in  that
science. — His  son,  Henry  Eyster,  clergyman,  b.  in
Gettysburg,  Pa.,  10  Nov.,  1844,  was  graduated  at
Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1862,  and  af-
terward at  the  theological  seminary  there.  He  be-
came tutor  in  Pennsylvania  college  in  1864,  and
having  been  engaged  in  home-mission  work  at
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  in  1867-'8,  was  principal  of  Thiel
hall,  at  Phillipsburg,  Pa.,  and  pastor  in  1868-'70,
and  professor  of  Latin  and  history  in  Pennsyl-
vania college  in  1870-'80,  of  ancient  languages
in  1880-'l,  and  of  the  Greek  language  and  lit-
erature in  1881-'3.  He  was  then  called  to  the
chair  of  systematic  theology  in  the  Lutheran  semi-
nary in  Philadelphia.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Thiel  college  in  1877.  Dr.  Jacobs  has
always  belonged  to  the  conservative  wing  of  the
Lutheran  church,  and  has  opposed  the  views  that
were  held  and  advocated  in  the  general  synod.
He  is  a  thorough  student  of  the  Confessions,  or
symbolical  books  of  the  Lutheran  church,  and  has
done  much  to  bring  them  within  the  reach  of
American  Lutherans,  and  also  to  the  notice  of  stu-
dents outside  of  his  own  church.  His  historical
introduction  and  notes  explanatory  of  the  history
of  the  Confessions  and  of  the  doctrines  set  forth
in  the  same  have  secured  for  him  wide  reputation.
Dr.  Jacobs  has  been  editor  of  the  •'Lutheran
Church  Review"  since  1883,  and  from  the  same
date  a  member  of  the  editorial  staff  of  "  The  Lu-
theran." His  published  works  include  Hutter's
"  Compend  of  Lutheran  Theology,"  with  Rev.  G.
P.  Spieker,  translated  from  the  Latin  (Philadelphia,
1868) ;  Schmidt's  "  Doctrinal  Theology  of  the  Lu-
theran Church,"  with  Rev.  C.  A.  Hay,  D.  D.,  trans-
lated from  the  German  and  Latin  (1875) ;  "  A
Question  of  Latinity  "  (1878) ;  "  Book  of  Concord,
or  Symbolical  Books  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran
Church,"  translated  from  the  Latin  and  German
(1882) ;  "  Book  of  Concord.  Historical  Introduc-
tion and  Appendices  "  (1883) :  Meyer's  "  Commen-
tary on  Galatians  and  Ephesians,"  edited  (New
York,  1884) ;  Duesterdieck's  "  Commentary  on  the
Revelation  of  St.  John,"  translated  and  edited  (1887);
and  various  pamphlets.  He  has  edited  "  Church
Almanac  "  (Philadelphia,  1874-'7) ; "  Proceedings

I  of  First  Lutheran  Diet "  (1878) ;  and  has  contrib-
uted largely  to  current  theological  literature. —
Another  son,  Michael  William,  lawyer,  b.  in
Gettysburg,  Pa.,  27  Jan.,  1850,  was  graduated  at


admitted  to  the  bar  in  1871.  He  practised  at
Gettysburg  and  Erie,  and  in  1875  settled  in  Harris-
burg.  He  is  the  author  of  "A  Treatise  on  the
Law  of  Domicile  "  (Boston,  1887).

JACOBS,  Orange,  jurist,  b.  in  Livingston
county,  N.  Y.,  2  May,  1829.  He  was  taken  to
Michigan  in  1831,  received  his  education  there,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In
1852  he  removed  to  Oregon  territory.  In  1869  he
was  appointed  associate  justice  of  Washington  ter-
ritory, and  was  made  chief  justice  a  year  later,  and
reappointed  in  1874.  The  same  year  he  was  elected
delegate  to  congress,  and  was  re-elected,  serving
from  6  Dec,  1875,  to  3  March,  1879. .

JACOBS,  Sarah  Sprague,  author,  b.  in  Paw-
tuxet,  R.  I.,  17  March,  1813.  She  is  the  daughter
of  Bela  Jacobs,  a  Baptist  minister  in  Cambridge.
Mass.,  taught  in  Georgia,  New  York,  Rhode  Island.
Nova  Scotia,  and  afterward  returned  to  Cambridge.
She  is  the  author  of  '•  Benedetta  "  and  many  other
fugitive  poems,  some  of  which  were  reprinted  in
Rufus  W.  Griswold's  "  Female  Poets  of  America  " :
also  of  a  memoir  of  her  father  (1837) ;  and  of  ju-
venile books,  one  of  which,  entitled  "  Nonantum
and  Natick,"  gives  in  a  readable  style  a  history  of
the  Indian  tribes  of  New  England,  and  of  John
Eliot's  missionary  labors  (Boston,  1853).

JACOBSEN,  Simon,  Dutch  mariner,  b.  in
Maestrich  in  1624:  d.  in  Leogane,  Hayti,  in  1679.
He  entered  the  French  service,  and  was  employed
for  several  years  by  the  Company  of  the  West  In-
dies, which  intrusted  him  in  1653  with  an  explora-
tion of  the  coasts  of  South  America  to  the  Straits
of  Magellan,  with  orders  to  take  possession  in
the  name  of  France  of  all  unoccupied  lands;  but
his  ship  was  wrecked  in  sight  of  Buenos  Ayres.
and  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Spanish.  On  his
release  he  returned  to  Dieppe,  and  in  1657  was  sent
to  found  a  colony  in  Brazilian  Guiana ;  but  the  un-
healthy climate  and  the  hostility  of  the  Spanish
drove  away  the  settlers.  The  company  then
bought  from  Diel  du  Parquet  the  southwestern
part  of  the  island  of  Martinique  in  1658,  and  Ja-
cobsen,  after  conquering  the  Caribs,  founded  a  pros-
perous colony  of  4.000  inhabitants.  He  was  given
the  government  of  Tortugas  in  1663  as  a  reward,
and  in  the  following  year  he  assumed  also  that  of
Santo  Domingo,  which  he  resigned  soon  afterward,
having  bought  from  the  company  a  large  tract
near  Cape  Leogane  in  1665.  He  founded  there  a
prosperous  city,  winch  he  ruled  until  his  death.

JACOBSON,  Christian,  Danish  explorer,  b.  in
Copenhagen  in  1528 :  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1596.
He  studied  divinity,  but  he  was  seized  with  a  de-
sire to  go  to  the  New  World,  and,  sailing  for  San
Lucar  de  Barrameda,  joined  a  cousin  who  was  es-
tablished as  a  merchant  in  Seville.  The  latter  ad-
vised him  to  enter  the  Roman  Catholic  church ;  to
which  he  readily  assented,  and  obtained  for  him  an
appointment  in  the  army.  He  was  sent  to  Peru
in  1551,  and  served  in  the  civil  wars  in  that  coun-
try. In  1557  he  went  to  Chili,  and  was  made  by
Hurtado  de  Mendoza  commander  of  the  marines  in
the  expedition  of  Ladrilleros  (q.  v.)  to  the  South
sea.  Resigning  his  commission  m  1564,  he  went
on  an  exploration  across  the  Cordilleras,  reaching
Buenos  Ayres,  after  a  dangerous  journey,  in  1565.
Thence,  sailing  again  for  Peru,  he  settled  in
Lima,  where  he  held  an  office  in  the  audiencia,  and
devoted  his  leisure  to  literary  labors.  He  wrote
"  Relation  del  Viage  de  Ladrilleros  al  estrecho  de
Magellanes"  (Seville,  1792);  "Historia  reperta?
navigationis  in  Oceanum  mare"  (1779);  "Derro-
tero  de  Viage"  (1794);  "  Vidas  de  Espanoles  cele-
bres"  (2  vols.,  1776);  and  several  other  works.


396


JACOBSON


JAMES


JACOBSON,  John  Christian,  Moravian  bish-
op, b.  in  Burkall,  Denmark,  8  April,  1795 ;  d.  in
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  24  Nov.,  1870.  He  was  educated
at  the  college  and  the  theological  seminary  of  the
Moravian  church  in  Germany.  In  1816  he  came
to  the  United  States,  and  filled  various  offices  until
1834.  when  he  was  appointed  principal  of  the
female  academy  at  Salem,  N.  C.  He  met  with
great  success,  building  up  that  school  until  it  be-
came one  of  the  best  known  and  most  prosperous
girls'  schools  in  the  south.  Subsequently  he  took
charge  of  the  boys'  boarding-school  at  Nazareth,
Pa.  On  20  Sept.,  1854,  he  was  consecrated  to  the
episcopacy,  and  stood  at  the  head  of  the  northern
district  of  the  church  until  1867,  when  he  retired.

JACOBUS,  Melanchthon  Williams,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  19  Sept.,  1816;  d.  m
Allegheny  City,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,  1876.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1834,  and  at  the  theological
seminary  there  in  1838,  after  which  he  spent  an
additional  year  in  study,  at  the  same  time  assisting
the  professor  of  Hebrew.  He  was  ordained  minis-
ter of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  of  Brooklyn  on
15  Sept.,  1839.  After  a  successful  pastorate  of
nearly  twelve  years  his  health  failed,  and  he  made
a  tour  through  Europe,  Egypt,  and  the  Holy  Land.
On  his  return,  in  1851,  he  accepted  the  professor-
ship of  oriental  and  biblical  literature  in  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  Alleghany  City,  where  he  re-
mained till  he  died.  From  1858  till  1870  he  filled
the  pastorate  of  the  Central  Presbyterian  church
in  Pittsburg  in  addition  to  his  work  in  the  semi-
nary. In  1869  he  was  moderator  of  the  last  gen-
eral assembly  of  the  old-school  branch  of  his
church,  and  in  1870  presided,  conjointly  with  Rev.
Dr.  Philemon  H.  Fowler,  at  the  opening  of  the
first  assembly  of  the  reunited  church.  He  was  an
effective  public  speaker,  and  held  a  high  place
among  biblical  scholars.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Jefferson  college  in  1852,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1867.  He  published
"  Letters  on  the  Public  School  Question "  and
"Notes  on  the  New  Testament"  (4  vols.,  New
York,  1848-'59).  These  commentaries,  which  were
designed  for  Sunday-school  and  family  use,  were
popular  among  all  denominations.  He  also  pub-
lished "  Notes  on  Genesis  "  (2  vols.,  1864-'5).

JACOBY,  Ludwig  Sigismund,  clergyman,
b.  in  Altstrelitz,  Mecklenburg,  21  Oct.,  1813:  d.
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  21  June,  1874.  He  was  of  Jew-
ish extraction,  was  converted  to  Christianity  when
about  twenty-one  years  of  age,  and  united  with
the  Lutheran  church.  He  had  studied  medicine,
and  on  his  arrival  in  the  United  States  in  1839  he
settled  as  a  physician  in  Cincinnati.  In  1841  he
entered  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  in
August  of  that  year  was  sent  by  Bishop  Morris
to  establish  the  first  German  mission  in  St.  Louis.
In  1849,  at  his  own  request,  he  was  sent  to  Brem-
en, Germany,  to  introduce  Methodism  there,  and
met  with  good  success.  There,  for  twenty-two
years,  he  labored  as  presiding  elder,  editor,  pub-
lishing agent,  and  superintendent.  In  1872  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States,  was  stationed  at  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  and  in  1873  was  made  presiding  elder
of  the  St.  Louis  district.  He  published  many  ser-
mons, etc.,  in  both  English  and  German,  his  chief
works  being :  "  Geschichte  des  Methodismus,  seiner
Entstehung  und  Ausbreitung  in  den  verschiedenen
Theilen  der  Erde  "  (Cincinnati,  1855) ; "  Letzte  Stun-
den,  oder  die  Kraft  der  Religion  Jesu  Christi  im
Tode "'  (1874) ;  "  Kurzer  Inbegriff  der  christlichen
Glaubenslehre";  and  "Biblische  Hand-Concordanz."

JACOME,  Diego,  Portuguese  missionary,  b.  in
Portugal  early  in  the  16th  century;  d.  in  Brazil  in


1565.  He  entered  the  Jesuit  order  m  1548,  and
went  to  Brazil  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  natives.
When  the  plague  broke  out  in  Espirito  Santo,  he
devoted  himself  to  the  care  of  the  sick,  and  con-
tracted the  disease  of  which  he  died.  He  wrote
"  Carta  escripa  do  Brazil  em  1551,  em  que  trata  dos
costumes  dos  Indios,  e  trabalhos,  que  os  PP.  da
companhia  padecem  na  sua  conversao."  The  origi-
nal is  preserved  in  the  convent  of  St.  Roch.  Lis-
bon. It  was  translated  into  Italian  (Venice,  1559).

JACQUES,  D.  H.,  author,  b.  about  1825;  d.  near
Fernandina,  Fla.,  28  Aug.,  1877.  He  was  a  physi-
cian, edited  the  "  Rural  Carolinian,"  and  was  the
author  of  "  Hints  toward  Physical  Perfection,  or
Philosophy  of  Human  Beauty  "  (New  York,  1859) ;
"  The  Garden  "  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  The  Farm,"
with  an  essay  by  John  J.  Thomas  (revised  ed.,  New
York,  1866) ;  and  other  agricultural  works.

JACQUIN,  Nicolas  Joseph,  Dutch  botanist,
b.  in  Leyden,  16  Feb.,  1727;  d.  in  Vienna,  24  Oct.,
1817.  He  was  appointed  in  1752,  by  Francis  I.,
imperial  botanist,  and  two  years  later  went  to
America  in  search  of  unknown  plants.  He  re-
mained five  years  in  South  America  and  the  West
Indies,  and  returned  to  Europe  in  1760,  with  a  rich
collection  of  plants  and  many  specimens  in  natu-
ral history,  which  he  presented  to  the  emperor.
They  became  afterward  the  property  of  the  Mu-
seum of  Schoenbrunn,  which  he  contrived  to  make
one  of  the  most  interesting  in  Europe.  He  was
appointed  in  1774  professor  of  botany  and  chem-
istry in  the  University  of  Vienna,  and  created
baron  by  Joseph  II.  in  1806.  Jacquin  discovered
about  sixty  new  species  of  plants,  and  Linnaeus  has
given  his  name  to  a  tree  of  the  family  of  the  Sa-
potellas,  peculiar  to  the  West  Indies.  His  numer-
ous works  include  "Selectarum  stirpium  ameri-
canarum  historia  "  (Vienna,  1763 ;  2d  ed.,  revised,
1781) ;  and  "  Enumeratio  systematica  plantarum
quae  in  insulis  Caribaeis,  vicinoque  Americae  con-
tinente  detexit "  (Leyden,  1760).

JAFFREY,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Castle,
N.  H.,  22  Nov.,  1682 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  8
May,  1749.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1702,
studied  law,  and  was  successively  a  councillor,
a  judge,  treasurer  of  New  Hampshire,  and  chief
justice. The  town  of  Jaffrey  is  named  for  him.

JAGGAR,  Thomas  Augustus,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  New  York  city,  2  June,  1839.  He  was  educated
by  a  private  tutor,  and  began  a  course  of  prepara-
tion for  the  ministry  while  engaged  in  business.
He  was  graduated  at  the  General  theological  semi-
nary, and  was  made  deacon,  10  Nov.,  1860,  at
once  becoming  assistant  minister  of  St.  George's,
Flushing,  N.  Y.  In  May,  1862,  he  took  charge  of
Trinity  church,  Bergen  Point,  N.  J.,  and  was  or-
dained priest,  3  June,  1863,  by  Bishop  Potter,  of
New  York.  He  was  successively  rector  of  Anthon
memorial  church,  New  York,  in  1864-'8 ;  St.  John's,
Yonkers,  N.  Y,  in  1868-'70,  where  he  founded  the
St.  John's  Riverside  hospital ;  and  Holy  Trinity,
Philadelphia,  in  1870-5.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  southern  Ohio,  28  April,  1875.  In  1874
he  had  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania.  His  publications  com-
prise occasional  sermons  and  addresses.

JAMES,  Benjamin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Stafford
county,  Va.,  22  April,  1768 ;  d.  in  Laurens  district,
S.  C,  15  Nov.,  1825.  He  received  his  literary  edu-
cation in  Virginia,  studied  law  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
and  practised  there  till  1796,  when  he  returned  to
the  homestead  in  Virginia,  and  there  prosecuted
his  profession  until  1808,  when  he  removed  to  Lau-
rens district,  S.  C.  After  this  he  abandoned  the
practice  of  law,  turned  his  attention  to  farming,


JAMES


JAMES


397


and  was  elected  to  the  state  senate.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Digest  of  the  Statute  and  Common  Law
of  Carolina  "  (Columbia,  1814).

JAMES,  Charles  Tillinghast,  senator,  b.  in
West  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Sag  Harbor,
N.  Y.,  17  Oct.,  1862.  He  received  a  limited  educa-
tion, learned  the  trade  of  a  carpenter,  and  in  1823
began  to  study  mechanics,  at  the  same  time  learn-
ing, as  a  workman  in  the  machine-shops,  the  con-
struction of  cotton-machinery.  He  afterward  re-
moved to  Providence,  became  superintendent  of
Slater's  steam  cotton-mills,  and  was  chosen  major-
general  of  Rhode  Island  militia.  After  a  few  years'
residence  in  Providence,  he  removed  to  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  where  he  erected  the  Bartlett  and  James
mills ;  subsequently  built  cotton-mills  in  Salem,
Mass.,  and  in  the  states  of  New  York,  Pennsylva-
nia, Indiana,  and  Tennessee,  and,  returning  in  1849
to  Rhode  Island,  erected  the  Atlantic  delaine-mill
at  Olneyville.  He  was  U.  S.  senator  from  Rhode
Island  from  1851  till  1857,  and  after  his  retirement
from  the  senate  devoted  his  attention  to  the  per-
fection of  several  inventions,  among  which  was  a
rifled  cannon  and  a  new  projectile.  He  was  an  ex-
cellent marksman,  and  thoroughly  versed  in  the
use  and  construction  of  fire-arras.  In  1838  Brown
university  conferred  upon  him  the  honorary  de-
gree of  M.  A.  Gen.  James  died  of  wounds  that  he
received  from  the  explosion  of  a  shell  of  his  own
manufacture,  with  which  he  was  experimenting.
He  wrote  a  series  of  papers  on  the  culture  and
manufacture  of  cotton  in  the  south.

JAMES,  Edmund  Janes,  political  economist,
b.  in  Jacksonville,  111.,  21  May,  1855.  He  studied
at  Harvard,  and  then  at  the  University  of  Halle,
in  Prussia,  where  in  1877  he  took  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  After  teaching  in  Illinois  until  1883,  he
was  appointed  in  that  year  to  the  professorship  of
public  finance  and  administration  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania.  Dr.  James  is  a  member  of  scien-
tific societies,  and  was  vice-president  of  the  Ameri-
can economic  association  in  1885.  He  was  editor
of  the  "  Illinois  School  Journal "  during  1880-'3,
and  in  1884  became  associate  editor  of  the  "Fi-
nanzarchiv  "  of  Wurzburg,  Germany.  His  scien-
tific papers  number  about  100,  and  have  been
contributed  to  journals  and  the  proceedings  of
societies  both  at  home  and  abroad.  He  is  now
(1887)  preparing  for  the  National  government  re-
ports on  the  "  Teaching  of  Political  Science  in  the
Schools  and  Universities  of  Europe  and  America"
and  the  "  Relation  of  the  Government  to  the  Pres-
ervation and  Extension  of  our  Forests."  Dr.
James  has  also  published  a  translation  of  Isocrates's
"  Panegyrics  "  (Cambridge,  1874) ;  "  Entwickelung
des  amerikanischen  Zolltariffs"  (Jena.  1877);  and
"  Relation  of  Modern  Municipality  to  the  Gas
Supply  "  (Baltimore,  1886).

JAMES,  Edwin,  geologist,  b.  in  Wevbridge,
Vt.,  27  Aug.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Burlington,  Iowa,"28  Oct.,
1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college  in
1816,  and  then  spent  three  years  in  Albany,  where
he  studied  medicine  with  his  brother,  Dr.  Daniel
James,  botany  with  Dr.  John  Torrey,  and  geology
under  Prof.  Amos  Eaton.  In  1820  he  was  ap-
pointed botanist  and  geologist  to  the  exploring  ex-
pedition of  Maj.  Samuel  H.  Long,  and  was  actively
engaged  in  field  work  during  that  year.  For  two
years  following  he  was  occupied  in  compiling  and
preparing  for  the  press  the  report  of  the  "  Expedi-
tion to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  1818-'19  "  (2  vols.,
with  atlas,  Philadelphia  and  London,  1823).  He
then  received  the  appointment  of  surgeon  in  the
U.  S.  army,  and  for  six  years  was  stationed  at
frontier  outposts. During  this  time,  in  addition


to  his  professional  duties,  he  was  occupied  with
the  study  of  the  native  Indian  dialects,  and  pre-
pared a  translation  of  the  New  Testament  in  the
Ojibway  language  (1833).  In  1830  he  resigned  his
commission  and  returned  to  Albany,  where  for  a
short  time  he  was  associated  with  Edward  C.  Dela-
van  in  the  editorship  of  the  "  Temperance  Her-
ald and  Journal."  Meanwhile  he  also  prepared  for
the  press  "  The  Narrative  of  John  Tanner,"  a
strange  frontier  character,  who  was  stolen  when  a
child  by  the  Indians  (New  York,  1830).  In  1834
he  again  went  west,  and  in  1836  settled  in  the
vicinity  of  Burlington.  Iowa,  where  he  spent  the
remainder  of  his  life,  mainly  in  agricultural  pur-
suits. Dr.  James  was  the  earliest  botanical  ex-
plorer of  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  his  name  was
originally  given  by  Maj.  Long  to  the  mountain
that  has  since  been  known  as  Pike's  peak.

JAMES,  Henry,  theologian,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
3  June,  1811 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  18  Dec.,  1882.
When  he  was  twelve  years  of  age  an  accident  so
injured  his  leg  that  amputation  was  necessary.  He
was  graduated  at  Union  in  1830.  Having  inherited
wealth  from  his  father,  a  merchant  in  Albany,  he
did  not  immediately  adopt  a  profession,  but  studied
law  for  a  time  in  Albany,  and  afterward  became  a
student  in  Princeton  theological  seminary.  There
he  argued  with  the  professors  against  the  doctrine
of  justification  by  faith,  and  infused  his  unortho-
dox opinions  into  the  minds  of  other  students.  He
therefore  decided  in  1835,  after  two  years' residence
in  Princeton,  to  leave  the  institution.  Going  to
England,  he  continued  the  study  of  theology  and
philosophy,  and  was  attracted  to  the  tenets  of  the
Sandemanian  sect.  After  his  return  he  published
an  edition  of  Robert  Sandeman's  "Letters on  The-
ron  and  Aspasia,"  with  an  introductory  essay
(New  York,  1839).  In  1840,  in  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  Remarks  on  the  Apostolic  Gospel,"  he  denied  the
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  while  affirming  the  divinity
of  Christ.  In  1843  lie  visited  Europe  again,  and
there  became  familiar  with  the  writings  and  doc-
trines of  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  and  in  the  main
adopted  the  theological  system  and  social  philoso-
phy of  that  thinker,  but  objected  to  the  ecclesias-
tical organization  of  the  New  Jerusalem  church.
"  What  is  the  State  ?  "  a  lecture  delivered  in  Al-
bany, was  published  in  1846,  and  in  1847  a  "  Let-
ter to  a  Swedenborgian,"  in  which  he  opposed  ec-
clesiasticism,  while  approving  the  Swedenborgian
doctrines.  A  series  of  lectures  that  he  delivered  in
New  York  city  in  1849  were  published  under  the
title  "  Moralism  and  Christianity,  or  Man's  Experi-
ence and  Destiny  "  (New  York,  1850) ;  also  a  sec-
ond series,  delivered  in  1851,  in  a  volume  entitled
"  Lectures  and  Miscellanies  "  (1852),  containing,
besides  the  lectures,  some  magazine  and  review
articles.  His  subsequent  works  elucidated  more
fully  his  theological  system,  in  which  the  central
idea  was  the  absolute  divinity  of  God  and  the  di-
vine humanity  of  Christ,  and  set  forth  social  doc-
trines similar  to  the  teachings  of  the  theoretical
socialists.  On  repeated  visits  to  England  he  fre-
quented the  society  of  Thomas  Carlyle  and  other
leaders  of  thought.  At  home  he  was  the  intimate
associate  of  the  transcendental  philosophers,  though
differing  with  them  in  opinion.  He  resided  for
many  years  in  New  York  city,  and  for  some  time
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  but  in  1866  removed  to  Cam-
bridge, Mass.  He  contributed  to  the  New  York
"  Tribune  "  a  series  of  letters  on  "  English  and
Continental  Life,"  and  in  later  life  published  "Per-
sonal Recollections  of  Carlyle  "  and  other  reminis-
cences in  the  periodicals.  Besides  the  works  al-
ready mentioned  he  published  "  The  Church  of


398


JAMES


JAMES


Christ  not  an  Ecclesiasticism  "  (New  York,  1854) ;
"  The  Nature  of  Evil  Considered  in  a  Letter  ad-
dressed to  the  Rev.  Edward  Beeeher,  D.  D. "  (1855) :
"  Christianity  the  Logic  of  Creation  "  (London  and
New  York,  1857) ;  "  Substance  and  Shadow,  or
Morality  and  Religion  in  their  Relation  to  Life  "
(Boston,  1863) ;  "  The  Secret  of  Swedenborg,  being
an  Elucidation  of  his  Doctrine  of  the  Divine  Natu-
ral Humanity"  (1869);  and  "  Society  the  Redeemed
Form  of  Man."  His  "  Literary  Remains  "  were
edited  bv  his  son  William  (Boston,  1885). — His  son,
William,  b.  in  New  York  city,  11  Jan.,  1842,  re-
sided much  with  his  father  abroad,  studied  in  the
Lawrence  scientific  school  at  Harvard,  and  accom-
panied the  Thayer  expedition  to  Brazil  in  1865-'6.
After  his  return  he  studied  medicine,  and  was
graduated  M.  D.  at  Harvard  in  1869.  In  1876  he
became  assistant  professor  of  physiology  in  the
Cambridge  medical  school,  in  1880  assistant  pro-
fessor of  philosophy  in  Harvard  college,  and  in
1885  full  professor  of  philosophy.  He  has  pub-
lished his  father's  "  Literary  Remains." — Another
son,  Henry,  novelist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  15
April,  1843,  was  educated  under  his  father's  super-
vision in  New  York,  Geneva,  Paris,  and  Boulogne-
sur-Mer.  His  family  went  abroad  in  1855,  and  re-
mained in  Europe  till
1858.  After  spending
another  year  in  Europe
(at  Geneva  and  Bonn)  he
returned  to  New  York,
and  in  1862  entered  the
Harvard  law-school.  In
1865  he  began  to  con-
tribute sketches  to  the
magazines.  A  year  or
two  later  he  essayed  se-
rial stories,  but  during
the  first  ten  years  of  his
literary  career  produced
no  extended  novel.  The
subject  most  frequently
/* /I  treated  of  in  his  works

yv  (jLr*,*/ ^sf s  *  *s  ^ne  contrast  between
'  ^~>  American  and  European
life  and  manners.  The
scenes  of  several  are  laid
in  the  Old  World,  and
the  principal  characters  are  Americans  travel-
ling abroad  and  coming  for  the  first  time  in  con-
tact with  European  society,  or  members  of  the
American  colonies  in  foreign  capitals.  When  the
action  of  his  stories  takes  place  in  the  United
States,  he  introduces  foreigners  or  travelled  Ameri-
cans in  order  to  illustrate  the  divergences  be-
tween American  and  European  life.  A  familiar-
ity with  the  Old  World  from  his  boyhood,  and
long  periods  of  residence  abroad,  afforded  sug-
gestions and  abundant  materials  for  this  kind  of
social  study.  In  1869  he  went  to  Europe,  where
he  has  since  resided,  alternating  between  England
and  Italy.  In  1874  he  returned  for  a  few  months,
and  wrote  anonymous  criticisms  on  literature  and
art  for  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."  His  novels,  after
appearing  serially,  were  issued  in  book-form  in  Bos-
ton and  London,  and  many  of  them  translated  into
French  and  German.  A  part  of  his  earlier  tales
and  sketches  and  nearly  all  of  his  later  ones  were
also  republished.  Mr.  James  originated  the  inter-
national novel,  and  is  classed  with  Thomas  Bailey
Aldrich  and  William  D.  Howells  as  a  representa-
tive of  the  analytical  and  metaphysical  school  of
novelists.  Many  of  his  novels  close  abruptly,  leav-
ing the  reader  in  doubt  concerning  the  subsequent
fate  of  the  actors  in  the  story,  where  other  authors


would  invent  a  denouement.  In  both  style  and
method  he  has  followed  French  models.  He  inrlv
acquired  a  mastery  of  the  French  tongue  so  com-
plete that  a  story  contributed  by  him  to  the  "  Revue
des  deux  mondes "  has  been  praised  by  severe
French  critics  as  an  example  of  elegant  French.
His  earliest  published  story  was  a  tale  of  the  war,
entitled  "  The  Story  of  a  Year."  In  1867  he  pub-
lished "  Poor  Richard,"  a  brief  serial  story,  which
was  followed  in  1869  by  "  Gabrielle  de  Bergorac."
of  about  the  same  length.  "  Watch  and  Ward  "
(1871)  was  longer,  and  "  Roderick  Hudson,"  pub-
lished serially  in  1875,  was  the  first  of  his  extended
novels.  During  his  visit  to  the  United  States  in
1874-'5  he  published  a  volume  of  "  Trans-Atlantic
Sketches "  (Boston,  1875).  "  A  Passionate  Pil-
grim," depicting  the  emotions  of  an  enthusiastic
traveller  among  the  historical  scenes  of  the  mother
country,  was  printed  in  a  volume  with  other  stories
in  the  same  year.  "  The  American,"  regarded  by
many  as  his  best  novel,  appeared  as  a  serial  during
1877-'8.  In  the  latter  year  "  Daisy  Miller  "  was
published,  and  in  immediate  succession  "An  In-
ternational Episode."  The  former,  describing  the
follies  of  an  American  girl  on  the  continent  of  Eu-
rope, and  the  compromising  situations  in  which
she  placed  herself  by  defying  European  rules  of
propriety,  first  brought  upon  the  author  the  re-
proaches of  his  countrymen,  who  accused  him  of
having  become  denationalized,  and  of  devoting  his
talents  to  deriding  and  belittling  his  own  land  and
people.  "  The  Europeans  "  appeared  in  1878 ;  also
a  short  serial  entitled  the  "  Pension  Beaurepas."
In  the  same  year  was  issued  a  volume  of  critical
essays  on  "  French  Poets  and  Novelists,"  treating
of  Alfred  de  Musset,  Gautier,  Baudelaire,  Georges
Sand,  and  other  modern  French  writers.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Hawthorne  "  in  the  "  English  Men
of  Letters"  series.  "Confidence"  was  published
in  1879,  followed  by  sketches  and  stories  and  essays
in  the  "  North  American  Review "  and  various
magazines.  "  Washington  Square,"  a. story  of  New
York  life  of  a  past  period,  appeared  simultaneously
on  both  sides  of  the  ocean  in  the  "  Cornhill  Maga-
zine" and  "Harper's  Magazine"  in  1880.  "A
Bundle  of  Letters  "  and  "  Diary  of  a  Man  of  Fifty  "
(1880)  are  shorter  works.  "  The  Portrait  of  a  Lady,"
delineating  the  character  of  an  American  female
newspaper  correspondent,  was  published  in  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly  "  and  "  Macmillan's  Magazine  "
in  1880-'l.  "  The  Siege  of  London  "  was  published
in  1883,  and  "Portraits  of  Places"  in  1884.
Sketches  of  French  life  and  scenes  were  published
in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  serially,  under  the  title
of  "  En  province,"  and  afterward  in  a  volume  under
that  of  "  A  Little  Tour  in  France  "  (Boston,'  1884).
"  Tales  of  Three  Cities  "  appeared  in  book-form
during  the  same  year,  and  in  1885  he  issued  "  The
Author  of  Beltraffio,"  with  other  stories.  In  1886
he  published  "The  Bostonians"  and  "Princess
Casamassima."

JAMES,  Henry  Amnion,  lawyer,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  24  April,  1854.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1874,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1878,  and
since  1880  has  practised  his  profession  in  New
York  city.  He  has  published  "Communism  in
America  "  (New  York,  1879).

JAMES,  Joseph  Francis,  botanist,  b.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  8  Feb.,  1857.  He  is  the  son  of  Uriah
P.  James,  who  is  the  owner  of  one  of  the  finest  col-
lections of  fossils  in  Ohio  and  the  publisher  of
"  The  Paleontologist."  The  son  received  a  com-
mon-school education  in  Cincinnati,  subsequently
turned  his  attention  to  botany,  and  in  1881  he  was
appointed  custodian  of  the  Cincinnati  society  of


JAMES


JAMES


39&


natural  history.  He  was  given  complete  charge  of
the  large  collections  of  that  society,  and  during  his
tenure  of  office  arranged,  labeled,  and  catalogued
the  library,  and  specimens  in  botany,  zoology,
mineralogy,  geology,  and  other  subjects.  This
place  he  resigned  in  August,  1886,  to  take  the
chair  of  botany  and  geology  in  Miami  university,
Oxford,  Ohio,  and  meanwhile  since  1883  he  has
also  held  the  professorship  of  botany  in  the  de-
partment of  pharmacy  in  the  University  of  Cincin-
nati. He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and
the  author  of  frequent  papers  on  botany  and  ge-
ology in  scientific  journals.

JAMES,  Maria,  poet,  b.  in  Wales  11  Oct.,  1793;
d.  in  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,  1868.  She  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  in  1803,  and  after  her
tenth  year  lived  at  domestic  service  in  the  Garrison
family,  of  Dutchess  county,  N.  Y.  In  1833  some  of
her  compositions  attracted  the  attention  of  Prof.
Alonzo  Potter,  of  Union  college,  who  introduced  a
collection  of  them  to  the  public  under  the  title  of
"  Wales  and  Other  Poems  "  (New  York,  1839).

JAMES,  Thomas,  English  navigator,  b.  about
1590.  He  was  employed  in  1631,  together  with
Luke  Fox,  by  a  company  of  merchants  at  Bristol
to  discover  a  northwest  passage.  He  left  Bristol
on  3  May  of  that  year,  and  proceeded  to  Hudson
bay.  After  wintering  on  an  island  in  about  lati-
tude 52°  N.,  he  sailed  northward,  and  on  26  Aug.,
1632,  when  his  further  progress  was  stopped  by  the
ice,  he  had  attained  lat.  65°  30'  N.  Capt.  James
explored  Hudson  bay,  and  gave  the  name  of  New
Wales  to  the  country  on  the  western  side  of  it.
The  southern  part  of  that  bay  was  named  James
bay.  He  returned  to  England  on  22  Oct.,  and  pub-
lished "The  Strange  and  Dangerous  Voyage  of
Capt.  Thomas  James  for  the  Discovery  of  a  North-
west Passage  to  the  South  Sea  "  (London.  1633).

JAMES,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in
1592 ;  d.  there  about  1678.  He  was  graduated  at
Cambridge  in  1614,  and  came  from  Lincolnshire,
where  he  had  been  a  minister,  to  Boston  on  5  June,
1632.  He  was  ordained  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  2
Nov.,  1632,  and  was  the  first  ministerof  that  place,
but  was  discharged  in  March,  1636,  a  dissension
having  sprung  up  between  him  and  his  congrega-
tion. He  then  went  to  New  Haven,  and  in  1642  to
Virginia,  but  was  compelled  to  leave  because  he
would  not  conform  to  the  English  church.  He  re-
turned to  New  England  in  June,  1643,  and  after-
ward to  his  native  country,  where  he  was  minister
of  Needham,  Suffolk,  until  he  was  ejected  for  non-
conformity in  1662. — His  son,  Thomas,  was  min-
ister of  East  Hampton,  L.  I.,  from  1650  till  the
time  of  his  death  in  1696.

JAMES,  Thomas  Chalkley,  phvsician,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1766 :  d.  there,  25  July,  1835.  His
father,  Abel,  a  Quaker  of  Welsh  origin,  was  a  suc-
cessful merchant  of  Philadelphia,  and  his  mother
was  a  daughter  of  Thomas  Chalkley,  the  Quaker
preacher.  The  son  was  educated  at  Robert  Prout's
school,  studied  medicine,  and  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1787.  He  then  went
as  surgeon  of  a  ship  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and
studied  in  London  and  Edinburgh  from  1790  till
1793,  when  he  returned  to  the  United  States.  In
1803  he  established  the  School  of  obstetrics  in
Philadelphia,  and  for  twenty-five  years  was  physi-
cian and  obstetrician  in  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.
He  was  for  some  years  president  of  the  Philadel-
phia college  of  physicians,  and  was  professor  of
midwifery  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  from
1811  till  1834.  Dr.  James  was  founder  of  the
Pennsylvania  historical  societv,  and  contributed  to


D.,"  translations  of  the  "  Idyls "  of  Gessner. He
was  associate  editor  of  the  "  Eclectic  Repertory."

JAMES,  Thomas  Lemuel,  banker,  b.  in  Utica^
N.  Y.,  29  March,  1831.  His  grandparents  on  both
sides  emigrated  to  the  United  States  from  Wales  in
1800.  After  studying  in  the  common  schools  and
the  Utica  academy,  he  learned  the  printer's  trade
in  the  office  of  the  Utica  "  Liberty  Press."  and  in
1851  bought  the  "Madison  County  Journal,"  a
Whig  newspaper,  published  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.
In  1856,  when  the  Republican  party  made  its  first
national  canvass,  his  paper  was  united  with  the
"  Democratic  Reflector "  under  the  name  of  the
"  Democratic  Republican."  He  continued  in  jour-
nalism for  ten  years,  meanwhile  also  serving  as
collector  of  canal  tolls  at  Hamilton  in  1854-'5.  In
1861  he  was  appointed  an  inspector  of  customs  in
New  York  city,  and  three  years  later  was  promoted
to  be  weigher.  In  1870  he  was  appointed  deputy
collector,  and  placed  in  charge  of  the  warehouse
division  and  the  bonded  warehouses  of  the  port.
The  records  of  the  division  were  in  confusion,  and
the  general  work  from  one  to  three  years  behind,
but  in  one  month  Mr.  James  reported  the  exact
condition  of  the  division,  and  within  six  months
he  had  brought  the  business  up  to  date.  Prevail-
ing laxity  had  given  way  to  the  utmost  efficiency.
He  was  appointed  by  Gen.  Arthur,  who  had  be-
come collector,  a  member  of  the  civil-service  board
of  the  collector's  and  surveyor's  offices,  was  made
its  chairman,  and  was  among  the  earliest  and
most  steadfast  of  public  officials  in  advocating  and
applying  the  reform  of  the  civil  service  by  estab-
lishing the  system  of  appointments  upon  the  basis
of  examination  and  merit.  On  17  March,  1873,
Mr.  James  was  appointed  postmaster  of  New  York
by  President  Grant,  and  he  was  reappointed  four
years  later  by  President  Hayes.  His  service  is
recognized  as  marking  a  new  era  in  postal  admin-
istration. The  two  aims  which  he  kept  steadily  in
view  were,  first,  to  bring  the  office  and  its  working
force  up  to  the  highest  state  of  efficiency,  and,
second,  to  improve  and  increase  the  postal  facili-
ties wherever  practicable.  The  deliveries  were
multiplied,  fast  mails  were  recommended  and  ob-
tained, the  foreign  mails  were  expedited,  and  the
security  of  the  mails  was  increased  by  careful  de-
vices. After  the  removal  of  Gen.  Arthur  from  the
collectorship,  the  President  tendered  the  appoint-
ment to  Mr.  James,  but  he  declined  it  on  the
ground  that,  having  been  Gen.  Arthur's  deputy,
he  could  not  consent  to  supersede  him.  In  1880,
when  David  M.  Key  resigned  the  postmaster-gen-
eralship, President  Hayes  offered  this  place  in  his
cabinet  to  Mr.  James,  who,  on  consultation  with
his  friends,  declined  it.  The  same  year  the  Re-
publicans named  him  for  mayor  of  New  York,  but
he  declined  the  nomination.  When  President  Gar-
field announced  his  cabinet,  5  March,  1881,  Mr.
James  was  included  as  postmaster-general,  and
two  days  later  entered  on  the  duties  of  the  office.
The  assassination  of  the  president  and  the  acces-
sion of  Vice-President  Arthur  caused  a  complete
recast  of  the  cabinet,  and  Mr.  James  retired,  4  Jan.,
1882.  Though  he  thus  served  only  ten  months,
his  administration  was  not  too  brief  to  be  distin-
guished by  important  and  lasting  reforms.  When
he  began  he  found  an  annual  deficit  of  $2,000,000,
which  had  varied  in  amount  every  year  from  1865,
and,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  from  1851.  His
policy  of  retrenchment  and  reform  was  immedi-
ately begun.  The  reductions  that  he  made  in  the
star  service  amounted  to  $1,713,541,  and  those  in
the  steamboat  service  to  over  $300,000,  thus  effect-
ing an  aggregate  saving  of  over  $2,000,000. In


400


JAMES


JANES


co-operation  with  the  department  of  justice,  Mr.
James  instituted  a  thorough  investigation  into  the
abuses  and  frauds  in  his  department,  the  result  of
which  was  the  famous  star-route  trials.  In  his  an-
nual report  to  Congress  he  announced  that,  with
these  reforms  and  with  retrenchments  in  other
directions  which  he  indicated,  a  reduction  of  letter
postage  from  three  to  two  cents  would  be  possible,
and  it  followed  soon  afterward.  While  postmaster-
general,  Mr.  James  negotiated  a  money-order  con-
vention with  all  the  Australian  colonies,  and  with
the  island  of  Jamaica.  Retiring  from  the  post-
office  department,  4  Jan.,  1882,  he  became  presi-
dent of  the  Lincoln  national  bank,  and  the  Lincoln
safe-deposit  company  of  New  York.  The  degree  of
A.  M.  was  given  him  in  1863  by  Hamilton  college,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Madison  university  in  1883
and  by  St.  John's  college  in  1884.

JAMES,  Thomas  Potts,  botanist,  b.  in  Rad-
nor, Pa.,  1  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  22
Feb.,  1882.  He  was  a  wholesale  druggist  in  Phila-
delphia for  forty  years,  devoting  his  leisure  to
botany,  for  which  he  showed  a  fondness  from  early
youth'.  While  in  Philadelphia  he  made  himself
familiar  with  the  phaenogamous  vegetation  of  that
vicinity,  and  subsequently  became  a  proficient  and
an  accepted  authority  on  bryology,  or  the  study  of
mosses.  He  shared  the  reputation  of  Coe  F.
Austin,  Leo  Lesquereux,  and  William  S.  Sullivant
as  authorities  on  that  branch  of  botany  in  the
United  States.  In  1867  he  settled  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  where  the  advantages  of  association  with
Asa  Gray  and  the  use  of  the  Harvard  collections
facilitated  his  investigations.  He  was  a  member
of  scientific  societies,  and  one  of  the  founders  and
long  the  treasurer  of  the  American  pomological
society.  His  scientific  papers  were  contributed  to
the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Philadelphia  Academy  of
Natural  Sciences  "  and  to  the  "  Proceedings  of  the
American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences."  The
article  on  "  Musci "  in  the  volume  on  "  Botany  "
of  the  reports  of  Clarence  King's  "  Exploration  of
the  40th  Parallel "  is  by  him,  and  to  other  govern-
ment reports  he  contributed  similar  articles.  He
was  joint  author  with  Leo  Lesquereux  of  the
"Manual  of  American  Mosses"  (Boston,  1884).

JAMESON,  Charles  Davis,  soldier,  b.  in  Gor-
ham,  Me.,  24  Feb.,  1827;  d.  in  Oldtown,  Me.,  6
Nov.,  1862.  In  his  youth  his  parents  removed
with  him  to  Oldtown,  where,  after  receiving  a  lim-
ited education,  he  embarked  in  the  lumber-trade,
and  became  one  of  the  largest  manufacturers  and
shippers  of  lumber  on  the  Penobscot.  In  1860  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  Charleston  National  Demo-
cratic convention,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  2d  Maine
regiment,  the  first  that  left  that  state  for  the  seat
of  war.  He  led  his  regiment  at  Bull  Run,  and
with  his  command  protected  the  rear  of  the  army
in  its  retreat  to  Centreville.  For  his  services  on
this  occasion  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  3  Sept.,  1861.  He  participated  in  the
seven  days'  fight  about  Richmond,  but  after  the
battle  of  Fair  Oaks  was  attacked  with  camp  fever,
and  returned  home  to  die.  In  1861-'2  he  was  the
Democratic  caAdidate  for  governor  of  Maine.

JAMESON,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  1752;  d.  in
Culpeper  county,  Va.,  2  Oct.,  1839.  He  fought  at
the  battle  of  Great  Bridge,  9  Dec,  1775,  and  served
in  the  southern  states  in  Stevens's  brigade  in  1780
and  1781.  In  1790-'l  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Vir-
ginia legislature,  and  was  afterward  a  magistrate
and  high-sheriff  of  Culpeper  county. — His  brother,
John,  held  a  command  till  the  end  of  the  war,
and  was  afterward  clerk  of  Culpeper  county.


JAMESON,  John  Alexander,  jurist,  b.  in
Irasburg,  Vt.,  25  Jan.,  1824.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1846,  and  was
tutor  there  in  1850-'3.  He  then  studied  law,  be-
gan practice  in  Freeport,  111.,  in  1853.  and  settled
in  Chicago  in  April.  1856.  In  November,  1865,  he
became  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  that  city
(now  the  superior  court  of  Cook  county),  and  con-
tinued on  the  bench  till  November,  1883.  He  was
professor  of  constitutional  law,  equity,  and  juris-
prudence in  the  law-school  of  the  University  of
Chicago  from  1867  till  1868,  when  he  resigned,  and
was  for  many  years  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Law  Register,"  published  in  Philadelphia.  He
is  the  author  of  "  The  Constitutional  Convention,
its  History,  Powers,  and  Modes  of  Proceeding"
(New  York,  1867 ;  4th  ed.,  1887).  He  had  prepared
materials  for  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Judicial
Sales,"  which  were  destroyed  in  the  Chicago  *fire.

JAMESON,  Patrick  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Monroe,  Jefferson  co.,  Ind.,  18  April,  1824.  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadelphia,
in  1849,  and  established  himself  in  practice  in  In-
dianapolis. He  was  commissioner  of  the  Indiana
hospital  for  the  insane  from  1861  till  1866,  and  also
surgeon  in  charge  of  state  and  National  troops  in
quarters  at  the  several  camps,  and  in  hospital  at
the  soldiers'  home,  Indianapolis.  From  January,
1863,  till  March,  1866,  he  was  acting  assistant, sur-
geon in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  from  1861  till  1869
physician  to  the  Indiana  institution  for  the  deaf
and  dumb.  He  has  contributed  occasionally  to
medical  journals,  and  has  written  eighteen  con-
secutive annual  reports  of  the  Indiana  hospital  for
the  insane.

JAMESON,  William,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1791 ;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  7  Oct.,  1873.
He  was  appointed  a  midshipman  from  the  District
of  Columbia  in  1811.  During  the  war  of  1812-'14
he  was  in  several  engagements,  and  received  his
commission  as  lieutenant  in  1817,  commander  in
1837,  and  as  captain  in  1844.  He  adhered  to  the
cause  of  the  Union  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  and  was  commissioned  commodore,  16  July,
1862.  He  was  invalided,  and  remained  in  Alexan-
dria during  the  war,  and  was  subsequently  placed
on  the  retired  list.

JANES,  Edmund  Storer,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Sheffield,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  27  April,  1807 ;  d.
in  New  York  city,  18  Sept.,  1876. His  father  was
a  mechanic,  and  the  son
united  with  the  Meth-
odist church  at  thirteen
years  of  age. By  dili-
gent improvement of
scanty  opportunities  he
fitted  himself  to  teach  a
country  school,  and  in
the  pursuit  of  that  call-
ing he  removed  to  New
Jersey,  where  he  found
his  way  into  the  Meth-
odist ministry. In  1830
he  was  admitted  to  the
Philadelphia confer-
ence, which then em-
braced the  whole  state
of  New  Jersey. In  1835
he  was  appointed  finan-
cial agent  for  Dickinson  college,  and  in  1840  he  was
chosen  financial  secretary  of  the  American  Bible
society,  which  office  he  filled  for  four  years,  travel-
ling in  the  interests  of  that  society  through  all
parts  of  the  country. In  1844  he  was  elected  and
ordained  bishop  by  the  general  conference  sitting  in


-^.  J'.fawJ.J


JANES


JANNEY


401


New  York  city.  He  was  not  a  member  of  the  body
by  which  he  was  elected,  nor  had  he  served  in  any
previous  general  conference.  He  was  only  thirty-
eight  years  old,  and  though  widely  known  by
means  of  his  labors  in  behalf  of  the  Bible  society,
yet  he  had  escaped  all  complication  with  the  sub-
ject of  the  church's  relation  to  slavery,  which  then
agitated  it,  and  so  he  was  not  unacceptable  to
either  party.  In  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  his
office  he  visited  and  revisited  nearly  every  state
and  territory  of  the  country.  In  1854  he  visited
Europe,  having  been  commissioned  to  represent
his  church  at  the  session  of  the  British  Wesleyan
inference.  While  abroad  he  visited  both  the  Irish
and  French  Methodist  conferences,  and  also  the
missions  of  his  own  church  in  Germany  and  Swit-
zerland, and  in  Norway  and  Sweden.  As  a  preach-
er Bishop  Janes  was  a  model  of  simplicity  and
correctness.  He  resided  in  New  York  from  his
election  to  the  episcopacy  till  his  death.  —  His
twin  brother,  Edwin  L.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Shef-
field, Mass.,  27  April,  1807 ;  d.  in  Flushing,  L.  I.,
10  Jan.,  1875,  taught  from  1825  till  1831,  and  in
1832  joined  the  Philadelphia  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  was  appointed

Sastor  in  West  Philadelphia.  He  held  charges  in
few  York,  Brooklyn,  Bridgeport,  and  elsewhere,
for  six  years  was  a  secretary  of  the  National  tem-
perance society,  and  also  labored  earnestly  for  the
poor.  His  works  include  "  Wesley  his  Own  Biogra-
pher "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  Incidents  in  the  Life  of
Bishop  Asbury  "  (1872) ;  and  "  Recollections  in  the
Life  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Edward  Payson  "  (1873).

JANES,  Edward  Houghton,  physician,  b.  in
Northfield,  Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  3  Oct..  1820.  He
was  educated  in  the  Delaware  literary  institute,
Franklin  county,  N.  Y.,  and  was  graduated  at  the
Berkshire  medical  college  in  1847.  He  settled  in
practice  in  New  York  city  in  1850,  was  for  a  short
period  during  the  civil  war  in  the  service  of  the
sanitary  commission,  and  appointed  sanitary  in-
spector by  the  Metropolitan  board  of  health  in  1866.
Since  1873  he  has  been  assistant  superintendent  of
the  New  York  health  department.  In  1872  he  was
appointed  to  the  chair  of  hygiene  in  the  Women's
medical  college  of  the  New  York  infirmary.  He
was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  American
public  health  association,  and  was  its  recording
secretary  from  1877  till  1880.  He  has  published
a  "Report  on  Condensed  Milk"  (1858),  "Report
on  the  Sanitary  Condition  of  New  York"  (New
York.  1865),  annual  reports  to  the  American  pub-
lic health  association,  and  papers  on  professional
subjects.

J  ANEW  AY,  Jacob  Jones,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  20  Nov.,  1774 ;  d.  in  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  27  June,  1858.  His  family  came  from
England  early  in  the  17th  century,  one  of  whom
bore  with  him  the  charter  of  Trinity  church,  of
which  he  was  a  vestryman.  He  died  about  1708.
Jacob  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1794,  and  after
studying  theology  with  Dr.  John  H.  Livingston  was
ordained  in  1799  a  colleague  of  Dr.  Ashbel  Green  in
the  2d  Presbyterian  church  of  Philadelphia,  where
he  remained  till  1828.  After  holding  for  one  year
the  chair  of  theology  in  the  Western  theological
seminary,  he  was  pastor  of  a  Dutch  Reformed  church
in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  for  two  years.  He  was
elected  a  trustee  of  Rutgers  in  1820,  and  in  1833-'9
was  vice-president  of  that  college  and  professor  of
'iterature,  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  and  politi-

1  economy.  He  then  became  a  trustee  of  Prince-
m,  and  was  engaged  till  his  death  in  general
missionary  work  and  in  supervision  of  theological
and  collegiate  institutions in the Presbyterian

VOL.  III.— 26


church.  He  was  a  director  of  Princeton  theologi-
cal seminary  from  1813  till  1830  and  again  from
1840  till  1858,  and  president  of  the  board  from
1849  till  1858.  He  joined  his  friend,  Dr.  Jona-
than Cogswell,  of  New  Brunswick,  in  the  gift  of  a
church  to  the  Presbyterians  of  that  citv.  His  pub-
lications include  "  Commentaries  on  Romans,  He-
brews, and  Acts"  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1866);
"Internal  Evidence  of  the  Holy  Bible";  "Com-
municants' Manual";  "On  Unlawful  Marriage"
(New  York,  1844);  "Review  of  Dr.  Schaff  on
Protestantism";  and  essays  and  letters  on  relig-
ious subjects.  See  "Memoir  of  Rev.  Jacob  J.
Janeway,"  by  his  son,  Thomas  L.  Janeway  (Phila-
delphia, 1861).  —  His  grandson,  Edward  Gama-
liel, physician,  b.  in  New  York  city,  31  Aug.,
1841,  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1860,  after
which,  during  1862-'3,  he  was  acting  medical  cadet
in  the  U.  S.  army  hospital  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  and
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  1864.  Dr.  Janeway  then  settled  in
New  York,  where  he  has  ever  since  practised.  His
connection  with  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college
began  in  1868,  when  he  was  appointed  one  of  its
curators.  In  1872  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
physiology  and  pathological  anatomy  in  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  the  city  of
New  York,  but  at  the  end  of  a  year  he  returned  to
Bellevue  as  professor  of  materia  medica  and  thera-
peutics. This  appointment  he  held  until  1876,
when  he  became  professor  of  pathological  anatomy
and  histology,  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  ana
clinical  medicine.  In  1881  he  added  the  instruc-
tion in  principles  and  practice  of  medicine  to  his
duties,  and  he  also  delivered  the  lectures  on  mate-
ria medica  and  therapeutics  from  1873  till  1876.
Dr.  Janeway  was  appointed  health  commissioner
of  the  city  of  New  \  ork  in  1875,  and  filled  that
appointment  until  1882.  He  held  visiting  ap-
pointments to  the  Charity  hospital  in  1868-'71,  to
the  Hospital  for  epileptics  and  paralytics  in  1870-'4,
and  to  Bellevue  hospital  since  1871,  being  also  one
of  the  pathologists  to  that  institution  since  1867.
As  a  diagnostician  he  has  a  high  reputation,  and
his  consulting  practice  is  very  large.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  numerous  medical  societies,  was  vice-presi-
dent of  the  New  York  pathological  society  in  1874,
and  has  been  president  of  the  New  York  medical
journal  association.

JANNEY,  Samuel  Macpherson,  author,  b.  in
Loudon  county,  Va.,  11  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  there,  30
April,  1880.  He  was  a  minister  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  travelled  extensively  in  this  capacity.
In  1869  he  was  appointed  by  President  Grant
superintendent  of  Indian  affairs  in  the  northern
superintendency.  He  was  the  author  of  a  prize
poem  entitled  "  The  Country  School-House  "  (1825) ;
"  Conversations  on  Religious  Subjects  "  (1835  ;  3d
ed.,  Philadelphia,  1843) ;  "  The  Last  of  the  Lenape,
and  Other  Poems  "  (1839) ;  "  The  Teacher's  Gift,"
essays  in  prose  and  verse  (1840);  "An  Historical
Sketch  of  the  Christian  Church  during  the  Middle
Ages  "(1847);  "  Life  of  William  Penn"(1852;  3d
ed.,  1856);  "Life  of  George  Fox"  (1853);  and  a
"  History  of  the  Religious  Society  of  Friends,  from
its  Rise  to  the  Year  1828  "  (4  vols.,  1860-'7).— His
brother.  Asa  Moore,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Loudon
county,  Va.,  18  Sept.,  1802 ;  d.  there,  31  May,  1871.
In  1836  he  removed  to  Richmond  with  his  family,
and  had  charge  of  Gallego  mills,  one  of  the  largest
flouring-mills  in  the  south.  He  resided  in  Loudon
county  from  I860  till  1869,  when  he  was  appointed
agent  for  the  Santee  Sioux  Indians  in  Nebraska.
He  labored  faithfully  for  the  advancement  of  these
Indians,  doing  much  to  improve  their  moral  and


402


JANNEY


JANSON


physical  condition.  While  there,  he  had  a  saw-
mill and  flouring-mill  erected,  lands  were  allotted
to  the  Indians  in  severalty,  and  about  100  log-
houses  built.  His  wife  and  daughters  also  labored
among  the  women  of  the  tribe.  Owing  to  impaired
health,  he  resigned  his  commission  and  returned
to  Virginia.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  in  which  he  held  the  office  of  elder.

JANNEY,  Thomas,  Quaker,  b.  in  Cheshire,
England,  in  1634;  d.  there,  12  Dec,  1696.  He  set-
tled in  Bucks  county,  Pa.,  in  1683,  and  also  labored
in  New  Jersey.  He  visited  the  churches  of  New
England,  Long  Island,  and  Maryland,  and  finally
went  to  England  with  Griffith  Owen  in  1695.

JANNSENS,  Francis,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Til-
burg,  North  Brabant,  Holland,  17  Oct.,  1847.  He
studied  theology  in  the  Episcopal  seminary  of  Bois-
le-Duc,  and  afterward  entered  the  American  college
of  the  University  of  Louvain,  with  a  view  to  becom-
ing a  missionary  in  the  United  States.  He  was  or-
dained priest.  21  Dec,  1867,  sailed  for  this  country
in  September,  1868,  and  was  assigned  to  mission-
ary duty  in  Richmond,  Va.  He  was  first  assistant
at  the  cathedral,  and  in  1870  was  appointed  rector,
secretary,  and  chancellor  of  the  diocese,  at  the
same  time  taking  charge  of  several  missions.  In
1877  he  became  vicar-general.  On  the  translation
of  Bishop  Gibbons  to  Baltimore  as  coadjutor-arch-
bishop, Father  Jannsens  was  appointed  admin-
istrator of  the  diocese  of  Richmond.  He  filled  the
same  office  under  Bishop  Keane  that  he  had  occu-
pied under  his  predecessor.  After  the  translation
of  Bishop  Elder  from  the  diocese  of  Natchez  to  the
coadjutorship  of  Cincinnati,  Father  Jannsens  was
nominated  for  the  vacant  see,  and  he  was  con-
secrated by  Archbishop  Gibbons  in  the  cathedral  of
Richmond,  1  May,  1881.  Before  assuming  the  du-
ties of  his  office  he  visited  Rome.  Bishop  Jannsens
is  supreme  spiritual  director  of  the  Catholic  knights
of  the  United  States,  a  benevolent  organization  of
large  membership.  In  1884  there  were  14,000
Roman  Catholics  under  his  jurisdiction,  with  fifty-
three  churches  and  thirty  priests.

JANSEN,  Olatts,  Danish  naturalist,  b.  in  Chris-
tianstadt  in  1714;  d.  in  Copenhagen  in  1778.  He
studied  in  Germany,  and  was  for  several  years  pro-
fessor at  the  University  of  Tubingen,  where  he  ac-
quired reputation  as  a  naturalist.  He  was  elected  in
1761  rector  of  the  University  of  Copenhagen,  and  in
the  following  year  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  sci-
ences. Two  years  later  he  was  sent  by  the  govern-
ment to  travel  in  America  and  collect  information
on  the  natural  productions  of  that  country.  He
landed  in  Buenos  Ay  res  in  October,  1764,  and  vis-
ited successively  Paraguay,  Uruguay,  Chili,  Pata-
gonia, Araucania,  Brazil,  Peru,  Central  America,
thence,  crossing  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  he  jour-
neyed through  New  Spain,  Louisiana,  and  Florida,
reaching  Boston  in  1772.  On  his  return,  which
was  hastened  by  difficulties  in  which  he  was  in-
volved with  the  English  authorities  when  he  was
about  to  visit  Canada,  he  published  "  Den  Geist  in
den  Naturvidenskaben  og  naturens  almindelige
laere"  (Copenhagen,  1773);  "Journal  holden  y
Skibet  prindsess  Isabella  poa  rejsen  til  Buenos
Ayres  "  (2  vols.,  1773-'4) ;  "  Forste  indledning  til
den  Almind.  naturlaere "  (1774) :  "  Neue  Reisen
durch  Brazil  und  Peru"  (1775);  "Neue  Reisen
durch  Louisiana  und  Nueva  Espana  "  (1776) ;  "  Ge-
schichte  und  Beschreibung  des  Brodbaums "  (Tu-
bingen and  Copenhagen,  1776);  "  Anmarkningar
ons  Historia  Naturalis  och  climated  af  Nye  Eng-
land og  Nye  Spanien "  (2  vols.,  Copenhagen  and
Stockholm,  1778) ;  and  several  other  works,  which
enjoyed  a  high  reputation  during  the  18th  century.


JANSEN,  Reynier,  printer,  b.  in  Holland ;  d.
in  Philadelphia  in  March,  1706.  He  emigrated  to
this  country  in  1698.  He  was  a  lace-maker  at  Alk-
maier,  Holland,  but,  shortly  after  coming  to  Phila-
delphia, he  set  up  a  printing-press — the  second  in
the  middle  colonies.  From  1698  till  1706  he  was
the  only  printer  in  Pennsylvania.  Probably  the
first  book  issued  by  him  was  "God's  Protecting
Providence  "  (1699).  Thomas,  in  "  History  of  Print-
ing in  America,"  says :  "  I  have  met  with  only  one
book  with  Jansen's  name  in  the  imprint,"  while
Hildeburn,  in  "  Issues  of  Pennsylvania  Press,  1685-
1784"  (1885),  enumerates  thirty-five  different  publi-
cations bearing  Jansen's  imprint.  The  issues  of
Jansen's  press  have  sold  higher  on  the  average  as
imprints  than  the  issues  of  any  other  American
printer.  His  two  sons  earned  on  the  printing-
business  a  few  years  after  their  father's  death.  One
of  the  sons  assumed  the  name  of  Tiberius  John-
son, and  the  other  that  of  Joseph  Reynier,  and
respectively  printed  in  these  names.

JANSEN  VAN  ILPENDAM,  Jan,  Dutch  offi-
cial, d.  probably  at  Marcus  Hook,  Pa.,  in  1685.
About  1640  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  William
Kieft  custom-house  officer  on  the  Delaware,  and  put
in  command  of  Fort  Nassau.  In  1642  a  company
from  New  Haven  attempted  to  effect  a  settlement
nearly  opposite  the  fort,  to  prevent  which  Jansen
was  ordered  by  the  Dutch  governor  to  proceed  to
the  unbidden  comers  and  require  of  them  to  show
by  what  "  authority  they  acted,  and  how  they  dared
to  make  such  encroachment  on  our  rights  and
privileges,  our  territory  and  commerce ;  and,  if
they  could  show  no  authority,  to  let  them  depart,
and,  if  they  refused,  to  take  them  prisoners  and
bring  them  to  New  York  " ;  and  to  aid  him  in  en-
forcing his  authority  he  was  sent  two  yachts,  and
directed  to  man  them.  This  order  he  obeyed,  and
it  resulted  in  his  burning  the  trading-house  and
taking  the  traders  prisoners,  whereat  the  govern-
ment of  New  Haven  addressed  to  Kieft  a  vigor-
ous protest.  In  1644  he  refused  to  allow  a  Boston
company  to  pass  up  the  river  on  the  ostensible  mis-
sion of  exploring  for  the  Syconian  lake.  In  1645
he  fell  into  disfavor,  and  was  charged  with  fraud
and  neglect  of  duty  in  his  office  as  commissary  of
the  fort,  one  item  of  his  offending  being  that  he
had  given  "  more  to  the  Indians  than  the  ordinary
rate."  He  was  removed,  and  Andreas  Hudde  ap-
pointed to  succeed  him.  He  continued  to  reside
on  the  river  and  to  trade  with  the  Indians,  and  is
frequently  named  in  historical  documents.

JANSON,  Kristofer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bergen,
Norway,  5  May,  1841.  After  finishing  the  theo-
logical course  in  the  University  of  Christiania,  he
founded,  with  a  friend,  Kristofer  Bruun,  a  People's
high-school  in  Gudbrandsdalen,  Norway,  with  the
view  of  raising  the  intellectual  level  of  the  peas-
ants. While  at  home  he  was  a  leader  of  the  move-
ment (the  "  Maalstraev  "),  which  has  in  view  the  re-
placing of  the  Danish  language,  which  is  the  Nor-
wegian language  of  literature,  by  the  truly  Nor-
wegian language,  which  is  still  spoken  among  the
peasants  of  Norway.  Janson  has  written  a  large
series  of  novels  in  this  language,  the  most  impor-
tant of  which  are  "  Han  ok  Ho  "  (Christiania,  1867),
and  "  Marit  Skjolte  "  (1869).  The  Norwegian  storth-
ing, in  acknowledgment  of  Janson's  merits,  al-
lowed him  what  is  called  a  poet's  salary,  a  compen-
sation that  has  been  given  to  only  three  others  of
the  most  eminent  Norwegian  authors.  In  1882
Janson  settled  in  this  country  as  minister  of  a
Unitarian  parish  in  Minneapolis,  Minn.  He  has
since  then  preached  both  in  English  and  Nor-
wegian, and  he  seeks  to  spread  religious  tolerance


JANVIER


JARD1NE


403


among  his  countrymen  in  the  northwest.  His  ex-
periences as  a  minister  in  the  far  west  have  been
utilized  in  his  book  "Praeriens  Saga,"  which  is
written  in  the  common  Danish-Norwegian  language
(Copenhagen,  1884).  Some  of  his  books  have  been
translated  into  English,  including  "The  Spell-
bound Fiddler"  (Chicago,  1884);  "The  Children
of  Hell "  (1885) ;  and  "  Wives,  Submit  Yourselves
unto  your  Husbands  "  (1885).

JANVIER,  Levi,  missionary,  b.  in  Pittsgrove,
N.  J.,  25  April,  1816;  d.  in  India,  25  March,  1864.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1835,  and  studied
theology  in  the  seminary  there,  also  teaching  in
Lafayette  college.  He  was  ordained  to  the  Pres-
byterian ministry  and  went  to  India  as  a  mission-
ary in  1841,  settling  in  Lodonia,  in  northern  India,
where  he  was  for  several  years  superintendent  of
the  mission.  Owing  to  impaired  health,  he  visited
the  United  States  in  1859,  but  returned  to  his  mis-
sionary work  in  the  following  year.  He  was  as-
sassinated by  a  fanatic  Sikh  at  Ananapoor,  India.
The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Lafayette  in  1861.  He  prepared  a  translation  of
the  Pentateuch  and  Psalms  into  Punjaubi,  assisted
in  compiling  a  "  Punjaubi  Dictionary  "  (1854),  and
wrote  various  books  and  tracts  in  this  language.

JAQUEZ,  Christoval  (hah'-keth),  Portuguese
mariner,  b.  toward  the  end  of  the  15th  century ;  d.
in  Iguarassu  in  1555.  He  served  with  credit  in  the
navy,  and  in  1536  was  given  command  of  a  fleet  to
oppose  the  progress  of  the  French  in  Brazil.  Sail-
ing from  Lisbon  in  November,  Jaquez  landed  on
the  South  American  continent  in  the  following
spring  and  founded  an  establishment  on  the  banks
of  the  river  called  by  the  Indians  Iguarassu.  He
afterward  explored  and  charted  the  coast  as  far  as
the  river  Plate,  and,  on  his  return  to  Iguarassu,
sent  to  Portugal  two  vessels  loaded  with  Brazilian
dye-woods.  In  1540  he  started  again  on  an  explora-
tion along  the  coast  and  captured  three  French
schooners  which  were  trading  with  the  Indians.
Jaquez  sailed  a  few  years  later  to  Lisbon  and  en-
deavored to  obtain  a  grant  of  land  in  Brazil  for
himself,  but,  having  failed  in  his  efforts,  he  re-
turned again  to  Iguarassu  in  time  to  assist  Duarte
Ccelho  Pereira  in  the  destruction  of  the  establish-
ment that  had  been  founded  by  Marseilles  traders
forty-two  miles  from  the  Portuguese  settlement,
and  resumed  the  command  of  the. colony.  He  died
from  fever,  two  years  later.

JARAUTA,  Cenobio  (hah-row'-tah),  Mexican
insurgent,  b.  in  Spain  late  in  the  18th  century ;  d.
near  Guanajuato,  Mexico,  18  July,  1848.  He  en-
tered a  convent  in  Spain  in  early  life,  and  during
the  civil  war  in  that  country,  although  he  was  a
priest,  raised  men  and  became  a  Carlist  leader,
celebrated  for  his  cruelties.  He  came  to  Mexico
about  1841,  and  by  the  influence  of  his  country-
men obtained  a  parish  in  Aguascalientes.  Toward
the  end  of  June,  1848,  a  revolution  against  the
government,  headed  by  Father  Jarauta,  began  in
that  city.  Supported  by  the  garrison  of  Lagos,
Jarauta  published  in  June  a  proclamation  ignoring
the  existing  government  and  providing  for  the  in-
stalment of  another  with  monarchical  tendency.
Meanwhile  the  command  of  the  forces  was  to  be
vested  in  the  general  officer  of  the  highest  rank
who  would  accept  the  plan.  Gen.  Mariano  Pare-
des  joined  Jarauta  and  marched  on  Guanajuato.
The  governor  of  the  place  was  deposed  and  Ma-
nuel Doblado  appointed  in  his  place,  who  issued
an  address  to  other  governors ;  but  they  disapproved
it,  and  Gen.  Minon  was  sent  with  a  large  force  to
attack  the  rebels.  Much  hard  fighting  ensued,  but
the  most  important  action  was  on  18  July,  1848,


when  the  town  was  assaulted  and  Jarauta  taken
prisoner,  conveyed  to  La  Valenciana  near  by,  and
shot.  The  guerilla  force  commanded  by  Father
Jarauta  had  been  much  feared  because  they  plun-
dered both  friends  and  enemies.  The  death  of  their
leader  disheartened  the  rebels,  and,  although  their
chiefs  pretended  to  continue  the  struggle,  they  sur-
rendered on  the  next  day.

JARAVA,  Manuel  (hah-rah'-vah),  Chilian  his-
torian, b.  in  Santiago  in  1621 ;  d.  in  Quito  in  1673.
He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  at  first  employed  in
missionary  work,  but  met  with  little  success,  as  he
i  often  neglected  his  duties  for  study.  His  superi-
ors at  last  called  him  to  Quito,  where  he  was  ap-
pointed historiographer  of  the  viceroy  in  1670.  It
is  supposed  that  Jarava  would  have  achieved  great
reputation  as  a  historian,  but  his  former  labors  in
the  mission  bad  heavily  told  upon  him,  and  he  soon
died  of  consumption.  He  left  many  notes,  which
were  preserved  in  the  College  of  Quito,  and  which
Humboldt  discovered  and  used  afterward  with
great  benefit,  as  he  acknowledges  in  his  works.
Jarava  published  "Relatio  de  Christianitate  in
America,  et  de  rebus  gestis  patrum  Societatis  Jesu
in  provincias "  (2  vols.,  Quito,  1671) ;  "  Historia
del  Reino  de  Chile  "  (3  vols.,  1672) ;  "  Historia  del
Reino  de  Quito"  (2  vols.,  1672);  and  "Cronica  del
Reino  de  Quito  "  (3  vols.,  1673).

JARAY,  Luis  de  C6spedes  (hah-rah'-e),  Span-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Santiago,  Spain,  in  the  latter  part
of  the  16th  century;  d.  in  Charcas,  Peru,  about
1640.  He  began  his  career  in  Italy,  where  he  rose
to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  about  1619  sailed  for
Rio  de  la  Plata,  having  been  appointed  governor  of
Paraguay.  On  his  way  he  married  in  Brazil  Victoria
Correa  de  Saa,  and,  instead  of  continuing  his  jour-
ney by  water,  according  to  instnictions,  he  resolved
to  go  across  the  country.  The  Jesuits  and  their
followers  awaited  the  coming  of  the  new  governor
with  joy,  as  they  believed  that,  coming  through
the  country  of  the  Paulists  or  traders  from  Sao
Paulo,  he  must  have  become  fully  informed  of
their  atrocities  and  would  at  once  check  them.
But  his  wife's  estates  in  Brazil  needed  laborers,
and  Jaray  had  agreed  to  protect  the  traders  in
kidnapping  the  people  whom  he  had  been  sent  to
govern  on  condition  that  he  should  receive  600  of
the  captives  to  labor  in  his  wife's  plantations.  Ja-
ray haughtily  refused  the  request  of  the  priests  for
protection,  and  the  missions  of  Guayra  and  Misi-
ones  fell  an  easy  pray  to  the  slave-hunters.  The
neophytes  were  carried  off  by  thousands,  and  those
that  were  left,  to  the  number  of  about  12.000,  re-
solved to  abandon  that  part  of  the  eountry.  But
the  Paulists,  having  depopulated  the  missions  of
the  eastern  and  northern  part  of  Paraguay,  now
turned  their  eyes  on  the  Spanish  towns  in  the  same
province,  and  these  soon  shared  the  fate  of  the
others.  At  last  the  crimes  of  Jaray  reached  the
ears  of  the  audiencia  of  Charcas,  which  summoned
him  to  its  presence  in  1636  and  condemned  him  to
pay  a  heavy  fine,  stripping  him  of  all  authority,
and  forbidding  him  to  hold  any  public  office  what-
ever for  the  space  of  six  years.

JARDINE,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Augusta,
Grenville  co.,  Ontario.  19  June,  1840.  His  family
emigrated  from  Scotland  to  Canada,  and  he  was
graduated  at  Queens  university,  Kingston,  in  1860.
After  studying  theology  he  labored  as  a  missionary
in  La  Prairie  and  Owen  Sound.  In  1866  he  was
licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Perth  and  went  to
Scotland,  "where  he  studied  in  the  University  of
Edinburgh,  receiving  the  degree  of  doctor  of  sci-
ence in  1867.  In  that  year  he  returned  to  Canada,
and  was  appointed  professor  of  rhetoric  and  phi-


404


JARDINS


JARRIC


losophy  in  the  University  of  New  Brunswick,  which
post  he  held  two  years.  In  1869  he  again  went  to
Scotland,  and  during  a  walking-tour  in  the  high-
lands met  Dr.  Norman  Macleod,  of  Glasgow,  who
had  returned  from  India,  and  who  induced  him  to
become  a  missionary.  He  was  appointed  principal
of  the  general  assembly's  institution  in  Bombay,
with  instruction  to  add  a  college  department.
After  one  year  in  Bombay  he  was  ordered  to  Cal-
cutta to  take  charge  of  a  similar  institution,  where
he  served  six  years.  During  his  service  a  large
number  of  pupils  were  added  to  the  school,  and  it
was  united  with  the  University  of  Calcutta.  He
was  also  interested  in  other  missionary  work,  aided
the  Bengali  Christians  in  organizing  a  congrega-
tion and  in  building  a  church,  and  was  a  delegate
to  the  missionary  conference  at  Allahabad  in
1872-'3,  where  he  read  a  paper  upon  the  "  Brahma
Samaj."  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
"  Calcutta  Review "  and  other  local  papers,  and
was  appointed  every  year  an  examiner  for  degrees
in  the  University  of  Calcutta.  In  1877  he  went  to
Scotland,  where  he  spent  several  months,  and  lec-
tured in  the  four  universities  on  "Comparative
Theology"  from  a  missionary  standpoint.  For
three  months  he  held  charge  of  Park  church,  Glas-
gow, after  which  he  returned  to  Canada.  He  was
pastor  of  St.  Andrew's  church,  Chatham,  N.  B.,  in
1879-'81,  and  was  then  called  to  St.  John's  church  in
Brockville.  He  published  letters  to  English-speak-
ing Hindus  on  religious  subjects  entitled  "  What  to
Believe"  (Calcutta,  1876)),  and  "The  Elements  of
the  Psychology  of  Cognition  "  (London,  1874).

JARDINS,  Charles  Francois  des,  French  na-
val officer,  b.  in  Port  Louis,  Guadeloupe,  in  1729 ;
d.  in  Santo  Domingo  in  September,  1791.  He  en-
tered the  navy  when  scarcely  sixteen  years  old,  be-
came commander  in  1778,  and  under  the  Marquis
of  Bouille  greatly  contributed .  to  the  capture  of
Tobago,,  taking  part  also  in  the  battles  with  Ad-
miral Rodney  in  the  waters  of  La  Dominique  in
April  and  May,  1780.  In  the  third  battle,  which
was  a  success  for  the  French,  he  held  his1  ground
alone  against  three  English  vessels,  and  received
the  brevet  of  commodore.  He  afterward  served
under  Count  de  Grasse  when  the  latter  went  to
protect  the  American  coasts,  and  commanded  a
division  in  the  fleet  of  Admiral  Destouches  when
the  latter  defeated  the  English  under  Admiral
Arbuthnot  on  16  March,  1781,  at  the  entrance  of
Chesapeake  bay.  His  gallantry  during  the  action
won  him  great  praises  from  the  Americans,  and  he
was  made  an  honorary  member  of  the  Society  of
the  Cincinnati.  He  commanded  the  station  of
Santo  Domingo  in  1791  at  the  time  of  the  troubles
in  the  island,  and,  having  landed  with  a  corps  of
marines  to  crush  the  rebels,  was  instantly  killed.

JARNAC,  Gaston  Louis  de  (zhar'-nack'),
French  soldier,  b.  in  Angouleme  in  1758;  d.  in
Texas  in  1818.  He  served  in  the  war  for  American
independence  from  1776  till  1781,  was  wounded  at
Yorktown,  and  received  from  Louis  XVI.  the  cross
of  Saint  Louis.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States
during  the  French  revolution,  taught  French  and
mathematics  in  Boston  and  Philadelphia,  and
opened,  in  1797,  the  French  institute  at  New  Or-
leans. Returning  to  France  in  1805,  he  was  for
some  time  an  officer  in  the  army,  but  having  ex-

{>ressed  himself  too  freely  on  the  policy  of  Napo-
eon,  he  feared  arrest,  and  fled  again  to  the  United
States,  living  quietly  till  1814,  when  he  accepted
service  under  Jean  Lafttte  (o.  v.).  In  1816  he  made
the  acquaintance  of  Gen.  Charles  Lallemand  (q.  v.),
and  agreed  to  devote  the  fortune  that  he  had  made
with  Lafitte  in  the  foundation  of  the  "  Champ


d'Asile "  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Trinidad  in
Texas,  and  in  that  military  colony  held  an  im-
portant command.  But  famine  and  troubles  ruined
the  colony.  Jarnac  reproached  Lallemand  for  his
despotic  rule,  and  with  a  few  followers  set  out,
under  the  guidance  of  a  Choctaw  Indian,  to  reach
Louisiana.  But  the  savage  led  them  to  an  Indian
village,  where  they  were  attacked  and,  after  a  des-
perate resistance,  taken  captive  and  murdered.

JARNAGIN,  Spencer,  lawyer,  b.  in  Granger
county,  Tenn.,  about  1793;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,
24  June,  1851.  After  his  graduation  at  Greenville
college  in  1813,  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1817,  and  began  to  practise  in  Athens,
Tenn.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of
representatives,  and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Whig,  serving  from  1843  till  1847.

JARQUE,  Francisco  (har'-keh),  South  Ameri-
can missionary,  b.  in  Hispaniola  (according  to  some
authors,  in  Panama)  in  1636 ;  d.  in  Tucuman,  Ar-
gentine Republic,  in  1691.  He  studied  in  Mexico,
and  served  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  Spanish  army,
but  in  1658  resigned,  and  united  with  the  Jesuits.
He  taught  rhetoric  for  several  years  in  the  College
of  Buenos  Ayres,  and,  having  acquired  a  perfect
knowledge  of  the  Guarani  language,  was  attached
to  the  missions  of  South  America  in  1665.  In  1671
he  was  elected  provincial  of  the  Paraguayan  mis-
sions, which  he  reorganized  and  greatly  enlarged,
and  he  became  afterward  vicar  of  the  cathedral  of
Potosi,  Peru,  and  dean  of  Cordova.  Leon  Pinelo
asserts  in  his  "Biblioteca  oriental  y  occidental"
that  Fray  Jarque  was  the  most  competent  linguist
that  has  devoted  his  labors  to  the  Indian  language,
and  Humboldt  and  many  others  have  spoken  of
him  with  high  praise.  He  published  "  Estado  pre-
sente  de  las  misiones  en  el  Tucuman,  Paraguay  e
Rio  de  la  Plata"  (Tucuman,  1687),  and  "Tesoro
de  la  lengua  Guarani,"  which  is  still  a  standard
work  (Buenos  Ayres,  1690).

JARRATT,  Devereux,  clergyman,  b.  near
Richmond,  Va.,  17  Jan.,  1733 ;  d."  in  Virginia,  29
Jan.,  1801.  He  began  to  prepare  for  the  Presby-
terian ministry,  but  in  1762,  determining  to  take
orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  sold
his  patrimony  and  went  to  England  for  ordina-
tion. In  the  next  year  he  returned  to  Virginia
and  assumed  charge  of  the  parish  of  Bath.  His
system  of  religion  was  regarded  as  an  innovation
in  the  established  church  of  Virginia,  and  many
considered  him  a  fanatic.  His  last  sermon  was
delivered  in  the  old  Saponey  church,  which  is  re-
garded as  the  scene  of  his  labors.  He  published
three  volumes  of  sermons  (1793-'4),  and  a  series
of  letters  to  a  friend  entitled  "  Thoughts  on  Some
Important  Subjects  in  Divinity"  (1791).  These
were  afterward  republished  in  connection  with
his  "Autobiography"  in  a  series  of  letters  ad-
dressed to  the  Rev.  John  Coleman  (1806).

JARRIC,  Louis  Etienne,  Chevalier  de,  West
Indian  revolutionist,  b.  in  Les  Cayes,  Santo  Do-
mingo, in  1757;  d.  there,  21  Feb.,  1791.  He  was
the  son  of  a  wealthy  Creole  nobleman,  and  assumed
the  name  of  Chevalier  de  Jarric,  although  he  was
a  natural  son  and  a  mulatto.  His  father  gave  him
a  good  education  and  left  him  some  property,  but
young  Etienne  felt  his  situation  keenly,  and  ac-
cepted with  delight  the  new  democratic  principles
of  1789  as  the  means  of  elevating  himself  to  the
same  level  as  the  white  Creoles.  He  served  on  the
continent  as  a  captain  when  the  French  revolution
began,  and,  returning  to  Santo  Domingo,  called  the
negroes  together  in  mass-meetings,  urging  them  to
assert  their  rights,  inasmuch  as  the  constituent
assembly  had  already  given  some  hint  of  recogni-


JARVES


JARVIS


405


tion.  The  result  of  these  meetings  was  his  election
as  a  delegate  to  the  assembly  in  1789.  In  Paris  he
founded  the  Society  of  the  friends  of  the  blacks,  and
spoke  several  times  at  the  bar  of  the  assembly  in
behalf  of  the  colored  population  of  the  colonies ;
but  his  exertions  were  in  the  end  of  no  avail,  al-
though he  had  interested  the  orator  Barnave  in  his
cause.  He  then  resolved  to  conquer  by  force  what
he  could  not  do  by  persuasion,  and,  sailing  for  the
United  States,  he  bought  in  that  country  a  full
cargo  of  arms  and  ammunition,  and  landed  with
his  colleague,  Vincent  Oge  (q.  v.),  in  October,  1790.
They  at  once  issued  proclamations,  calling  the  ne-
groes to  arms,  and  in  a  few  days  found  themselves
at  the  head  of  700  men.  M.  de  Vincent,  governor
of  the  cape,  sent  a  body  of  regulars  to  crush  the
rebellion ;  but  they  were  defeated  at  the  battle  of
Dondan,  after  which  Jarric  increased  his  forces  to
the  number  of  over  2,500  men.  De  Vincent  now
marched  in  person  with  all  his  forces  against  Jarric.
A  great  battle  was  fought  near  the  river  Saint  Vin-
cent, and  the  rebels  suffered  such  a  defeat  that  Oge
and  Jarric  were  compelled  to  fly  to  the  Spanish
possessions.  They  were  surrendered  by  the  au-
thorities, and  Jarric  was  broken  on  the  wheel.

JARVES,  James  Jackson,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  20  Aug.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Terasp,  Switzerland,  28
June,  1888.  He  was  educated  in  Boston,  and  was
prepared  to  enter  Harvard  in  1833,  when  failing
health  and  impaired  eyesight  compelled  him  to  give
up  study.  Subsequently  he  travelled  extensively
through  South  America  and  the  islands  of  the
Pacific,  settling  in  1838  on  the  Hawaiian  islands.
In  1840  he  established  "  The  Polynesian,"  the
first  newspaper  published  in  Honolulu,  and  in
1844  he  received  the  title  of  director  of  the  gov-
ernment press,  his  journal  becoming  the  official  or-
gan of  the  Hawaiian  islands.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1849,  and  soon  afterward  received
from  the  Hawaiian  government  the  appointment
of  special  commissioner  to  negotiate  treaties  with
the  United  States,  France,  and  Great  Britain.  In
1851  he  visited  Europe,  and  subsequently  resided
in  Florence,  where  he  was  engaged  in  making  art
collections.  Of  these  his  art  gallery  of  old  Italian
masters  now  forms  part  of  the  collection  of  the
Yale  school  of  the  fine  arts,  while  a  second  collec-
tion of  old  masters  and  antique  sculpture  belongs
to  the  Holenden  gallery  in  Cleveland,  and  his
specimens  of  antique  and  modern  Venetian  glass
were  presented  by  him  to  the  Metropolitan  museum
of  art  in  New  York.  His  work  gained  for  him  an
election  to  honorary  membership  in  the  Academia
delle  belle  arti  in  Florence.  From  1879  till  1882
he  was  U.  S.  vice-consul  and  acting  consul  in
Florence,  and  later  became  the  commissioner  of
Italy  at  the  Boston  foreign  exhibition  of  1882-'3,
for  which  in  1887  he  was  made  a  knight  of  the
order  of  the  crown  of  Italy.  In  1886  his  collec-
tion of  laces,  stuffs,  embroideries,  costumes,  and
other  textile  fabrics,  embracing  specimens  made
in  the  12th  century  and  till  the  present  time,  were
sold  in  New  York.  Mr.  Jarves  contributed  to
periodical  literature,  and  published  "  History  of
the  Hawaiian  or  Sandwich  Islands"  (Boston  and
London,  1843)  ;  "  Scenes  and  Scenery  in  the
Sandwich  Islands  "  (1844) ;  "  Parisian  Sights  and
French  Principles  seen  through  American  Spec-
tacles" (2  vols.,  New  York,  1853);  "Art  Hints,
Architecture,  Sculpture,  and  Painting "  (1855)  ;
"  Kiana,  a  Tradition  of  Hawaii "  (Boston,  1855) ;
"  Italian  Sights  and  Papal  Principles  seen  through
American  Spectacles "  (New  York,  1855) ;  "  The
Confessions  of  an  Inquirer"  (3  parts,  Boston,
1857-'69); "Art  Studies: The Old Masters  of


^^O^rJM^T


Italy  "  (New  York,  1861) ;  "  The  Art  Idea,  Sculp-
ture, Painting,  and  Architecture  in  America  "  (Bos-
ton, 1866) ;  "  Art  Thoughts :  The  Experiences  and
Observations  of  an  American  Amateur  in  Europe  "
(1869);  "Glimpses  at  the  Art  of  Japan"  (New
York,  1876)  J  and  "  Italian  Rambles  "  (1884).

JARVIS,  Abraham,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Nor-
walk,  Conn.,  5  May,  1739 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
3  May,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1761,
and  soon  after  leav-
ing college  became
lay-reader  in  the
parish  at  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  mean-
while studying  the-
ology. He  was  or-
dained priest  in
England,  19  Feb.,
1764,  by  the  Bishop
of  Carlisle,  and  on
returning  to  Con-
necticut was  set-
tled as  rector  of
Christ  church,  Mid-
dletown.  At  the
beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  was
subjected  to  great
inconvenience  and
many  trials,  as  he  did  not  hold  that  the  Decla-
ration of  Independence  dissolved  the  ecclesiasti-
cal obligations  of  his  church  to  the  Church  of
England.  On  23  July,  1776,  a  convention  of  the
Episcopal  clergy  of  Connecticut  was  held  at  New
Haven,  over  which  Mr.  Jarvis  presided.  It  was
resolved  to  suspend  all  public  worship  in  the
churches,  it  being  held  that  it  would  be  unsafe
to  continue  the  reading  of  the  entire  liturgy.
Shortly  after  the  declaration  of  peace  he  took
an  active  part  in  the  movement  which  result-
ed in  the  consecration  of  Bishop  Seabury  (q.  v.),
most  of  the  official  papers  on  the  subject  which
were  sent  to  England  being  written  by  him.  On
the  death  of  Seabury  in  1796,  Mr.  Jarvis  was  elect-
ed to  succeed  him,  but  declined.  On  being  again
elected  in  June,  1797,  he  accepted  and  was  conse-
crated by  Bishop  Provoost,  of  New  York,  Bishop
Bass,  of  Massachusetts,  and  Bishop  White.  He
continued  at  Middletown  for  two  years  after  his
consecration  and  then  removed  to  Cheshire,  and  in
1803  to  New  Haven,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  Bishop  Jarvis  was  didactic  and  often  meta-
physical in  the  pulpit.  He  published  a  "  Sermon  on
the  Death  of  Bishop  Seabury  "  (1796),  and  another
on  "  The  Witness  of  the  Spirit." — His  son,  Samnel
Farmar,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  20
Jan.,  1786 ;  d.  there,  26  March,  1851,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1805,  and  ordained  priest,  5  April,
1811.  The  same  year  he  took  charge  of  St.  Mi-
chael's church,  Bloomingdale,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1813
was  also  made  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  New
York  city,  retaining  both  parishes  until  May,  1819.
In  the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  professor  of
biblical  learning  in  the  recently  established  New
York  general  theological  seminary,  but  he  resigned
in  1820  on  being  elected  the  first  rector  of  St.
Paul's,  Boston,  Mass.  Here  he  remained  six  years,
when  he  gave  up  his  charge  to  sail  for  Europe,
with  a  view  of  qualifying  himself  for  certain  works
that  he  had  projected,  relating  to  the  history  of
the  church.  During  a  nine  years'  absence  he  vis-
ited all  the  important  libraries  and  explored  every
accessible  source  of  information  on  the  subjects  to
which  his  attention  had  been  directed.  On  his
return  in  1835  he  accepted  the  professorship  of


406


JARVIS


JARVIS


oriental  literature  in  Washington  (now  Trinity)
college,  but  resigned  in  1837  to  become  rector  of
Christ  church,  Middletown,  Conn.  Having  been
appointed  church  historiographer  by  the  general
convention  of  1838,  he  resigned  his  charge  in  1842,
and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  to  literary  la-
bors. He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1819,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Trinity  in  1837.  Dr.  Jarvis  was  a  trustee  of
Trinity  college  and  of  the  General  theological  semi-
nary, secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  Christian  knowl-
edge society,  and  secretary  of  his  diocese.  He
was  a  fine  classical  and  biblical  scholar,  and  also
took  a  great  interest  in  art,  having  collected  dur-
ing his  residence  abroad  a  gallery  of  old  paintings,
mostly  of  the  Italian  school.  These  were  exhibit-
ed on  his  return  for  the  benefit  of  a  charitable  as-
sociation, but  were  finally  sold  after  his  death,  to-
gether with  his  valuable  library.  Ur.  Jarvis's
principal  publications  are  "  A  Discourse  on  the
Religion  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of  North  America  "
(New  York,  1820);  "A  Discourse  on  Regenera-
tion" (1821);  "A  Sermon  on  Christian  Unity"
(1837);  "Two  Discourses  on  Prophecy;  being  a
Refutation  of  Millerism"  and  "No  Union  with
Rome  "  (1843) ;  "  A  Chronological  Introduction  to
the  History  of  the  Church  "  (London,  1844 ;  Bos-
ton, 1845) ;  "  The  Colonies  of  Heaven,"  a  sermon
(1846) ;  "  A  Replv  to  Dr.  Milner's  '  End  of  Contro-
versy '  "  (New  York,  1847) ;  and  "  The  Church  of
the  Redeemed,"  only  the  first  volume  of  which  was
published  (Boston,  1850),  Dr.  Jarvis's  last  illness
preventing  further  literary  work.  He  was  one  of
the  editors  of  the  "  Gospel  Advocate "  from  1821
till  1826,  contributed  articles  to  the  "  Church  Re-
view," and  edited  the  American  edition  of  Thomas
H.  Home's  "  Mariolatry  "  (1844).

JARVIS,  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  26  Oct.,  1748 ;  d.  there,  15  Nov.,  1807.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1766,  and,  after  com-
pleting his  medical  education  in  Europe,  settled  in
Boston,  where  he  became  well  known  in  his  pro-
fession. He  was  a  zealous  patriot  during  the
Revolution,  was  a  delegate  to  the  Constitutional
convention  of  1788,  and  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture until  1798.  He  was  a  popular  orator  and
leader  of  the  Jefferson  party,  and  was  appointed
by  Jefferson  to  be  surgeon  of  the  marine  hospital
in  Chelsea. — His  only  son,  William,  merchant,  b.
in  Boston,  4  Feb.,  1770 ;  d.  in  Weathersfield,  Vt.,
21  Oct.,  1859,  was  educated  at  Bordentown  acade-
my, N.  J.  When  of  age  he  entered  into  mercan-
tile business  in  Boston,  but  failed,  and  went  to  sea
as  supercargo.  In  two  voyages  he  had  made
enough  to  purchase  a  third  of  a  ship,  and  although
he  had  no  nautical  experience,  except  that  of
these  voyages,  the  other  owners  intrusted  him  with
her  command.  He  navigated  this  vessel  with  suc-
cess for  five  years,  also  engaging  in  trade  on  his
own  account,  and,  regaining  his  fortune,  paid  his
debts  and  retired  from  the  sea.  In  1802  he  was
appointed  by  President  Jefferson  consul-general  at
Lisbon,  and  charge  d'affaires  at  the  court  of  Por-
tugal. This  was  during  the  English  wars  with
Napoleon,  and  the  position  of  our  representatives
in  Europe  was  difficult.  American  commerce  was
constantly  assailed  by  the  cruisers  of  the  belliger-
ents, and  the  impressment  of  our  seamen  by  the
British  finally  led  to  the  war  of  1812.  Mr.  Jarvis
won  a  great  reputation  by  the  dexterous  manage-
ment of  the  nogotiations  which  he  was  obliged  to
conduct  from  time  to  time,  first  with  the  Portu-
guese government,  then  with  Gen.  Junot,  the  com-
mander of  the  French  forces,  who  took  possession
of  Lisbon  in  1807,  and  governed  there  until  1808,


and  afterward  with  the  British  authorities.  Mr.
Jefferson  spoke  of  him  as  "  pre-eminently  among
the  faithful  of  the  public  servants."  Mr.  Jarvis  con-
tinued to  represent  this  country  in  Portugal  until
October,  1810.  During  this  time  the  departure  of
the  Braganzas  to  Brazil  took  place,  and  the  over-
throw of  the  Spanish  royal  family.  The  flocks  of
merino  sheep,  which  up  to  that  time  had  remained
exclusively  the  property  of  the  Spanish  and  Portu-
guese grandees,  were  offered  for  sale.  Mr.  Jarvis
was  satisfied  that  the  raising  of  sheep  and  the
growth  of  wool  could  be  conducted  successfully  in
New  England,  and  he  purchased  and  exported  to
the  United  States  large  numbers  of  merinos,  many
of  them  from  the  Paular  flocks  of  Godoy.  Some
of  these  he  presented  to  public  men,  and  they  were
distributed  from  Maine  to  Virginia.  Our  minister
to  Madrid,  Col.  Humphreys,  did  the  same,  and
from  the  flocks  thus  sent  to  this  country  by  these
two  gentlemen  the  merino  sheep  throughout  the
Union  are  descended.  On  his  return  to  this  coun-
try Mr.  Jarvis  found  the  National  treasury  almost
bankrupt,  and  he  never  asked,  and  never  received,
a  dollar  of  his  salary.  About  1812  Mr.  Jarvis  pur-
chased a  large  tract  of  land  on  the  bank  of  Con-
necticut river,  in  the  town  of  Weathersfield,  Vt.,
where  he  resided  till  his  death.  Mr.  Jarvis  con-
tinued to  take  pride  in  his  pure-blooded  merinos.
He  exhibited  an  active  interest  in  public  affairs,
was  an  ardent  friend  and  admirer  of  Henry  Clay
and  active  in  the  Whig  party,  although  he  never
would  consent  to  accept  the  offices  that  were
frequently  tendered  him.  Although  a  high-tariff
man,  he  never  advocated  a  duty  on  wool.

JARVIS,  Edward,  physician,  b.  in  Concord,
Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1803;  d.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  31
Oct.,  1884.  He  was  descended  from  John  Jarvis,  a
ship-builder  who  emigrated  from  Yorkshire,  Eng-
land, to  Boston  in  1661.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1826,  and  at  the  Boston  medical  school
in  1830,  and  practised  in  Northfield,  Mass.,  in
1830-'2,  in  Concord,  Mass.,  till  1837,  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  in  1837-'42,  and  then  in  Dorchester,  Mass.  Dr.
Jarvis  made  a  sanitary  survey  of  Massachusetts,  by
order  of  the  government,  and  published  a  report
(1855),  and  subsequently,  by  appointment  of  the
secretary  of  the  interior,  he  tabulated  the  mortality
statistics  of  the  United  States  as  reported  in  the
census  of  1860,  his  work  constituting  one  half  of  the
fourth  volume  of  the  reports  of  the  eighth  census.
He  was  a  member  of  numerous  learned  societies,
was  president  of  the  American  statistical  associa-
tion from  1852  till  his  death,  and  published  "  Prac-
tical Physiology  "  (Philadelphia,  1848) ;  "  Primary
Physiology  for  Schools  "  (1849) :  and  a  large  num-
ber of  reports  on  public  health,  mortality  rates,
education,  insanity,  and  other  subjects.

JARVIS,  John  Wesley,  artist,  b.  in  South
Shields,  England,  in  1780 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in
1840.  He  came  to  Philadelphia  in  1785,  and  be-
gan, with  but  little  instruction,  as  a  portrait-painter,
but,  although  self-taught,  was  one  of  the  first  artists
in  the  United  States  to  give  attention  to  the  study
of  art-anatomy.  He  became  popular,  and  his  por-
traits, which  were  executed  chiefly  in  New  York
and  the  southern  cities,  were  numerous  and  often
effective.  His  works  include  likenesses  of  Com.
Isaac  Hull,  Com.  William  Bainbridge,  Com.  Thomas
McDonough,  Gov.  De Witt  Clinton,  John  Randolph,
Bishop  Benjamin  Moore,  and  Fitz-Greene  Halleck.
His  portraits  are  agreeable  in  color,  and  valuable
for  seizing  characteristic  traits.

JARVIS,  Russell,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1791 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  17  April,  1853.
During  his  infancy  his  family  removed  to  Clare-


JARVIS


JAUREGUI Y ALDECOA


407


mont,  N.  H.,  where  his  early  life  was  spent.  He  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1810,  and  afterward
at  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,  law-school.  After  prac-
tising his  profession  for  a  few  years,  he  became  a
regular  writer  on  the  "  United  States  Telegraph  "
in  Washington,  and  in  1836,  on  the  establishment
of  the  "  Public  Ledger "  in  Philadelphia,  became
its  editor.  He  was  bold  in  attacking  abuses  of
local  interest,  and  succeeded  in  attracting  attention
to  the  "Ledger,"  adding  to  its  popularity  and
increasing  its  circulation.  In  1839  he  withdrew
from  that  paper  and  established  the  "  World,"  a
morning  journal,  which  was  not  a  success.  In
about  nine  months  Jarvis  gave  up  the  publication
and  went  to  New  York,  where  he  afterward  re-
sided. In  time  he  renewed  his  connection  with
the  "  Ledger  "  as  contributing  editor,  still  living  in
New  York.  He  was  also  a  writer  and  correspondent
for  other  journals.

JARVIS,  Thomas  Jordan,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  Jarvisburg,  Currituck  co.,  N.  C,  18
Jan.,  1836.  His  youth  was  spent  on  a  farm,  labor-
ing for  the  support  of  his  family,  and  his  college
education  was  obtained  by  a  loan  from  a  friend.
He  was  graduated  at  Randolph-Macon  in  1860,
and  in  the  following  year  entered  the  Confederate
army  as  a  private.  He  soon  became  1st  lieutenant
in  the  8th  North  Carolina  regiment,  and  in  1863
was  promoted  captain,  but  on  14  May,  1864,  his
right  arm  was  shattered  by  a  bullet,  and  he  was
compelled  to  retire  from  the  service.  He  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1865,  became  a  merchant,  and  while  engaged  in
business  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  began  to  practise  in  1868,  was  a  presidential
elector  in  that  year,  elected  to  the  legislature,  and
re-elected  in  1870.  becoming  speaker  of  the  house.
He  was  again  a  presidential  elector  in  1872,  in  1875
was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  conven-
tion, and  in  the  following  year  was  elected  lieuten-
ant-governor of  North  Carolina.  In  1879  he  became
governor,  by  the  election  of  Gov.  Zebulon  B.  Vance
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  in  1880  he  was  elected  to
the  office,  which  he  held  till  1884.  In  1885  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  minister  to  Brazil.

JASPER,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Caro-
lina about  1750 ;  d.  in  Savannah.  Ga.,  9  Oct.,  1779.
He  enlisted  as  a  sergeant  in  the  2d  South  Carolina
regiment,  and  distinguished  himself  in  the  attack
on  Fort  Moultrie,  28  June,  1776.  In  the  height  of
the  engagement  the  flag-staff  was  shot  away,  and
the  flag  fell  to  the  bottom  of  the  ditch  on  the  out-
side of  the  works.  Fearlessly  leaping  from  an
embrasure,  Jasper  recovered  the  colors,  which  he
tied  to  a  sponge-staff  and  replaced  on  the  para-
pet, where  he  supported  them  until  another  flag-
staff had  been  procured.  In  recognition  of  this
act,  Gov.  Rutledge  gave  Jasper  his  own  sword,  and
offered  him  a  lieutenant's  commission,  which  he
declined,  as  he  could  neither  read  nor  write.  His
activity  and  enterprise  induced  Moultrie  to  give
him  a  roving  commission,  and,  selecting  about  six
men  from  the  regiment,  he  often  returned  with
prisoners  before  Moultrie  was  aware  of  his  absence.
On  one  occasion,  actuated  by  sympathy  for  a  Mrs.
Jones,  whose  husband  was  a  prisoner  and  liable  to
execution,  with  only  one  companion  he  captured  a
small  British  guard,  and  released  the  prisoners
they  were  taking  to  Savannah.  In  the  assault  on
Savannah,  9  Oct.,  1779,  Sergeant  Jasper  accom-
panied D'Estaing  and  Lincoln  in  their  attack  on
the  Spring  Hill  redoubt,  and  was  mortally  wounded
while  attempting  to  fasten  the  regimental  colors  to
the  parapet.  A  square  in  the  city  of  Savannah  and
a  county  of  Georgia  bear  his  name.


JAUBERT,  Edonard  Etienne  (zho'-bair),
French  historian,  b.  in  Auch  in  1629 ;  d.  in  Bor-
deaux in  1698.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  went  in
1658  to  Guadeloupe,  where  he  remained  several
years.  He  was  elected  provincial  of  Santo  Do-
mingo in  1671,  and  of  Guatemala  in  1683,  and
made  himself  conspicuous  by  his  exertions  for  the
Indians.  Father  Jaubert  came  several  times  into
conflict  with  the  Spanish  authorities,  and  at  last,
for  the  sake  of  peace,  his  superiors  recalled  him  in
1682.  He  published  "  Histoire  des  Caralbes,  dans
laquelle  est  discutee  la  ferocite  de  leurs  moeurs,  et
l'anthropophagie  qu'on  leur  reproche  "  (Bordeaux,
1685);  "  Statistique  des  missions  de  la  compagnie
de  Jesus"  (2  vols.,  1687);  "  Histoire  et  decouvertes
des  Portugais,  des  Espagnols  et  des  Francais  dans
l'Amerique  "  (1688) ;  "  Les  colonies  f rancaises  dans
les  iles  Antilles  de  l'Amerique "  (1687) ;  "Histoire
et  geographie  de  l'ile  Hispaniola  ou  Santo  Do-
mingo "  (1689) ;  and  several  other  works,  which
enjoyed  great  popularitv  for  many  vears.

JAUCOURT,  Paul  de  (zho'-koor),  Flemish  sol-
dier, b.  in  Malines  in  1754;  d.  in  Paris  in  1793.
He  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  Austrian  army  when
the  American  Revolution  began,  and,  having  sent
in  his  resignation,  he  accompanied,  in  1779,  his
friend,  the  Chevalier  de  Chastellux,  to  the  United
States,  where  he  served  as  a  volunteer.  He  was
adjutant  to  the  Count  of  Saint  Simon  at  Yorktown
in  1781.  When  peace  was  signed,  he  entered  the
French  service,  and  went  to  Cayenne  as  a  major  of
artillery  in  1785.  He  submitted  to  the  governor
designs  for  the  fortifications  of  Cayenne,  and  was
permitted  to  carry  them  out.  But  the  events  of
the  revolution  interrupted  the  works,  and  he  was
arrested  on  suspicion  of  being  a  royalist,  and  sent
to  Paris  in  1793,  where  he  was  sentenced  to  death,
and  executed  in  November.

JAUREGUI  Y  AGUILAR,  Domingo  (how  -
ray-ghee),  South  American  historian,  b.  in  Panama
in  1705;  d.  in  Paracatii  del  Principe,  Brazil,  in
1758.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  lived  in  Brazil,  engag-
ing in  missionary  work  among  the  Indians,  and
afterward  in  Uruguay,  where  he  was  elected  assist-
ant provincial,  and  had  charge  of  several  Indian
villages.  Toward  the  end  of  his  career  he  retired
to  Paracatii  del  Principe,  of  which  he  became  vicar
in  1751,  and  devoted  his  leisure  time  to  historical
researches.  Jauregui  published  his  works  under
the  pen-name  of  Fray  Domingo,  but  after  his  death
his  manuscripts  and  a  revised  edition  of  his  former
publications  were  printed  in  Rome  under  his  real
name.  They  include  "  Cronica  de  la  Nueva  Anda-
lusia" (2  vols.,  Buenos  Ayres,  1748);  "  Descripcac-
geral  d' America"  (Rio  Janeiro,  1751);  "  Historia
da  provincia  Sancta  Cruz  a  qui  vulgarmente  cha-
mamos  Brazil  "  (Buenos  Ayres,  1754) ;  "  Cronica  do
estado  do  Brasil"  (2  vols." Rome,  1774);  "Cronica
de  las  Indias  "  (2  vols.,  1774) ;  "  Historia  corografica
des  los  Reinos  del  Quito  e  Chile  "  (3  vols.,  1776) ;  and
"  Historia  del  Nuevo  Mundo"  (1776).

JAUREGUI  Y  ALDECOA,  Agustin  de,  vice-
roy of  Peru,  b.  in  Bazan,  Navarre,  in  1708;  d.  in
Lima,  Peru,  27  April,  1784.  In  his  youth  he  was
equerry  to  Philip  v.,  who  afterward  appointed  him
captain  of  dragoons.  In  1740,  having  been  pro-
moted lieutenant-colonel  of  his  regiment,  he  joined
the  expeditionary  force  that  was  sent  to  the  West
Indies  to  protect"  them  against  the  British.  With
a  division  of  3,000  men  he  was  in  the  expedi-
tion to  Honduras,  and  his  regiment  took  part  in
the  capture  of  the  island  of  Ruatan.  On  his  re-
turn to  Spain  he  was  promoted  brigadier  by  Charles
III.  in  1753,  and  in  1762  participated  in  the  cam-
paign of  Portugal,  and  was  promoted  major-gen-


408


JAUREYBO


JAY


eral.  In  1772  he  was  appointed  president  and
governor  of  Chili,  and  took  possession  of  his  office
in  1773.  During  his  administration  the  audiencia
of  Chili  was  established  in  1776.  and  in  1779  he
was  active  in  preparing  to  defend  the  country
against  a  threatened  invasion  by  the  British.  He
was  then  promoted  to  lieutenant-general,  appointed
viceroy  of  Peru,  and  received  the  government  from
his  predecessor  on  21  July,  1780.  He  found  the
country  in  a  difficult  situation  on  account  of  the
threatened  rising  of  the  natives  in  the  interior,  and,
while  he  was  preparing  to  resist  the  British  fleet
under  Admiral  Hugues.  which  had  forced  an  entry
to  the  Pacific,  he  received  the  news  of  the  revolu-
tion under  Tupac-Amaru.  (See  Condorcanqui.)  By
the  active  measures  that  were  taken  by  Jauregui,  the
insurgents  were  decisively  defeated,  6  April,  1781,
and  the  insurrection  quelled  by  the  capture  and
execution  of  its  leader.  Tupac-Amaru's  brother,
Diego-  Cristobal,  continued  the  insurrection,  and
the  viceroy  offered,  on  10  Sept.,  1781,  to  abolish  the
Indian  tribute  and  grant  a  general  amnesty,  which
Diego  Cristobal  accepted.  As  some  of  the  Indian
chieftains  continued  the  insurrection,  Diego  Cris-
tobal, on  the  pretext  that  he  was  secretly  in  com-
munication with  the  insurgents,  was  arrested,  27
Feb.,  1783,  carried  as  a  prisoner  to  Cuzco,  and,  after
a  mock  trial,  sentenced  to  be  tortured  and  hanged
together  with  two  other  Indian  chiefs  and  one
woman.  Jauregui's  administration  was  not  re-
markable for  any  very  beneficial  measures,  and  he
is  justly  accused  of  cruelty  in  the  treatment  of  the
Indian  rebels ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  thor-
oughly honest,  and,  unlike  other  viceroys,  died
Joor.  His  successor  arrived  early  in  1784,  and
auregui  delivered  the  government  to  him  on  3
April.  He  died  from  the  result  of  an  accident,
and  was  buried  in  the  church  of  Santo  Domingo.

JAUREYBO  I.  (how-ray'-e-bo),  Caribbean  ca-
cique, b.  in  Guadeloupe  in  the  last  half  of  the  15th
century;  d.  at  sea  in  1514.  From  the  year  1511,
when  the  natives  of  Porto  Rico  asked  the  Caribs
of  the  neighboring  islands  to  help  them  in  their
desperate  struggle  for  freedom  against  the  Spanish
invaders,  the  Caribs  made  many  incursions  into  that
country.  From  1511  to  1514  their  most  formidable
leader  was  Jaureybo,  who  harassed  the  conquerors
by  his  numerous  invasions.  His  last  exploit,  which
was  carried  out  to  revenge  the  death  of  his  brother
Cazimes,  occurred  about  the  middle  of  the  year
1514.  He  landed,  with  200  men,  at  the  mouth  of
Loiza  river,  and  attacked  the  neighboring  farms,
setting  the  buildings  on  fire  and  killing  the  inhabi-
tants. One  of  the  conquerors,  Capt.  Sancho  de
Aragon,  marched  with  a  few  men  that  had  hastily
been  assembled  against  the  invaders,  but  was  totally
defeated.  Jaureybo  withdrew  his  forces,  prisoners,
and  plunder  to  the  shore,  and  set  out  on  his  return
to  the  Lesser  Antilles. Don  Cristobal  de  Mendoza,

fovernor  of  Porto  Rico,  on  hearing  the  news  of
aureybo's  deed,  pursued  him  with  three  ships
manned  by  fifty  men,  and  met  the  Caribbean  craft
at  sunset  near  the  island  of  Vieques.  Jaureybo,
who  might  have  escaped  toward  one  of  the  islands
near  by,  protected  by  the  darkness,  decided  to  re-
sist. He  led  his  canoes  toward  the  ships,  and  did
his  best  to  board  them,  but,  after  a  desperate  strug-
gle and  the  destruction  of  his  craft,  was  killed.

JAUREYBO  II.,  Caribbean  cacique.  It  is  not
certain  that  this  chief  was  the  son  of  the  one  men-
tioned above;  but  his  name,  the  time  of  his  ap-
pearance in  Porto  Rico,  his  rank,  and  his  courage
and  audacity,  leave  little  doubt  of  their  kinship.
Like  his  predecessor,  he  harassed  the  Spaniards,
making  the  southeast  part  of  the  island  practically


uninhabitable.  At  the  request  of  the  governor  of
Porto  Rico  the  king  sent  a  squadron  of  three  ships,
under  the  command  of  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  to  ex-
terminate the  Caribs.  The  squadron  arrived  at
Guadaloupe,  the  stronghold  of  Jaureybo,  15  July,
1515,  and  Ponce  de-  Leon  ordered  several  of  his
men  to  land  for  water ;  but  the  Caribs,  who  were
in  ambush,  fell  upon  them  and  obliged  them  to
leave  the  field  after  a  fight  in  which  fifteen  Span-
iards were  wounded  and  four  killed.  This  loss
obliged  Ponce  de  Leon  to  return  to  Saint  John  of
Porto  Rico  without  attempting  anything  against
them,  which  increased  their  audacity.  From  that
time  Jaureybo  made  numerous  incursions,  devastat-
ing the  country,  and  the  Spaniards  were  powerless
to  stop  their  depredations.  On  23  Oct.,  1530,  he
led  500  men  and  11  canoes  to  the  island  and  landed
in  a  place  called  Daguao,  where  there  were  many
farms  and  gold-mines.  He  plundered  and  de-
stroyed the  plantations,  set  every  house  on  fire,  mur-
dering the  inhabitants,  and  returned  to  his  quar-
ters with  25  prisoners  and  much  booty.  He  fre-
quently repeated  his  incursions ;  but  little  or
nothing  is  known  of  his  last  days.

JAY,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  12
Dec,  1745 ;  d.  in  Bedford,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,
17  May,  1829.  He  was  of  Huguenot  descent,  and
was  educated  in  part  by  Pastor  Stoope,  of  the
French  church  at  New
Rochelle,  and  was  grad-
uated at  Kings  (now
Columbia),  New  York,
in  1766.  He  studied
law  with  Benjamin  Kis-
sam,  having  Lindley
Murray  as  his  fellow-
student,  and  in  1766
was  admitted  to  the  bar.
When  news  of  the  pas-
sage of  the  Boston  port
bill  reached  New  York,
on  16  May,  1776,  at  a
meeting  of  citizens,  Jay
was  appointed  a  mem-
ber of  a  committee  of
fifty-one  to  correspond
with  the  other  colonies.
Their  reply  to  the  Bos-
ton committee,  attrib-
uted to  Jay,  recommended,  as  of  the  utmost  mo-
ment, "  a  congress  of  deputies  from  the  colonies  in
general."  Jay  was  a  delegate  to  the  congress,  which
met  in  Philadelphia,  5  Sept.  As  one  of  a  commit-
tee of  three  he  prepared  the  "  Address  to  the  Peo-
ple of  Great  Britain,"  which  Jefferson,  while  igno-
rant of  the  authorship,  declared  to  be  "a  produc-
tion certainly  of  the  finest  pen  in  America."  Jay
was  an  active  member  of  the  committee  of  observa-
tion in  New  York,  on  whose  recommendation  the
counties  elected  a  provincial  congress,  and  also  of  a
committee  of  association  of  100  members,  invested
by  the  city  of  New  York  with  general  undefined
powers.  He  was  a  member  also  of  the  2d  congress,
which  met  in  Philadelphia,  10  May,  1775,  and  drafted
the  "Address  to  the  People  of  Canada  and  of  Ire-
land " ;  and  he  carried  against  a  strong  opposition
a  petition  to  the  king,  which  was  signed  by  the
members  on  8  July.  The  rejection  of  this  petition,
leaving  no  alternative  but  submission  or  resist-
ance, opened  the  way  for  a  general  acquiescence  in
the  Declaration  of  Independence.  Jay  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  secret  committee  appointed  by  congress,
29  Nov.,  1775,  after  a  confidential  interview  with  a
French  officer,  "  to  correspond  with  the  friends  of
America  in  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  other  parts


JfTmJfisy?


JAY


JAY


409


of  the  world."  While  he  was  attending  congress
at  Philadelphia,  Jay's  presence  was  requested  by
the  New  York  convention,  which  required  his  coun-
sel. This  convention  met  at  White  Plains,  9  July,
1776,  and  on  Jay's  motion  unanimously  approved
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  which  on  that
day  was  received  from  congress.  The  passage  of  a
part  of  Lord  Howe's  fleet  up  the  Hudson  induced
the  appointment  by  the  convention  of  a  secret
committee  vested  with  extraordinary  powers,  of
which  Jay  was  made  chairman,  as  also  of  a  fur-
ther committee  for  defeating  conspiracies  in  the
state  against  the  liberties  of  America.  The  reso-
lutions relating  to  this  committee  were  drawn  by
him ;  and  its  minutes,  many  of  which  are  in  his
hand,  show  the  energy  with  which  it  exercised  its
powers  by  arrests,  imprisonments,  and  banish-
lents,  and  the  vigorous  system  demanded  by  the
critical  condition  of  the  American  cause.  The  suc-
cesses of  the  British  in  New  York,  and  the  retreat
and  needs  of  Washington's  army,  had  induced  a
feeling  of  despondency,  and  Jay  was  the  author  of
an  earnest  appeal  to  his  countrymen,  which  by  or-
der of  congress  was  translated  into  German  and
widely  circulated.

Jay  drafted  the  state  constitution  adopted  by  the
convention  of  New  York,  which  met  successively
at  Harlem,  Kingsbridge,  Philip's  Manor,  White
Plains,  Poughkeepsie,  and  Kingston.  He  was  ap-
pointed chief  justice  of  the  state,  holding  his  first
term  at  Kingston  on  9  Sept.,  1777,  and  acting  also
in  the  council  of  safety,  which  directed  the  mili-
tary occupation  of  the  state  and  wielded  an  abso-
lute sovereignty.  He  was  visited  at  Fishkill,  in
the  autumn  of  1778,  by  Gen.  Washington  for  a
confidential  conversation  on  the  invasion  of  Cana-
da by  the  French  and  American  forces,  which  they
concurred  in  disapproving,  chiefly  on  the  proba-
bility that  if  conquered  it  would  be  retained  by
France.  Chief-Justice  Jay  was  again  sent  to  con-
gress on  a  special  occasion,  the  withdrawal  of  Ver-
mont from  the  jurisdiction  of  New  York,  and  three
days  after  taking  his  seat  he  was,  1  Dec,  1778,
elected  its  president.  The  next  September  he
wrote  his  letter,  in  the  name  of  congress,  on  cur-
rency and  finance.  On  27  Sept.,  1778,  he  was  ap-
pointed minister  to  Spain,  and  later  one  of  the
commissioners  to  negotiate  a  peace.  He  sailed
with  Mrs.  Jay,  on  20  Oct.,  in  the  American  frigate
"  Confederacy,"  which,  disabled  by  a  storm,  put  in-
to Martinico,  whence  they  proceeded  in  the  French
frigate  "Aurora,"  which  brought  them  to  Cadiz,
22  Jan.,  1780.  Jay,  while  received  with  personal
courtesy,  found  no  disposition  to  recognize  Ameri-
can independence,  and  congress  added  to  the  em-
barrassing position  of  the  minister  at  a  reluctant
court  by  drawing  bills  upon  him  for  half  a  million
of  dollars,  on  the  assumption  that  he  would  have
obtained  a  subsidy  from  Spain  before  they  should
have  become  due.  Jay  accepted  the  bills,  some  of
which  were  afterward  protested,  the  Spanish  court
advancing  money  for  only  a  few  of  them,  and  the
rest  were  afterward  paid  with  money  borrowed  by
Franklin  from  France.

While  in  Spain  Jay  was  added  by  congress  to
the  peace  commissioners,  headed  by  John  Adams,
and  at  the  request  of  Franklin,  on  23  June,  1782,
he  went  to  Paris,  where  Franklin  was  alone.  The
position  of  the  two  commissioners  was  complicated
by  the  fact  that  congress,  under  the  persistent  ur-

Sency  of  Luzerne,  the  French  minister  at  Phila-
elphia,  had  materially  modified  the  instructions
originally  given  to  Mr.  Adams,  and  on  15  June,
1781,  had  instructed  its  commissioners  "  to  make
the  most  candid  and  confidential  communications


upon  all  subjects  to  the  ministers  of  our  generous
ally,  the  king  of  France ;  to  undertake  nothing  in
their  negotiations  for  peace  and  truce  without
their  knowledge  and  concurrence,  and  ultimately
to  govern  yourselves  by  their  advice  and  opinion."
Two  arguments  were  used  in  support  of  this  in-
struction: First,  that  the  king  was  explicitly
pledged  by  his  minister  to  support  the  United
States  "  in  all  points  relating  to  their  prosperity  " ;
and  next,  that  "  nothing  would  be  yielded  by  Great
Britain  which  was  not  extorted  by  the  address  of
France."  An  interesting  memoir  in  the  French  ar-
chives, among  the  papers  under  the  head  of  "  An-
gleterre."  shows  that  the  interests  of  France  re-
quired that  the  ambition  of  the  American  colonies-
"  should  be  checked  and  held  down  to  fixed  limits
through  the  union  of  the  three  nations,"  England,
France,  and  Spain.  Before  the  arrival  of  Jay,
Franklin  had  had  an  informal  conversation,  first
with  Grenville,  and  then  with  Mr.  Oswald,  who
had  been  sent  by  the  cabinet  of  Rockingham.  On
6  Aug.  Oswald  presented  to  Jay  and  Franklin  a
commission  prescribing  the  terms  of  the  enabling
act,'  and  authorizing  him  "  to  treat  with  the  colo-
nies and  with  any  or  either  of  them,  and  any  part
of  them,  and  with  any  description  of  men  in  them,
and  with  any  person  whatsoever,  of  and  concern-
ing peace."  etc.  This  document  led  to  a  new  com-
plication in  the  American  commission  by  develop-
ing a  material  difference  of  opinion  between  Jay
and  Franklin.  When  the  commission  was  submit-
ted to  Vergennes,  that  minister  held  that  it  was
sufficient,  and  advised  Fitzherbert  to  that  effect.
Franklin  believed  it  "would  do."  But  Jay  de-
clined to  treat  under  the  description  of  "colonies"
or  on  any  other  than  an  equal  footing.  Oswald
adopted  Jay's  view,  but  the  British  cabinet  did  not.
and  Jay's  refusal  to  proceed  soon  stayed  the  peace
negotiations  of  the  other  powers,  which  Vergennes
had  arranged  should  proceed  together,  each  nation
negotiating  for  itself.

During  Jay's  residence  in  Spain  he  had  learned
much  of  the  aims  and  methods  of  the  Bourbon
policy,  and  a  memoir  submitted  to  him  by  Rayne-
val,  as  his  "  personal  views  "  against  our  right  to  the
boundaries,  an  intercepted  letter  of  Marbois,  secre-
tary of  legation  at  Philadelphia,  against  our  claim
to  the  fisheries,  and  the  departure  for  England
with  precautions  for  secrecy  of  Rayneval  himself,
the  most  skilful  and  trusted  agent  of  Vergennes,
convinced  him  that  one  object  of  Rayneval's  mis-
sion was  to  prejudice  Shelburne  against  the  Ameri-
can claims.  As  a  prudent  counter-move  to  this
secret  mission,  Jay  promptly  despatched  Benjamin
Vaughan,  an  intimate  friend  and  agent  of  Shel-
burne, to  counteract  Rayneval's  adverse  influence
to  the  American  interests.  This  was  done  without
consultation  with  Franklin,  who  did  not  concur
with  Jay  in  regard  to  Rayneval'sjourney,  and  who
retained  his  confidence  in  the  French  court  and
was  embarrassed  and  constrained  by  his  instruc-
tions. It  appears  from  "Shelburne's  Life"  that
Rayneval,  in  his  interview  with  Shelburne  and
Grantham,  after  discussing  other  questions,  pro-
ceeded to  speak  about  America  ;  and  "  here  Rayne-
val played  into  the  hands  of  the  English  ministers,
expressing  a  strong  opinion  against  the  American
claims  to  the  fisheries  and  the  vallevs  of  the  Missis-
sippi and  the  Ohio";  and  that  Vaughan  arrived
almost  simultaneously,  bringing  the  "considera-
tions" prepared  by  Jay,  which  enforced  these
Eoints  :  1.  That,  as  Britain  could  not  conquer  the
fnited  States,  it  was  for  her  interest  to  conciliate
them ;  2.  That  the  United  States  would  not  treat
except  on  an  equal  footing ;  3.  That  it  was  the  in-


410


JAY


JAY


terest  of  France,  but  not  of  England,  to  postpone
the  acknowledgment  of  independence  to  a  general
peace;  4.  That  a  hope  of  dividing  the  fisheries
with  France  would  be  futile,  as  America  would
not  make  peace  without  them ;  5.  That  any  at-
tempt to  deprive  the  United  States  of  the  naviga-
tion of  the  Mississippi,  or  of  that  river  as  a  boun-
dary, would  irritate  America ;  6.  That  such  an  at-
tempt, if  successful,  would  sow  the  seeds  of  war  in
the  very  treaty  of  peace.  The  disclosure  of  the
grave  difference  between  the  Americans  and  their
allies  on  the  terms  of  peace,  with  the  opportunity
it  afforded  to  England,  consistently  with  the  pride,
interest,  and  justice  of  Great  Britain,  and  with  the
national  jealousy  of  France,  seems  to  have  come  to
the  cabinet  with  the  force  of  a  revelation,  and  its
effect  upon  their  policy  was  instantaneous  and  cora-

Slete.  A  new  commission  in  the  form  drafted  by
ay,  authorizing  Oswald  to  treat  with  "  the  United
States  "  of  America,  was  at  once  ordered,  and  Lord
Shelburne  wrote  to  Oswald  that  they  had  said  and
done  "everything  which  had  been  desired,"  and
that  they  had  put  the  greatest  confidence  ever  placed
in  man  in  the  American  commissioners.  Vaughan
returned  "  joyfully  "  with  the  new  commission  on  27
Sept.,  and  on  5  Oct.  Jay  handed  to  Oswald  the  plan
of  a  treaty  including  the  clauses  relating  to  inde-
pendence, the  boundaries,  and  the  fisheries,  and
Oswald,  in  enclosing  it  to  his  government,  wrote :
"  I  look  upon  the  treaty  as  now  closed."  The  great
success  of  the  English  at  Gibraltar,  however,  which
determined  the  ministry  to  resist  the  demands  of
France  and  Spain,  induced  them  to  attempt  some
modification  of  the  concessions  to  the  Americans,
even  when  they  had  been  made  by  Oswald  with  the
approval  of  the  cabinet.  Strachey  and  Fitzherbert
were  therefore  ordered  to  assist  Oswald,  and  on  25
Oct.  John  Adams  arrived  from  Holland,  where  he
had  negotiated  a  treaty.  He  expressed  to  Frank-
lin his  entire  approval  of  Jay's  views  and  action,
and  Franklin,  at  their  next  meeting  with  Oswald,
said  to  Jay :  "  I  am  of  your  opinion,  and  will  go
on  with  these  gentlemen  without  consulting  the
court " ;  and  Jay,  in  writing  to  Livingston,  spoke
of  their  perfect  unanimity,  and  specially  acknowl-
edged Mr.  Adams's  services  on  the  eastern  bounda-
ries and  Franklin's  on  the  subject  of  the  Tories.
The  provisional  articles,  signed  80  Nov.,  1782,  to
take  effect  on  a  peace  between  France  and  Eng-
land, were  communicated  to  Vergennes,  who  wrote
to  Rayneval  in  England  that  the  concessions  of  the
English  exceeded  all  that  he  had  believed  possible,
and  Rayneval  replied:  "The  treaty  seems  to  me
like  a  dream."  A  new  loan  from  France  to  Ameri-
ca marked  the  continuance  of  their  good  under-
standing, and  Hamilton  wrote  to  Jay  that  the
terms  of  the  treaty  exceeded  the  anticipations  of
the  most  sanguine.

The  violation  of  the  instructions  of  congress  dis-
pleased a  part  of  that  body.  Mr.  Madison,  who
had  voted  for  the  instruction,  wrote :  "  In  this  busi-
ness Jay  has  taken  the  lead,  and  proceeded  to  a
length  of  which  you  can  form  little  idea.  Adams
has  followed  with  cordiality.  Franklin  has  been
dragged  into  it."  Mr.  Sparks,  in  his  "  Life  of
Franklin,"  contended  that  the  violation  of  their
instructions  by  the  American  commissioners,  in
concluding  and  signing  their  treaty  without  the
concurrence  of  the  French  government,  was  "  un-
justifiable." By  some  error  still  unexplained,  he
represented  the  correspondence  of  Vergennes  in
the  French  archives  as  disproving  the  suspicions,
which  it  authoritatively  confirms.  A  map  of
North  America,  given  in  the  "  Life  of  Shelburne,"
showing  "  the  boundaries  of  the  United  States,


Canada,  and  the  Spanish  possessions,  according  to
the  proposals  of  the  court  of  France,"  shows  that
obedience  by  the  American  commissioners  to  the
instruction  to  govern  themselves  by  the  opinion  of


Vergennes.  would  have  shut  out  the  United  States
from  the  Mississippi  and  the  Gulf,  and  would  have
deprived  them  of  nearly  the  whole  of  the  states  of
Alabama  and  Mississippi,  the  greater  part  of  Ken-
tucky and  Tennessee,  the  whole  of  Ohio,  Michigan,
Indiana,  Illinois,  Wisconsin,  and  part  of  Minneso-
ta, and  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi.

The  definitive  treaty,  a  simple  embodiment  of
the  provisional  articles,  for  nothing  more  could  be
procured  from  the  cabinet  of  Fox  and  North,  was
signed  3  Sept.,  1783,  and  Jay  returned  to  New  York
in  July,  1784,  having  been  elected  by  congress  secre-
tary for  foreign  affairs,  then  the  most  important
post  in  the  country,  which  he  held  until  the  estab-
lishment of  the  Federal  government  in  1789.  In
that  work  he  had  taken  a  deep  interest,  as  is  shown
by  his  correspondence  with  Washington  and  Jef-
ferson, and  on  the  formation  of  the  National  consti-
tution he  joined  Hamilton  and  Madison  in  con-
tributing to  the  "  Federalist,"  and  published  an
address  to  the  inhabitants  of  New  York  in  favor  of
the  constitution.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the
New  York  convention,  which,  after  a  long  struggle,
adopted  the  constitution  "  in  full  confidence  "  that
certain  amendments  would  be  adopted,  and  Jay
was  appointed  to  write  the  circular  letter  that  se-
cured the  unanimous  assent  of  the  convention.  On
the  organization  of  the  Federal  government,  Presi-
dent Washington  asked  Jay  to  accept  whatever
place  he  might  prefer,  and  Jay  took  the  office  of
chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  when  he  re-
signed the  post  of  president  of  the  Abolition  society.
In  1792  he  consented  to  be  a  candidate  for  the  gov-
ernorship of  New  York,  but  the  canvassers  declined
on  technical  grounds  to  count  certain  votes  given
for  Jay,  which  would  have  made  a  majority  in  his
favor,  and  Gov.  Clinton  was  declared  elected.  In
1794  Jay  was  nominated  by  Washington  as  a  special
envoy  to  Great  Britain,  with  which  our  relations
were  then  strained,  and  he  concluded  with  Lord
Grenville  on  19  Nov.,  1794,  the  convention  known
in  American  history  as  "  Jay's  treaty,"  which  was
assailed  with  furious  denunciations  by  the  Demo-
cratic party,  whose  tactics  severely  tested  the  firm-
ness of  Washington's  character  and  the  strength  of
his  administration.  The  treaty  and  its  ratification
against  an  unexampled  opposition  avoided  a  war
with  Great  Britain.  An  English  opinion  of  the
treaty,  which  in  America  was  denounced  as  a  com-
plete surrender  to  England,  was  expressed  by  Lord
Sheffield  when,  on  the  occurrence  of  the  rupture
with  America,  he  wrote,  "  We  have  now  a  complete
opportunity  of  getting  rid  of  that  most  impolitic
treaty  of  1794,  when  Lord  Grenville  was  so  per-
fectly duped  by  Jay."  Five  days  before  his  return
from  England,  Jay  was  elected  governor  of  New


JAY


JAY


411


York,  an  office  to  which  he  was  re-elected  in  April,
1798.  On  the  close  of  his  second  term,  in  1801,
Jay  declined  a  return  to  the  chief  justiceship  of
the  supreme  court,  to  which  he  was  reappointed
by  President  Adams,  and  passed  the  remainder  of
his  life  on  his  estate  in  Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,
a  property  which  had  descended  to  Mr.  Jay  through
his  mother,  Mary  Van  Cortlandt.  It  is  situated
some  forty-five  miles  north  of  New  York  city  about
midway  between  the  Hudson  river  and  Long  Island
sound.  The  Bedford  house,  as  the  mansion  is
called,  is  placed  on  an  eminence  overlooking  the
whole  beautiful  rolling  region  between  the  two
great  bodies  of  water.  It  is  now  the  summer  resi-
dence of  his  grandson,  John  Jay.  See  illustration
on  page  410.  The  last  office  that  he  filled  was
the  presidency  of  the  American  Bible  society.
Daniel  Webster  said  of  him :  "  When  the  spotless
ermine  of  the  judicial  robe  fell  on  John  Jay,  it
touched  nothing  less  spotless  than  itself."  The
life  of  John  Jay  has  been  written  by  his  son,
and  also  by  Henry  B.  Renwick  (New  York,  1841).
See  "  The  Life  and  Times  of  John  Jay,"  by  Will-
iam Whitlock  (New  York,  1887).  He  married  on
28  April,  1774,  Sarah  Van  Brugh  Livingston,
eldest  daughter  of  Gov.  William  Livingston.  She
accompanied  her  husband  to  Spain,  and  later
was  with  him  in  Paris,  where  she  was  a  great
favorite  in  society,  and  they  resided  with  Benja-
min Franklin  at  Passy.  John  Adams's  daughter
says  of  her  at  this  time :  "  Every  person  who  knew
her  here  bestows  many  encomiums  on  Mrs.  Jay.
Madame  de  Lafayette  said  she  was  well  acquainted
with  her,  and  very
fond  of  her,  adding
that  Mrs.  Jay  and  she
thought  alike,  that
pleasure  might  be
found  abroad,  but
happiness  only  at
home  in  the  society
of  one's  family  and
friends."  During  the
week  of  Washing-
ton's inauguration  he
dined  with  the  Jays,
and  a  few  days  later
Mrs.  Washington  was
entertained  at  Liber-
ty hall  by  Gov.  Liv-
ingston, Mrs.  Living-
ston, and  Mrs.  Jay.
^^^  ^  During  the  following

^^H  . \Ssrt^*  season hospitalities

were  frequently  ex-
changed between  the
president  and  the  Jays.  The  portrait  of  Mrs.  Jay
is  from  an  original  portrait  painted  by  Robert  E.
Pine,  and  now  in  the  possession  of  her  grandson,
John  Jay. — John  Jay's  elder  brother,  Sir  James,
physician,  b.  in  New  York  ciry,  27  Oct.,  1732 ;  d.  in
Springfield,  N.  J.,  20  Oct.,  1815.  He  studied  medi-
cine, and,  while  visiting  England  in  1762  on  busi-
ness of  his  own,  was  employed  to  solicit  contribu-
tions for  King's  (now  Columbia)  college.  At  this
time  (25  March,  1763)  he  was  knighted  and  became
involved  in  a  suit  in  chancery  arising  out  of  the
collections  made  for  the  college,  but  he  returned  to
New  York  prior  to  the  Revolution.  Later  he  was
instrumental  in  the  passage  of  the  New  York  act
of  attainder,  and  during  the  British  occupation  of
the  city  was  confined  in  the  New  York  prison,  but
was  at  once  released  on  the  arrival  of  Sir  Guy  Carle-
ton  in  1782.  He  published  two  pamphlets  (London,
1771  and  1774)  relative  to  the  collections  made  for


*y


the  colleges  in  America  and  also  "  Reflections  and
Observations  on  the  Gout "  (London,  1772). — John
Jay's  eldest  son,  Peter  Augustus,  lawyer,  b.  in
Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  24  Jan.,  1776;  d.  in  New
York  city,  20  Feb.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1794,  and  became  his  father's  private  secre-
tary, and  in  that  capacity  accompanied  him  when
he  was  sent  as  minister  to  England  in  1794.  On
his  return  he  studied  law  and  achieved  a  high
rank  at  the  New  York  bar.  In  1816  he  was  a
member  of  the  assembly,  being  active  in  pro-
moting legislation  for  the  building  of  the  Erie
canal,  and  with  bis  brother  William  supported
the  bill  recommending  the  abolition  of  slavery  in
New  York  state.  He  held  the  office  of  recorder  of
New  York  city  in  1819-'21,  and  was  a  member  of
the  New  York  constitutional  convention  in  1821.
Mr.  Jay  was  a  trustee  of  Columbia  in  1812-'17,  and
again  in  1823-'43,  being  chairman  in  1832.  In
1840-'3  he  was  president  of  the  New  York  histori-
cal society,  and  he  was  connected  with  several  lit-
erary and  charitable  societies.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1831,  and  from
Columbia  in  1835.  His  great  learning  and  strength
of  intellect,  his  masterly  reasoning,  his  wisdom  and
his  pre-eminent  moral  excellence,  combined  with
his  thorough  refinement  and  dignity  as  a  man,  made
him  a  very  marked  and  remarkable  jurist  and
member  of  society.  Mr.  Jay  was  one  of  the  mem-
bers of  the  Kent  club,  composed  of  prominent
members  of  the  bar,  and  was  active  in  the  social
affairs  of  New  York  city. — John  Jay's  second  son,
William,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  16  June,
1789;  d.  in  Bedford,  N.  Y.,  14  Oct.,  1858,  studied
the  classics  at  Albany  with  the  Rev.  Thomas  Elli-
son, of  Oxford,  England.  Among  his  classmates
was  James  Fenimore  Cooper,  with  whom  he  formed
a  life-long  friendship,  and  who  inscribed  to  Jay
"  Lionel  Lincoln  "  and  some  of  his  "  Letters  from
Europe."  Jay  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,  and
studied  law  with  John  B.  Henry  of  Albany,  but  was
compelled  to  relinquish  the  profession  by  weak-
ness of  the  eyes.  He  retired  to  his  father's  home
at  Bedford,  and  in  1812  married  Augusta,  daugh-
ter of  John  McVickar,  a  lady  "  in  whose  character
were  blended  all  the  Christian  graces  and  virtues."
In  1815  he  published  a  "Memoir  on  the  Subject
of  a  General  Bible  Society  for  the  United  States,"
and  in  1810  assisted  Elias  Boudinot  and  others  in
forming  the  American  Bible  society,  of  which  he
was  for  years  an  active  and  practical  promoter,
and  its  principal  champion  against  the  vigorous
attacks  of  the  high-churchmen  led  by  Bishop  Ho-
bart.  The  interest  in  the  controversy  extended  to
England,  and  Jay's  numerous  letters  and  pamphlets
on  the  subject  have  been  commended  as  models  of
that  sort  of  warfare.  In  1818  Jay  was  appointed
to  the  bench  of  Westchester  county  by  Gov.  De
Witt  Clinton.  His  office  as  first  judge  was  va-
cated by  the  adoption  of  the  new  constitution  in
1821,  but  he  was  subsequently  reappointed,  with-
out regard  to  politics,  until  he  was  superseded  in
1843  bv  Gov.  Bouck  at  the  demand  of  a  pro-slavery
faction.  In  1826,  Jay,  who  in  1819,  during  the
Missouri  controversy,  had  written  strongly  against
the  extension  of  slavery,  demanding  that  congress
should  "  stand  between  the  living  and  the  dead,
and  stay  the  plague,"  was  instrumental  in  calling
the  attention  of  the  New  York  legislature  and  of
congress  to  the  necessity  of  reforming  the  slave-
laws  of  the  District  of  Columbia.  A  free  colored
man,  Gilbert  Horton,  of  Somers,  Westchester  co.,
who  had  gone  to  Washington,  was  there  arrested
as  a  runaway  and  advertised  by  the  sheriff  to  be
sold  as  a  fugitive  slave,  to  pay  his  jail  fees,  un-


412


JAY


JAY


less  previously  claimed  by  his  master.  Jay  called
a  public  meeting,  which  demanded  the  interpo-
sition of  Gov.  DeWitt  Clinton.  This  was  prompt-
ly given,  Horton  was  released,  and  a  petition  cir-
culated for  the  aboli-
tion of  slavery  in  the
District.  The  New
York  assembly,  by  a
vote  of  fifty- seven  to
thirty-nine,  instruct-
ed their  representa-
tives in  congress  to
vote  for  the  meas-
ure. Pennsylvania
passed  a  similar  bill,
and  upon  the  me-
morial presented  by
Gen.  Aaron  Ward,
the  house  of  repre-
/  i /)n  '  /  sentatives, after a

AAMJUCLWMA.^ OCy^ prolonged  debate,  re-
/  ferred  the  subject  to

a  special  committee.  In  1828-'9  the  debate  was
renewed  in  congress,  and  resolutions  and  petitions
multiplied,  from  Maine  to  Tennessee.

Among  Jay's  writings  at  this  time  were  essays
on  the  Sabbath  as  a  civil  and  divine  institution,
temperance,  Sunday-schools,  missionary  and  edu-
cational efforts,  and  an  essay  on  duelling,  to  which,
in  1830,  while  the  authorship  was  unknown,  a  medal
was  awarded  by  the  Anti-duelling  association  of
Savannah,  by  a  committee  of  which  Judge  James
M.  Wayne  and  Gov.  Richard  W.  Habersham  were
members.  In  1833  he  published  the  "Life  and
Writings  of  John  Jay."  Its  careful  sketch  of  the
peace  negotiations  of  1782,  and  its  exposition  of
the  hostility  of  France  to  the  American  claims  was
questioned  by  Dr.  Sparks,  but  their  accuracy  was
certified  by  Lord  St.  Helens  (Mr.  Fitzherbert),  and
has  since  been  confirmed  by  the  Vergennes  corre-
spondence and  the  "  Life  of  Shelburne."  In  Octo-
ber, 1832,  President  Jackson  appointed  Judge  Jay  a
commissioner  to  adjust  all  unsettled  matters  with
the  western  Indians ;  but  the  appointment,  which  was
unsolicited,  was  declined;  Judge  Jay  contributed
a  paper  on  the  anti-slavery  movement  to  the  first
number  of  the  "  Emancipator,"  published  in  New
York,  1  May,  1833.  In  October  of  the  same  year
the  New  York  city  anti-slavery  society  was  formed,
and  in  December  an  Anti-slavery  convention  met
at  Philadelphia  to  form  the  American  anti-slavery
society.  Each  of  these  bodies,  at  Judge  Jay's  sug-
gestion, disclaimed  the  right  of  congress  to  inter-
fere with  slavery  in  the  states,  while  claiming  for
congress  power  to  suppress  the  domestic  slave-
trade  and  to  abolish  slavery  in  the  territories  under
its  exclusive  jurisdiction.  The  significance  of  the
principles  and  action  of  these  societies  is  illustrated
by  the  interesting  historic  facts :  first,  that  nulli-
fication in  South  Carolina  in  1832,  when  a  medal
was  struck  inscribed  "John  C.  Calhoun,  First
President  of  the  Southern  Confederacy,"  was  the
precursor  of  the  secession  of  1861,  showing  that  the
pro-slavery  policy  during  the  interval  was  a  part
of  the  secession  scheme ;  and  next,  that  the  anti-
slavery  movement,  organized  in  1833  on  strictly
constitutional  grounds,  culminated  in  the  Republi-
can party,  by  which  slavery  was  abolished  and  the
republic  preserved.  The  same  year,  1833,  was  noted
for  the  persecution  and  trial  in  Connecticut  of  Pru-
dence Crandall  (q.  v.),  and  for  the  decision  of  Judge
Daggett  that  colored  persons  could  not  be  citizens.
Judge  Jay's  review  of  that  decision  and  his  able
enforcement  of  the  opposite  doctrine  were  approv-
ingly quoted  by  Chancellor  Kent  in  his  "Com-


mentaries." The  years  1834  and  1835  were  mem-
orable for  the  attempt  to  arrest,  by  threats  and
violence,  the  expression  of  anti-slavery  sentiments.
Judge  Jay,  in  a  charge  to  the  grand  jury,  called
their  attention  to  the  prevailing  spirit  of  lawless  vio-
lence, and  charged  them  that  any  law  that  might  be
passed  to  abridge  in  the  slightest  degree  the  free-
dom of  speech  or  the  press,  to  shield  any  one  sub-
ject from  discussion,  would  be  null  and  void.  He
prepared  also,  for  the  American  anti-slavery  society,
an  address  to  the  public,  restating  their  views  and
principles,  which  was  widely  published  throughout
America  and  Europe.  In  1834  Judge  Jay  published
his  "  Inquiry  into  the  Character  and  Tendency  of
the  American  Colonization  and  American  Anti-
Slavery  Societies,"  which  was  read  "  by  scholars
and  statesmen  and  exerted  a  powerful  influence ! "
"The  work,"  wrote  Prof.  E.  Wright,  Jr.,  "sells
faster  than  it  can  be  printed,"  and  it  was  presently
reprinted  in  London.  In  December,  1835,  Presi-
dent Jackson,  in  his  message,  assailed  the  character
and  designs  of  the  anti-slavery  movement,  accusing
the  Abolitionists  of  circulating  through  the  mails
"  inflammatory  appeals  addressed  to  the  passions
of  the  slaves,  and  calculated  to  stimulate  them  to
insurrection  and  all  the  horrors  of  civil  war,"  and
the  president  suggested  to  congress  a  law  forbid-
ding the  circulation  through  the  mails  of  incen-
diary documents.  On  28  Dec.  the  executive  com-
mittee addressed  to  the  president  what  Henry  Wil-
son called  "  an  elaborate  and  dignified  protest  from
the  polished  and  pungent  pen  of  Judge  Jay,"  de-
nying his  accusations,  and  offering  to  submit  their
publications  to  the  inspection  of  congress.

Judge  Jay's  next  work,  "A  View  of  the  Action
of  the  Federal  Government  in  Behalf  of  Slavery  "
(1837),  made  a  deep  impression,  and  had  a  rapid
sale.  This  was  followed  in  1839  by  a  startling
presentation  of  facts  on  "  The  Condition  of  the
Free  People  of  Color  in  the  United  States,"  in  1840
by  an  address  to  the  friends  of  constitutional  lib-
erty on  the  violation  by  the  house  of  representa-
tives of  the  right  of  petition,  and  a  review  from  his
pen  of  the  case  of  the  "  Amistad "  negroes  (see
Cinque)  was  read  by  John  Quincy  Adams  in  con-
gress as  a  part  of  his  speech  on  the  subject.  In
1842  Judge  Jay  reviewed  the  argument  by  Mr.
Webster  on  the  slaves  of  the  "  Creole."  The  two
subjects  to  which  Judge  Jay's  efforts  were  chiefly
devoted  were  those  of  war  and  slavery.  His  writ-
ings on  the  first,  both  before  and  after  he  became
president  of  the  American  peace  society,  had  no
little  influence  at  home  and  abroad.  In  his  volume
entitled  "  War  and  Peace ;  the  Evils  of  the  First,
with  a  Plan  for  securing  the  Last "  (New  York,  1848),
he  suggested  stipulation  by  treaty  referring  inter-
national disputes  to  arbitration,  as  a  plan  based  upon
obvious  principles  of  national  policy,  and  adapted
to  the  existing  state  of  civilized  society.  The  sug-
gestion met  with  the  warm  approval  of  Joseph
Sturge,  the  English  philanthropist,  who  visited
Judge  Jay  at  Bedford  while  the  work  was  still  in
manuscript,  and  it  was  embodied  by  Mr.  Sturge  in
a  volume  published  by  him  on  his  return  to  Eng-
land. The  plan  was  heartily  approved  by  Mr.
Cobden,  who  wrote  to  Judge  Jay  :  "  If  your  gov-
ernment is  prepared  to  insert  an  arbitration  clause
in  the  pending  treaties,  I  am  persuaded  it  will  be
accepted  by  our  government."  The  main  feature
of  the  plan,  arbitration,  after  approval  by  succes-
sive peace  congresses  in  Europe  (at  Brussels  in
1848,  at  Paris  in  1849,  at  London  in  1851)  was  vir-
tually recommended  by  Protocol  No.  23,  of  the
Congress  of  Paris,  held  in  1856  after  the  Crimean
war,  which  protocol  was  unanimously  adopted  by


JAY


JAY


413


the  plenipotentiaries  of  France,  Austria,  Great
Britain,  Prussia,  Russia,  Sardinia,  and  Turkey.
These  governments  declared  their  wish  that  the
states  between  which  any  serious  misunderstanding
might  arise  should,  before  appealing  to  arms,  have
recourse,  as  far  as  circumstances  might  allow,  to
the  good  offices  of  a  friendly  power.  The  honor  of
its  introduction  in  the  congress  belongs  to  Lord
Clarendon,  whose  services  had  been  solicited  by
Joseph  Sturge  and  Henry  Richard,  and  it  was  sup-
ported by  all  of  his  colleagues  in  the  congress.  It
was  subsequently  referred  to  by  Lord  Derby  as
worthy  of  immortal  honor.  Lord  Malmsbury  pro-
nounced it  an  act  "  important  to  civilization  and
to  the  security  of  the  peace  of  Europe,"  and  it  was
somewhat  later  approved  by  all  the  other  powers  to
whom  it  was  referred,  more  than  forty  in  number.
Among  Judge  Jay's  other  writings  on  this  sub-
ject are  his  letter  on  the  "  Kossuth  Excitement "
(1852) ;  an  address  before  the  American  peace
society  at  Boston  (1845),  and  a  petition  from  the
society  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  behalf  of  stipulated
arbitration  (1853).  Perhaps  under  this  head  should
be  included  his  historic  and  searching  "  Causes  and
Consequences  of  the  Mexican  War  "  (Boston,  1849).
In  1846  Judge  Jay  republished,  with  an  elaborate
preface,  the  concluding  chapter  of  Bishop  Wilber-
iorce's  "  History  of  the  Church  in  America,"  which
had  been  announced  by  two  American  publishers
who  relinquished  the  design  when  it  was  found  to
contain  a  reproof  of  the  American  church  for  its
course  on  slavery.  This  was  followed  by  a  letter
on  the  same  subject  to  Bishop  Ives,  of  North  Caro-
lina. "The  Calvary  Pastoral,  a  Tract  for  the
Times,"  rebuked  the  attempt  to  convert  the  Episco-
pal church  into  a  popish  church  without  a  pope.
In  1849  appeared  "  An  Address  to  the  Non-Slave-
holders of  the  South,  on  the  Social  and  Political
Evils  of  Slavery."  This  was  in  part  embodied  in
an^dress  to  the  people  of  California,  which  was
effectively  circulated  on  the  Pacific  coast  in  Eng-
lish and  Spanish.  In  1850  Judge  Jay  addressed  a
letter  to  William  Nelson,  on  Clay's  compromise
measures;  and  this  was  followed  by  a  review  of
Mr.  Webster's  declaration  that  slavery  was  ex-
cluded from  California  and  New  Mexico  by  the
law  of  physical  geography.  Subsequent  letters
and- addresses  included  one  to  Samuel  A.  Elliott.
in  reply  to  his  apology  for  the  fugitive-slave  bill,
an  address  to  the  anti-slavery  Christians  of  the
United  States,  and  in  1853  several  letters  and  re-
views of  the  conduct  of  the  American  tract  soci-
ety in  the  interest  of  slavery.  The  same  year  a
volume  of  Judge  Jay's  miscellaneous  writings  on
slavery  was  published  in  Boston.  In  1854  he  had
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  Republican  party
founded  on  the  anti-slavery  principles  that  he  had
early  advocated.  Of  his  anti-slavery  labors  Horace
Greeley  said :  "  As  to  Chief -Justice  Jay,  the  father,
may  be  attributed,  more  than  to  any  other  man,
the  abolition  of  negro  bondage  in  this  state  [New
York],  so  to  Judge  William  Jay,  the  son,  the  future
will  give  the  credit  of  having  been  one  of  the  earli-
est advocates  of  the  modern  anti-slavery  move-
ments, which  at  this  moment  influence  so  radically
the  religion  and  the  philanthropy  of  the  country,
and  of  having  guided  by  his  writings,  in  a  large
measure,  the  direction  which  a  cause  so  important
and  so  conservative  of  the  best  and  most  precious
rights  of  the  people  should  take."  He  left  in
manuscript  a  commentary  on  the  Bible. — Peter
Augustus's  son,  John  Clarkson,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city,  11  Sept.,  1808,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1827,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  1831. In  addition  to  his  practice


of  medicine  he  made  a  specialty  of  conchology,  and
acquired  the  most  complete  and  valuable  collection
of  shells  in  the  United  States.  This  and  his  costly
library  on  this  branch  of  science  were  purchased
by  Catherine  Wolfe  and  presented,  in  memory  of
her  father,  to  the  American  museum  of  natural
history,  where  it  is  known  as  the  Jay  collection.
In  1832  he  became  a  member  of  the  Lyceum  of
natural  history  (now  New  York  academy  of  sciences),
and  was  its  treasurer  in  1836-'43.  He  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  the  efforts  that  were  made  during  that
time  to  obtain  subscriptions  for  the  new  building,
and  bore  the  principal  burden  inplanning  and  su-
perintending its  construction.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  New  York  yacht-club,  and  for
some  time  its  secretary.  From  1859  till  1880  he
was  a  trustee  of  Columbia  college.  The  shells  col-
lected by  the  expedition  of  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry
to  Japan  were  submitted  to  him  for  examination,
and  he  wrote  the  article  on  that  subject  in  the
government  reports.  Dr.  Jay  was  the  author  of
"  Catalogue  of  Recent  Shells  "  (New  York,  1835) ;
"  Description  of  New  and  Rare  Shells  "  (1836) ;  and
later  editions  of  his  catalogue,  in  which  he  enu-
merates about  11,000  well-marked  varieties,  and  at
least  7,000  well-established  species. — William's  son,
John,  diplomatist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  23  June,
1817,  was  graduated  at  Dr.  William  A.  Muhlen-
berg's institute  in  1832,  and  at  Columbia  in  1836.
After  his  admission  to  the  bar  in  1839  he  became
well  known  by  his  active  opposition  to  slavery  and
his  advocacy  of  St.  Philip's  colored  church,  which
was  admitted  to  the  Protestant  Episcopal  conven-
tion after  a  nine  years'  contest.  He  was  secretary
of  the  Irish  relief  committee  of  1847,  and  was  coun-
sel for  many  fugitive  slaves,  including  George
Kirk,  two  Brazilian  slaves  that  were  landed  in
New  York,  Henry  Long,  and  the  Lemmons.  (See
Arthur,  Chester  Alan.)  In  1854  he  organized
the  meetings  at  the  Broadway  tabernacle,  that  re-
sulted in  the  state  convention  at  Saratoga  on  10
Aug.,  and  in  the  dissolution  of  the  Whig  and  the
formation  of  the  Republican  party  at  Syracuse,  27
Sept.,  1855.  During  the  civil  war  he  acted  with
the  Union  league  club,  of  which  he  was  president
in  1866,  and  again  in  1877.  In  1868,  as  state  com-
missioner for  the  Antietam  cemetery,  he  reported  tc
Gov.  Reuben  E.  Fenton  on  the  chartered  right  cf
the  Confederate  dead  of  that  campaign  to  burial,  a
right  questioned  by  Gov.  John  W.  Geary,  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  Hon.  John  Covode.  In  1869  he  was
sent  as  minister  to  Austria,  where  his  diplomatic
work  included  a  natu-
ralization treaty,  the
establishment  of  a  con-
vention on  trademarks,
and  the  supervision  of
the  U.  S.  commission
to  the  world's  fair  of
1873.  He  resigned  and
returned  to  the  United
States  in  1875,  and  has
since  resided  in  New
York  city.  -  In  1877  he
was  appointed  by  Sec.
Sherman  chairman  of
the  Jay  commission  to
investigate  the  system
of  the  New  York  cus-
tom-house, and  in  1883
was  appointed  by  Gov.
Cleveland  as  the  Republican  member  of  the  State
civil  service  commission,  of  which  he  is  still  (1887)
president.  Mr.  Jay  was  active  in  the  early  history
of  the  American  geographical  and  statistical  so-


y^i^c  y<z


<ZC*f


414


JAYNE


ciety,  and  was  long  manager  and  corresponding
secretary  of  the  New  York  historical  society.  He
was  also  the  first  president  of  the  Huguenot  socie-
ty, organized  in  1855  in  New  York.  In  connection
with  his  political  career,  Mr.  Jay  has  delivered  nu-
merous addresses  on  questions  connected  with  sla-
very, and  also  bearing  on  its  relation  to  the  Epis-
copal church,  of  which  he  is  a  leader  among  the
laity.  His  speeches  and  pamphlets,  which  have
been  widely  circulated,  include  "  America  Free,  or
America  Slave  "  (1856) ;  "  The  Church  and  the  Re-
bellion" (1863);  "On  the  Passage  of  the  Constitu-
tional Amendment  abolishing  Slavery"  (1864);
'•Rome  in  America"  (1868);  "The  American  For-
eign Service"  (1877);  "The  Sunday-School  a  Safe-
guard to  the  Republic  " ;  "  The  Fisheries  Question" ;
"  The  Public  School  a  Portal  to  the  Civil  Service."

JAYNE,  David,  physician,  b.  in  Monroe  county,
Pa.,  22  July,  1799;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5
March,  1866.  He  was  the  son  of  Ebenezer  Jayne,
a  Baptist  clergyman,  who  was  the  author  of  a
Baptist  hymn-book,  and  of  various  polemical  es-
says. The  son  studied  medicine  and  practised  in
New  Jersey  until  1836,  when  he  settled  in  Phila-
delphia and  continued  his  professional  work  in
connection  with  a  drug  business.  He  also  began
the  manufacture  of  medicines,  which  business
grew  to  large  proportions  and  made  him  wealthy.
As  early  as  1849  he  began  to  erect  extensive  gran-
ite and  marble  buildings  in  Philadelphia,  and  he
continued  to  do  so  till  the  end  of  his  life.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  about  completing  one  of
the  finest  residences  in  Philadelphia.  Dr.  Jayne  is
said  to  have  been  the  first  person  to  publish  al-
manacs as  a  means  of  advertising,  and  these  he
printed  in  all  the  modern  languages  of  Europe  and
Asia,  including  even  some  of  the  minor  dialects
of  India. — His  son,  Horace,  scientist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 5  March,  1859,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1879,  in  medicine  in  1882.
He  subsequently  spent  nearly  two  years  abroad,
studying  biology  in  the  university  at  Leipsic,  and
under  Haeckel  at  Jena.  On  his  return  he  was
chosen  lecturer  in  biology  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  and  subsequently  professor  of  ver-
tebrate morphology  in  the  same  institution,  which
place  he  now  (1887)  holds.  He  has  written  "  A
Revision  of  the  Dermestidae  of  North  America,"
"  Abnormities  observed  in  North  American  Coleop-
tera,"  and  "  Origin  of  the  Fittest."

JEFFERS,  William  Nicholson,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Gloucester  county,  N.  J.,  6  Oct.,  1824 ;  d.  in
Washington,  I).  O,  23  July,  1883.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  25  Sept.,  1840,  took  part  in
the  capture  of  Upper  California  in  1842,  and  at
the  beginning  of  the  Mexican  war  was  ordered  to
the  steamer  "  Vixen,"  and  was  present  in  all  the
naval  actions  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  He  was
promoted  to  master  in  June,  1854,  and  commis-
sioned lieutenant  in  January,  1855,  and  while  in
command  of  the  "  Water  Witch "  rescued  the
Spanish  steamer  "  Cartagena,"  for  which  service
the  queen  of  Spain  presented  him  with  a  sword.
He  was  also  present  at  the  engagement  with  the
fort  at  Paso  de  la  Patria,  which  caused  the  expe-
dition under  Com.  Shubrick  to  Paraguay.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  on  sick-leave  at
his  home,  but  at  once  applied  for  service,  and  was
detailed  on  ordnance  duty  at  Norfolk.  He  com-
manded the  "  Philadelphia  "  on  Potomac  river  in
April  and  May,  1861,  the  "  Underwriter "  during
the  brilliant  operations  in  the  sounds  of  North
Carolina  during  January  and  February,  1862,  and
the  "  Monitor  "  in  the  action  with  Fort  Darling  on
15  May  of  that  year. He  was  commissioned  com-


JEFFERSON

mander  in  March,  1865,  captain  in  July,  1870,  and
in  April,  1873,  became  chief  of  the  bureau  of  ord-
nance. He  was  made  commodore,  26  Feb.,  1878,
and  in  1875  introduced  a  system  of  bronze  and
steel  boat  howitzers.  In  1876  he  doubled  the  power
of  the  Dahlgren  11-inch  smooth-bore  by  converting
it  into  an  8-inch  rifle,  and  the  details  of  a  breach-
loading  system  for  every  calibre  up  to  12-inch.  He
published  "  Short  Methods  in  Navigation  "  (1849) ;
•'  Theory  and  Practice  of  Naval  Gunnery  "  (New
York,  1850) ;  "  Inspection  and  Proof  of  Cannon  "
(1864) :  «  Marine  Surveying  "  (1871) ;  "  Ordnance
Instructions  for  U.  S.  Navy  "  (1866,  1880),  and  nu-
merous pamphlets  on  naval  subjects.

JEFFERSON,  Joseph,  actor,  b.  in  Plymouth,
England,  in  1774 ;  d.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa., '6  Aug.,
1832.  He  was  the  son  of  Thomas,  a  comedian
connected  with  Drury  Lane  theatre,  London,  who
for  some  time  managed  the  play-house  in  Rich-
mond, England.  Jefferson's  first  appearance  in
the  United  States  was  made  at  the  Federal  street
theatre,  Boston,  in  1795.  On  10  Feb.,  1796,  he
joined  the  John  street  company  in  New  York
city,  continuing  there  until  1803.  Within  the  same
year  he  went  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  con-
nected with  the  Chestnut  street  theatre  for  twen-
ty-seven years,  except  for  brief  visits  to  neigh-
boring cities.  He  resigned  from  this  post  in
1832.  In  Philadelphia  his  talent  for  comedy  was
rated  beyond  that  of  any  other  performer.  As  a
comedian  his  manner  was  altogether  free  from
grimace  and  extravagance.  Jefferson's  roles  were
many,  and  almost  equally  well  sustained. — His
son,  Joseph,  actor,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in  1804 ;  d,
in  Mobile,  Ala.,  24  Nov.,  1842,  was  trained  for  a
scene-painter,  but  eventually  became  an  actor  and
manager.  In  1826  he  married  Mrs.  Burke,  a
popular  stage  vocalist.  From  1835  till  1837  Jeffer-
son was  connected  with  the  Franklin  and  Niblo's
garden  theatres  in  New  York  city.  He  appeared
at  many  places  during  his  career,  but  attracted
little  notice.  His  best  personations  were  old  men's
characters.  The  son  resembled  his  father  in  ap-
pearance, but,  besides  being  constitutionally  timid
before  an  audience,  he  inherited  none  of  the  lat-
ter's  ability.  He  was  unselfish  and  improvident,
and  engaged  in  constant  struggles  for  a  livelihood.
— His  son,  Joseph,  the  third  -of  that  name,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  20  Feb.,  1829,  at  the  age  of  three
years  figured  as  the  child  in  Kotzebue's  drama  of
"  Pizarro,  or  the  Death  of  Rolla,"  and  later  repre-
sented "The  Living  Statues"  at  the  theatre  in
Washington,  D.  C.  In  1843,  after  the  death  of  his
father,  the  lad  joined  a  party  of  strolling  players,
who  made  their  way  through  Texas,  and  during
the  war  with  Mexico  followed  the  U.  S.  army  into
Mexican  territory.  On  his  return  to  the  northern
states  he  was  engaged  to  play  small  parts  at  several
minor  theatres,  and  unsuccessfully  undertook  to
conduct  the  dramatic  performances  at  Peale's  mu-
seum in  Philadelphia.  In  1849  he  married  Miss
Lockyer,  an  actress,  and  joined  the  company  of
the  Chatham  street  national  theatre  in  New  York
city,  taking  a  part  in  the  farce  of  "Somebody
Else."  Thereafter  he  led  a  strolling  company
through  the  southern  states,  and  for  brief  terms
managed  the  theatres  in  Savannah,  Ga..  and
Wilmington,  N.  C.  From  1850  until  1856  Jeffer-
son was  employed  as  actor  and  stage-manager  in
Philadelphia,  New  York,  Baltimore,  and  Washing-
ton. During  the  latter  part  of  1856  he  visited
Europe  for  his  health,  and  on  his  return  became
stage-manager  of  the  theatre  in  Richmond,  Va.
Up  to  this  time  Jefferson  had  merely  attained  the
standing  of  a  respectable  stock-actor. In  1857  he


V  Apple  ton  &  Co


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


415


began  his  connection  with  Laura  Keene's  theatre
in  New  York  city,  which  lasted  until  1859.  Here
he  first  came  prominently  before  the  public  on  18
Oct.,  1858,  as  Asa  Trenchard  in  "  Our  American
Cousin."  Laura  Keene's  company  was  one  of  un-
usual strength,  and  under  admirable  management.
It  included  besides  herself  William  R.  Blake,  Ed-
ward A.  Sothern,
and  Charles  W.
Couldock,  and  later
Dion  Boucicault
and  his  wife,  all  of
whom,  in  course  of
time,  became  prom-
inent. Young  Jef-
ferson, in  this  and
several  other  dram-
as, fairly  surpassed
all  his  fellow-act-
ors. The  ease  and
simplicity  of  his
method  stood  wide-
ly apart  from  the
mannerism  of  his
£^J?fli^*r+*~ — »  surroundings,  and

£/(///  it was noticeable

how,  in  distinction
from  others  who  nightly  rehearsed  their  parts  with
studied  inflections  of  speech  and  in  unvarying  atti-
tudes, his  representations  were  controlled  by  pass-
ing feelings  and  impressions  that  gave  variety  and
freshness  to  each  performance.  The  play  ran  for
more  than  150  nights.  Among  Jefferson's  other
parts  were  Newman  Noggs  in  "  Nicholas  Nickleby,"
Caleb  Plummer  in  "  The  Cricket  on  the  Hearth,"
Dr.  Pangloss  in  "The  Heir  at  Law,"  Bob  Acres
in  "  The  Rivals,"  and  Dr.  OUapod  in  the  "  Poor
Gentleman."  Later  he  repeated  these  characters
at  the  Winter  garden  theatre  in  New  York  city  and
other  places  as  a  star  performer,  with  increas-
ing popularity.  In  1860  Jefferson  visited  Cali-
fornia, where  he  met  with  little  success,  and  soon
afterward  sailed  for  Australia,  where  he  acted
four  years  with  reputation  and  profit.  In  Sep-
tember, 1865,  against  his  inclination  he  made  his
debut  in  London  at  the  Adelphi  theatre  in  "  Rip
Van  Winkle,"  playing  the  part  with  success  for
more  than  150  nights.  He  also  appeared  in  Man-
chester and  other  large  cities,  returning  to  the
United  States  in  1866.  After  the  death  of  his  first
wife,  Mr.  Jefferson  was  married,  in  1867,  to  Miss
Sarah  Warren.  Since  then  his  performances  have
included  a  few  favorite  parts,  of  which  "  Rip  Van
Winkle  "  is  the  principal  one.  For  over  twenty
years  this  drama  has  been  played  in  almost  every
city  of  the  United  States.  It  has  yielded  Dion
Boucicault,  the  playwright,  in  purchase-money  and
royalties,  about  $25,000.  Several  dramatizations
of  Irving's  story  had  been  attempted  at  different
times,  and  played  both  in  this  country  and  in  Eng-
land, notably  that  of  James  H.  Hackett,  but  none
of  them  held  the  stage.  In  1860  Jefferson  played
in  one  of  these  old  versions  at  the  Winter  garden
theatre  in  New  York  city.  While  he  was  in  London
the  American  actor  arranged  with  Boucicault  for
an  entire  reconstruction  of  the  drama,  selecting
the  best  situations  from  all  the  old  renderings,  and
coupling  his  own  suggestions  with  the  playwright's
skill  and  experience.  In  retirement  Jefferson's
pastimes  are  those  of  an  angler  and  painter.  Some
of  his  landscapes  in  oil  bid  fair  to  attract  public
attention.  His  summers  are  spent  on  a  farm  in
New  Jersey,  his  midwinters  at  his  sugar-plantation
on  the  Bayou  Teche,  La.  At  present  (1887)  he  is
writing  an  autobiography.


JEFFERSON,  Thomas,  third  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Shadwell,  Albemarle  co.,  Va.,
2  April,  1743 ;  d.  at  Monticello,  in  the  same  coun-
ty, 4  July,  1826.  His  father  was  Peter  Jefferson,
who,  with  the  aid  of  thirty  slaves,  tilled  a  tobacco
and  wheat  farm  of  1,900  acres;  a  man  physically
strong,  a  good  mathematician,  skilled  in  surveying,
fond  of  standard  literature,  and  in  politics  a  Brit-
ish Whig.  Like  his  fathers  before  him,  Peter
Jefferson  was  a  justice  of  the  peace,  a  vestryman  of
his  parish,  and  a  member  of  the  colonial  legisla-
ture. The  first  of  the  Virginia  Jeffersons,  who
were  of  Welsh  extraction,  was  a  member  of  the
Virginia  legislature  of  1619,  noted  as  the  first  legis-
lative body  ever  convened  on  the  western  conti-
nent. Peter  married  in  1738  Jane,  daughter  of
Isham  Randolph,  a  wealthy  and  conspicuous  mem-
ber of  the  family  of  that  name.  Of  their  ten
children,  Thomas  was  the  third,  born  in  a  plain,
spacious  farm-house,  traces  of  which  still  exist.
He  inherited  a  full  measure  of  his  father's  bodily
strength  and  stature,  both  having  been  esteemed
in  their  prime  the  strongest  men  of  their  county.
He  inherited  also  his  father's  inclination  to  liberal
politics,  his  taste  for  literature,  and  his  aptitude
for  mathematics.  Peter  Jefferson  died  in  1757,
when  his  son  Thomas  was  fourteen  years  of  age.
On  his  death-bed  he  left  an  injunction  that  the
education  of  his  son,  already  well  advanced  in  a
preparatory  school,  should  be  completed  at  the
College  of  William  and  Mary,  a  circumstance  which
his  son  always  remembered  with  gratitude,  saying
that  if  he  had  to  choose  between  the  education
and  the  estate  his  father  left  him,  he  would  choose
the  education.  His  schoolmates  reported  that  at
school  he  was  noted  for  good  scholarship,  industry,
and  shyness.  Without  leaving  his  father's  land
he  could  shoot  turkeys,  deer,  foxes,  and  other
game.  His  father  in  his  last  hours  had  specially
charged  his  mother  not  to  permit  him  to  neglect
the  exercise  requisite  for  health  and  strength ;  but
the  admonition  was  scarcely  necessary,  for  the
youth  was  a  keen  hunter  and  had  been  taught  by
his  father  to  swim  his  horse  over  the  Rivanna,  a
tributary  of  the  James,  which  flowed  by  the  estate.
The  Jeffersons  were  a  musical  family;  the  girls
sang  the  songs  of  the  time,  and  Thomas,  practis-
ing the  violin  assiduously  from  boyhood,  became
an  excellent  performer.  At  seventeen,  when  he
entered  the  College  of  William  and  Mary,  he  was
tall,  raw-boned,  freckled,  and  sandy-haired,  with
large  feet  and  hands,  thick  wrists,  and  prominent
cheek-bones  and  chin.  His  comrades  described
him  as  far  from  handsome,  a  fresh,  healthy-looking
youth,  very  erect,  agile,  and  strong,  with  something
of  rusticity  in  his  air  and  demeanor.  The  college
was  not  then  efficient  nor  well  equipped,  but  there
was  one  true  educator  connected  with  it,  Dr.  Will-
iam Small,  of  Scotland,  professor  of  mathematics.
Jefferson  gratefully  remembered  him  as  an  ardent
student  of  science,  who  possessed  a  happy  talent  for
communicating  knowledges  man  of  agreeable  man-
ners and  enlightened  mind.  He  goes  so  far  as  to
say  in  his  autobiography  that  his  coining  under
the  influence  of  Dr.  Small  "probably  fixed  the
destinies  of  my  life."  The  learned  and  genial
professor  became  attached  to  his  receptive  pupil,
made  him  the  daily  companion  of  his  walks,  and
gave  him  those  views  of  the  connection  of  the
sciences  and  of  the  system  of  things  of  which  man
is  a  part  which  then  prevailed  in  the  advanced
scientific  circles  of  Europe.  Prof.  Small  was  a
friend  of  the  poet  Erasmus  Darwin,  progenitor  of
an  illustrious  line  of  learned  men.  Jefferson  was
a  hard  student  in  college,  and  at  times  forgot  his


416


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


father's  dying  injunction  as  to  exercise.  He  kept
horses  at  Williamsburg,  but  as  his  love  of  knowl-
edge increased  his  rides  became  shorter  and  less
frequent,  and  even  his  beloved  violin  was  neglected.
There  was  a  time,  as  he  remembered,  when  he
studied  fifteen  hours  a  day.  Once  a  week  the
lieutenant-governor,  Francis  Fauquier,  had  a  musi-
cal party  at  the  "  palace,"  to  which  the  guests,  in
the  good  old  style  of  that  century,  brought  their
instruments.  Jefferson  was  always  present  at
these  parties  with  his  violin,  and  participated  in
the  concert,  the  governor  himself  being  also  a
performer.  From  Fauquier,  a  man  of  the  world
of  the  period,  he  learned  much  of  the  social,  politi-
cal, and  parliamentary  life  of  the  Old  World.
George  Wythe,  afterward  chancellor,  was  then  a
young  lawyer  of  Williamsburg.  He  was  one  of  the
highly  gifted  men  that  frequented  the  governor's
table,  and  contributed  essentially  to  the  forming  of
Jefferson's  mind.

On  his  graduation,  Jefferson  entered  upon  the
study  of  law,  under  the  guidance  of  George
Wythe.  As  his  father's  estate  was  charged  with
the  maintenance  of  a  large  family,  a  profession
was  necessary  to  the  student,  and  he  entered  upon
his  preparation  for  the  bar  with  all  his  energy  and
resolution.  On  coming  of  age,  in  April,  1764,  he
assumed  the  management  of  the  estate,  and  was
appointed  to  two  of  his  father's  offices — justice  of
the  peace  and  vestryman.  He  gave  much  atten-
tion to  the  cultivation  of  his  lands,  and  remained
always  an  attentive,  zealous,  and  improving  farmer.
He  attached  importance  all  his  life  to  the  fact  that
his  legal  training  was  based  upon  the  works  of
Lord  Coke,  of  whom  he  said  that "  a  sounder  Whig
never  wrote,  nor  one  of  profounder  learning  in  the
orthodox  doctrines  of  the  British  constitution,  or
in  what  were  called  British  liberties."  It  was
his  settled  conviction  that  the  early  drill  of  the
colonial  lawyers  in  "Coke  upon  Lyttleton"  pre-
pared them  for  the  part  they  took  in  resisting  the
unconstitutional  acts  of  the  British  government.
Lawyers  formed  by  Coke,  he  would  say,  were  all
good  Whigs ;  but  from  the  time  that  Blackstone
became  the  leading  text-book  "the  profession  be-
gan to  slide  into  Toryism."  His  own  study  of
Coke  led  him  to  extend  his  researches  into  the
origins  of  British  law,  and  led  him  also  to  the
rejection  of  the  maxim  of  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  that
Christianity  is  parcel  of  the  laws  of  England.  His
youthful  treatise  on  this  complex  and  difficult  point
shows  us  at  once  the  minuteness  and  the  extent  of
his  legal  studies.  While  he  was  a  student  of  law,
he  was  an  eye-witness  of  those  memorable
scenes  in  the  Virginia  legislature  which  followed
the  passage  of  the  stamp-act.  He  was  present  as
a  spectator  in  the  house  when  Patrick  Henry  read
his  five  resolutions,  written  upon  a  blank  leaf  torn
from  a  "Coke  upon  Lyttleton,"  enunciating  the
principle  that  Englishmen  living  in  America  had
all  the  rights  of  Englishmen  living  in  England,
the  chief  of  which  was,  that  they  could  only  be
taxed  by  their  own  representatives.  When  he  was
an  old  man,  seated  at  his  table  at  Monticello,  he
loved  to  speak  of  that  great  day,  and  to  describe
the  thrill  and  ecstasy  of  the  moment  when  the
wonderful  orator,  interrupted  by  cries  of  "  Treason,"
uttered  the  well-known  words  of  defiance :  "  If  this
be  treason,  make  the  most  of  it ! "  Early  in  1767,
about  his  twenty-fourth  birthday,  Jefferson  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Virginia,  and  entered  at
once  upon  the  practice  of  his  profession.  Con-
nected through  his  father  with  the  yeomen  of  the
western  counties,  and  through  his  mother  with  the
wealthier  planters  of  the  eastern,  he  had  not  long


to  wait  for  business.  His  first  account-book,
which  still  exists,  shows  that  in  the  first  year  of
his  practice  he  was  employed  in  sixty-eight  cases
before  the  general  court  of  the  province,  besides
county  and  office  business.  He  was  an  accurate,
painstaking,  and  laborious  practitioner,  and  his
business  increased  until  he  was  employed  in  nearly
five  hundred  cases  in  a  single  year,  which  yielded
an  average  profit  of  about  one  pound  sterling  each.
He  was  not  a  fluent  nor  a  forcible  speaker,  and  his
voice  soon  became  husky  as  he  proceeded ;  but
James  Madison,  who  heard  him  try  a  cause,  reports
that  he  acquitted  himself  well,  and  spoke  fluently
enough  for  his  purpose.  He  loved  the  erudition
of  the  law,  and  attached  great  importance  to  the
laws  of  a  country  as  the  best  source  of  its  history.
It  was  he  who  suggested  and  promoted  the  collec-
tion of  Virginia  laws  known  as  "  Henning's
Statutes  at  Large,"  to  which  he  contributed  the
most  rare  and  valuable  part  of  the  contents.  He
practised  law  for  nearly  eight  years,  until  the  Revo-
lutionary contest  summoned  him  to  other  labors.

His  public  life  began  11  May,  1769,  when  he
took  his  seat  as  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house  of
burgesses,  Washington  being  also  a  member.  Jef-
ferson was  then  twenty-six  years  old.  On  becom-
ing a  public  man  he  made  a  resolution  "  never  to
engage,  while  in  public  office,  in  any  kind  of  en-
terprise for  the  improvement  of  my  fortune,  nor  to
wear  any  other  character  than  that  of  a  farmer."
At  the  close  of  his  public  career  of  nearly  half  a
century  he  could  say  that  he  had  kept  this  resolu-
tion, and  he  often  found  the  benefit  of  it  in  being
able  to  consider  public  questions  free  from  the  bias
of  self-interest.  This  session  of  the  burgesses  was
short.  On  the  third  day  were  introduced  the  fa-
mous four  resolutions,  to  the  effect  that  the  colo-
nies could  not  be  lawfully  taxed  by  a  body  in  which
they  were  not  represented,  and  that  they  might
concur,  co-operate,  and  practically  unite  in  seeking
a  redress  of  grievances.  On  the  fifth  day  of  the
session  the  royal  governor,  Lord  Botetourt,  dis-
solved the  house;  but  the  members  speedily  re-
assembled in  the  great  room  of  the  Raleigh  tavern,
where  similar  resolutions,  with  others  more  point-
ed, were  passed.  The  decency  and  firmness  of  these
proceedings  had  their  effect.  Before  many  months
had  passed  the  governor  summoned  the  assembly
and  greeted  them  with  the  news  that  parliament
had  abandoned  the  system  of  taxing  the  colo-
nies— a  delusive  statement,  which  he,  however,
fully  believed  himself  authorized  to  make.  Amid
the  joy — too  brief — of  this  supposed  change  of
policy,  Jefferson  made  his  first  important  speech
in  the  house,  in  which  he  advocated  the  repeal  of
the  law  that  obliged  a  master  who  wished  to  free
his  slaves  to  send  them  out  of  the  colony.  The
motion  was  promptly  rejected,  and  the  mover,  Mr.
Bland,  was  denounced  as  an  enemy  to  his  country.

On  1  Jan.,  1772,  Jefferson  married  Mrs.  Martha
Skelton,  a  beautiful  and  childless  young  widow,
daughter  of  John  Wayles,  a  lawyer  In  large  prac-
tice at  the  Williamsburg  bar.  His  new  house  at
Monticello,  a  view  of  which  is  given  on  page
419,  was  then  just  habitable,  and  he  took  his
wife  home  to  it  a  few  days  after  the  ceremony.
Next  year  the  death  of  his  wife's  father  brought
them  a  great  increase  of  fortune — 40,000  acres  of
land  and  135  slaves,  which,  when  the  encumbrances
were  discharged,  doubled  Jefferson's  estate.  He
was  now  a  fortunate  man  indeed ;  opulent  in  his
circumstances,  happily  married,  and  soon  a  father.
We  see  him  busied  in  the  most  pleasing  kinds  of
agriculture,  laying  out  gardens,  introducing  new
products,  arranging  his  farms,  completing and


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


417


furnishing  his  house,  and  making  every  effort  to
convert  his  little  mountain,  covered  with  primeval
forest,  into  an  agreeable  and  accessible  park.  Af-
ter man v  experiments  he  domesticated  almost  every
tree  and  shrub,  native  and  foreign,  that  could  sur-
vive the  Virginia  winter.  The  contest  with  the
king  was  soon  renewed,  and  the  decisive  year,  1774,
opened.  It  found  Thomas  Jefferson  a  thriving  and
busy  young  lawyer  and  farmer,  not  known  beyond
Virginia ;  but  when  it  closed  he  was  a  person  of
note  among  the  patriots  of  America,  and  was  pro-
scribed in  England.  It  was  he  who  prepared  the
"  Draught  of  Instructions  "  for  Virginia's  Delega-
tion to  the  Congress  which  met  at  Philadelphia
in  September.  That  congress,  he  thought,  should
unite  in  a  solemn  address  to  the  king :  but  they
should  speak  to  him  in  a  frank  and  manly  way,  in-
forming him,  as  the  chief  magistrate  of  an  empire
governed  by  many  legislatures,  that  one  of  those
legislatures — namely,  the  British  parliament — had
encroached  upon  the  rights  of  thirteen  others.
They  were  also  to  say  to  the  king  that  he  was  no
more  than  the  chief  officer  of  the  people,  appointed
by  the  laws  and  circumscribed  with  definite  powers.
He  also  spoke,  in  this  very  radical  draught,  of
""  the  late  deposition  of  his  majesty,  King  Charles,
by  the  Commonwealth  of  England  "  as  a  thing  ob-
viously right.  He  maintained  that  the  parliament
of  Virginia  had  as  much  right  to  pass  laws  for  the
government  of  the  people  of  England  as  the  Brit-
ish legislature  had  to  pass  laws  for  the  government
of  the  people  of  Virginia.  "  Can  any  one  reason
be  assigned,"  he  asked,  "  why  a  hundred  and  sixty
thousand  electors  in  the  island  of  Great  Britain
should  give  law  to  four  millions  in  the  states  of
America?"  The  draught,  indeed,  was  so  radical
on  every  point  that  it  seemed  to  the  ruling  British
mind  of  that  day  mere  insolent  burlesque.  It  was
written,  however,  by  Jefferson  in  the  most  modest
and  earnest  spirit,  showing  that,  at  the  age  of
thirty-one,  his  radical  opinions  were  fully  formed,
And  their  expression  was  wholly  unqualified  by  a
knowledge  of  the  world  beyond  the  sea.  This
draught,  though  not  accepted  by  the  convention,
was  published  in  a  pamphlet,  copies  of  which  were
sent  to  England,  where  Edmund  Burke  caused  it
to  be  republished  with  emendations  and  additions
of  his  own.  It  procured  for  the  author,  to  use  his
own  language,  "  the  honor  of  having  his  name  in-
serted in  a  long  list  of  proscriptions  enrolled  in
a  bill  of  attainder."  The  whole  truth  of  the  con-
troversy was  given  in  this  pamphlet,  without  any
politic  reserves.

In  March,  1775,  Jefferson,  who  had  been  kept  at
Monticello  for  some  time  by  illness,  was  in  Rich-
mond as  a  member  of  the  convention  which  assem-
bled in  the  parish  church  of  St.  John  to  consider
what  course  Virginia  should  take  in  the  crisis.  It
was  as  a  member  of  this  body  that  Patrick  Henry,
to  an  audience  of  150  persons,  spoke  the  prophetic
words  in  solemn  tones  as  the  key  to  the  enigma :
"  We  must  fight !  The  next  gale  that  sweeps  from
the  north  will  bring  to  our  ears  the  clash  of  re-
sounding arms."  These  sentences,  spoken  twenty-
seven  days  before  the  affair  of  Lexington,  con-
vinced the  convention,  and  it  was  agreed  that  Vir-
ginia should  arm.  A  committee  of  thirteen  was
•appointed  to  arrange  a  plan,  among  the  members
of  which  were  Patrick  Henry,  George  Washington,
Richard  Henry  Lee,  Benjamin  Harrison,  the  speak-
er, Edmund  Pendleton,  and  Thomas  Jefferson.
The  plan  they  agreed  upon  was  this:  The  popu-
lous counties  to  raise  and  drill  infantry  compa-
nies; the  other  counties  horsemen,  and  both  to
wear  the  hunting-shirt,  which  Col.  Washington
vol.  in. — 27


told  them  was  the  best  field-uniform  he  knew  of.
The  last  act  of  this  convention  was  to  appoint  that,
in  case  a  vacancy  should  occur  in  the  delegation  of
Virginia  to  congress,  Thomas  Jefferson  should  sup-

Jly  the  place.  A  vacancy  occurred,  and  on  20
une,  1775,  the  day  on  which  Washington  received
his  commission  as  commander-in-chief,  Jefferson
reached  Philadelphia,  and  took  his  seat  the  next
morning  in  congress.  Before  the  sun  set  that  day
congress  received  news  of  the  stirring  battle  of
Bunker  Hill.

Jefferson  was  an  earnest,  diligent,  and  useful
member  of  the  congress.  John  Adams,  his  fellow-
member,  describes  him  as  "so  prompt,  frank,  ex-
plicit, and  decisive  upon  committees  and  in  con-
versation that  he  soon  seized  upon  my  heart."
His  readiness  in  composition,  his  profound  knowl-
edge of  British  law,  and  his  innate  love  of  freedom
and  justice,  gave  him  solid  standing  in  the  body.
On  his  return  to  Virginia  he  was  re-elected  by  a
majority  that  placed  him  third  in  the  list  of  seven
members.  After  ten  days'  vacation  at  home,
where  he  then  had  a  house  undergoing  enlarge-
ment, and  a  household  of  thirty-four  whites  and
eighty-three  blacks,  with  farms  in  three  counties
to  superintend,  he  returned  to  congress  to  take  his
part  in  the  events  that  led  to  the  complete  and
formal  separation  of  the  colonies  from  the  mother-
country.  In  May,  1776,  the  news  reached  congress
that  the  Virginia  convention  were  unanimous  for
independence,  and  on  7  June  Richard  Henry  Lee
obeyed  the  instructions  of  the  Virginia  legislature
by  moving  that  independence  should  be  declared.
On  10  June  a  committee  of  five  was  appointed  to
prepare  a  draught  of  the  Declaration — Jefferson,
Franklin,  John  Adams,  Roger  Sherman,  and  Rob-
ert R.  Livingston.  Mr.  Jefferson,  being  the  chair-
man of  the  committee,  was  naturally  asked  to
write  the  document.  He  then  lived  near  what  is
now  the  corner  of  Market  and  Seventh  streets.
The  paper  was  written  in  a  room  of  the  second
floor,  upon  a  little  writing-desk  three  inches  high,
of  his  own  contriving,  which  still  exists.  Congress
subjected  his  draught  to  a  severe  and  prolonged
revision,  making  many  suppressions,  additions,  and
alterations,  most  of  which  were  improvements.
One  passage  was  suppressed  in  which  he  gave  ex-
pression to  the  wounded  feelings  of  the  American
people  in  being  so  unworthily  treated  by  brethren
and  fellow-citizens.  The  document  was  debated
in  congress  on  2,  3,  and  4  July.  Thursday,  the
4th,  was  a  warm  day,  and  the  members  in  the  af-
ternoon became  weary  and  impatient  with  the  long
strain  upon  their  nerves.  Jefferson  used  to  relate
with  much  merriment  that  the  final  vote  upon  the
Declaration  was  hastened  by  swarms  of  flies,  which
came  from  a  neighboring  stable,  and  added  to  the
discomfort  of  the  members.  A  few  days  afterward
he  was  one  of  a  committee  to  devise  a  seal  for  the
new-born  power.  Among  their  suggestions  (and
this  was  the  only  one  accepted  by  congress)  was
the  best  legend  ever  appropriated,  E  pluribus
unum,  a  phrase  that  had  served  as  a  motto  on
the  cover  of  the  "Gentleman's  Magazine"  for
many  years.  It  was  originally  borrowed  from  a
humorous  poem  of  Virgil's.

Having  thus  linked  his  name  imperishably  with
the  birthday  of  the  nation,  Jefferson  resigned  his
seat  in  congress,  on  the  ground  that  the  health  of
his  wife  and  the  condition  of  his  household  made
his  presence  in  Virginia  indispensable.  He  had
also  been  again  elected  a  member  of  the  Virginia
legislature,  and  his  heart  was  set  upon  the  work  of
purging  the  statute-books  of  unsuitable  laws,  and
bringing  up  Virginia  to  the  level  of  the  Declara-


418


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


tion.  He  had  formed  a  high  conception  of  the
excellence  of  the  New  England  governments,  and
wished  to  introduce  into  his  native  state  the  local
institutions  that  had  enabled  those  states  to  act
with  such  efficiency  during  the  war.  After  some
stay  at  home  he  entered  upon  this  work  at  Will-
iamsburg, where,  8  Oct.,  1776,  a  messenger  from
congress  informed  him  that  he  had  been  elected
joint  commissioner,  with  Franklin  and  Deane,  to
represent  the  United  States  at  Paris.  After  three
days  of  consideration,  he  resisted  the  temptation
to  go  abroad,  feeling  that  his  obligations  to  his
family  and  his  state  made  it  his  duty  to  remain  at
home.  In  reorganizing  Virginia,  Jefferson  and
his  friends  struck  first  at  the  system  of  entail,
which,  after  three  weeks'  earnest  debate,  was  to-
tally destroyed,  so  that  all  property  in  Virginia
was  held  in  fee  simple  and  could  be  sold  for  debt.
He  next  attempted,  by  a  short  and  simple  enact-
ment, to  abolish  the  connection  between  church
and  state.  He  was  able  to  accomplish  but  a  small
portion  of  this  reform  at  that  session,  but  the  work
was  begun,  and  nine  years  later  the  law  drawn  by
Jefferson,  entitled  "  An  Act  for  establishing  Re-
ligious Freedom,"  completed  the  severance.  This
triumph  of  equal  rights  over  ancient  prejudices
and  restriction  Jefferson  always  regarded  as  one  of
his  most  important  contributions  to  the  happiness
of  his  country.  Some  of  his  utterances  on  this
subject  have  passed  into  familiar  proverbs :  "  Gov-
ernment has  nothing  to  do  with  opinion,"  "  Com-
pulsion makes  hypocrites,  not  converts,"  "  It  is
eiTor  alone  which  need*  the  support  of  govern-
ment ;  truth  can  stand  by  itself."  It  was  he  who
drew  the  bill  for  establishing  courts  of  law  in  the
state,  and  for  prescribing  their  powers  and  meth-
ods. It  was  he  also  who  caused  the  removal  of
the  capital  to  Richmond.  He  carried  the  bill  ex-
tirpating the  principle  of  primogeniture.  It  was
the  committee  of  which  he  was  chairman  that
abolished  the  cruel  penalties  of  the  ancient  code,
and  he  made  a  most  earnest  attempt  to  establish  a
system  of  public  education  in  the  state.  During
two  years  he  and  his  colleagues,  Hamilton,  Wythe,
Mason,  and  Francis  Lightfoot  Lee,  toiled  at  the
reconstruction  of  Virginia  law,  during  which  they
accomplished  all  that  was  then  possible,  besides
proposing  many  measures  that  were  passed  at  a
later  day.  He  could  write  to  Dr.  Franklin  in
1777  that  the  people  of  Virginia  had  "  laid  aside
the  monarchical  and  taken  up  the  republican  gov-
ernment with  as  much  ease  as  would  have  attended
their  throwing  off  an  old  and  putting  on  a  new
suit  of  clothes."  It  was  Jefferson  and  his  friends
who  wrought  this  salutary  change,  and  they  were
able  to  effect  it  because,  during  the  first  three
years  of  the  war,  Virginia  was  almost  exempt
from  disturbance.  In  the  spring  of  1779,  when
Burgoyne's  army,  as  prisoners  of  war,  were  en-
camped near  Monticello,  Jefferson  was  assiduous
in  friendly  attentions  both  to  the  British  and  the
Hessians,  throwing  open  his  house  and  grounds  to
them,  and  arranging  many  agreeable  concerts  for
their  entertainment.  A  British  captain,  himself  a
good  violinist,  who  played  duets  with  Jefferson  at
this  time,  told  the  late  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  of  New
York,  that  Thomas  Jefferson  was  the  best  ama-
teur he  had  ever  heard.

In  January,  1779,  the  Virginia  legislature  elected
Jefferson  governor  of  the  state,  to  succeed  Patrick
Henry,  whose  third  term  ended  on  1  June.  The
two  years  of  his  governorship  proved  to  be  the
severest  trial  of  his  life.  With  slender  and  fast
diminishing  resources,  he  had  to  keep  up  the  Vir-
ginia regiments  in  the  army  of  Washington,  and  at


the  same  time  to  send  all  possible  supplies  to  the
support  of  Gen.  Gates  in  his  southern  campaign.
The  western  Indians  were  a  source  of  constant
solicitude,  and  they  were  held  in  check  by  that
brave  and  energetic  neighbor  of  Gov.  Jefferson,
George  Rogers  Clarke. The  British  and  Hessian

frisoners  also  had  to  be  supplied  and  guarded.
n  the  midst  of  his  first  anxieties  he  began  the
reorganization  that  he  had  long  desired  of  the
College  of  William  and  Mary.  Soon,  however,  his
attention  was  wholly  absorbed  by  the  events  of  the
war.  On  16  Aug.,  1780,  occurred  the  disastrous
defeat  of  Gates  at  Camden,  which  destroyed  in  a
day  all  that  Jefferson  had  toiled  to  accumulate  in
warlike  material  during  eight  agonizing  weeks.
On  the  last  day  of  1780,  Arnold's  fleet  of  twenty-
seven  sail  anchored  in  Chesapeake  bay,  and  Arnold,
with  nine  hundred  men,  penetrated  as  far  as  Rich*
mond;  but  Jefferson  had  acted  with  so  much
promptitude,  and  was  so  ably  seconded  by  the
county  militia,  that  the  traitor  held  Richmond  but
twenty-three  hours,  and  escaped  total  destruction
only  through  a  timely  change  in  the  wind,  which
bore  him  down  the  river  with  extraordinary  swift-
ness. In  five  days  from  the  first  summons  twenty-
five  hundred  militia  were  in  pursuit  of  Arnold,  and
hundreds  more  were  coming  in  every  hour.  For
eighty-four  hours  Gov.  Jefferson  was  almost  con-
tinuously in  the  saddle;  and  for  many  months
after  Arnold's  first  repulse,  not  only  the  governor,
but  all  that  Virginia  had  left  of  manhood,  re-
sources, and  credit,  were  absorbed  in  the  contest
Four  times  in  the  spring  of  1781  the  legislature  of
Virginia  was  obliged  to  adjourn  and  fly  before  the
approach  or  the  threat  of  an  enemy.  Monticello
was  captured  by  a  troop  of  horse,  and  Jefferson
himself  narrowly  escaped.  Cornwallis  lived  for
ten  days  in  the  governor's  house  at  Elk  Hill,  a.
hundred  miles  down  the  James,  where  he  de-
stroyed all  the  growing  crops,  burned  the  barns,
carried  off  the  horses,  killed  the  colts,  and  took
away  twenty-seven  slaves.  During  the  public  dis-
asters of  that  time  there  was  the  usual  disposition
among  a  portion  of  the  people  to  cast  the  blame
upon  the  administration,  and  Jefferson  himself
was  of  the  opinion  that,  in  such  a  desperate  crisis,
it  was  best  that  the  civil  and  the  military  power
should  be  intrusted  to  the  same  hand.  He  therefore
declined  a  re-election  to  a  third  term,  and  induced
his  friends  to  support  Gen.  Thomas  Nelson,  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  militia,  who  was  elected.
The  capture  of  Cornwallis  in  November,  1781,
atoned  for  all  the  previous  suffering  and  disaster.
A  month  later  Jefferson  rose  in  his  place  in  the
legislature  and  declared  his  readiness  to  answer
any  charges  that  might  be  brought  against  his  ad-
ministration of  the  government;  but  no  one  re-
sponded. After  a  pause,  a  member  offered  a  reso-
lution thanking  him  for  his  impartial,  upright,  and
attentive  discharge  of  his  duty,  which  was  passed
without  a  dissenting  voice.

On  6  Sept.,  1782,  Jefferson's  wife  died,  to  his  un-
speakable and  lasting  sorrow,  leaving  three  daugh-
ters, the  youngest  four  months  old.  During  the
stupor  caused  by  this  event  he  was  elected  by  a
unanimous  vote  of  congress,  and,  as  Madison  re-
ports, "without  a  single  adverse  remark,"  pleni-
potentiary to  France,  to  treat  for  peace.  He
gladly  accepted ;  but,  before  he  sailed,  the  joyful
news  came  that  preliminaries  of  peace  had  been
agreed  to,  and  he  returned  to  Monticello.  In  June,
1783,  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  in  November
took  his  seat  at  Annapolis.  Here,  as  chairman  of
a  committee  on  the  currency,  he  assisted  to  give  us
the  decimal  currency  now  in  use. The  happy  idea


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


419


originated  with  Gouverneur  Morris,  of  New  York,
but  with  details  too  cumbrous  for  common  use.
Jefferson  proposed  our  present  system  of  dollars
and  cents,  with  dimes,  half-dimes,  and  a  great  gold
coin  of  ten  dollars,  with  subdivisions,  such  as  we
have  now.  Jefferson  strongly  desired  also  to  apply
the  decimal  system  to  all  measures.  When  he
travelled  he  carried  with  him  an  odometer,  which


divided  the  miles  into  hundredths,  which  he  called
cents.  "  I  find,"  said  he,  "  that  every  one  compre-
hends a  distance  readily  when  stated  to  him  in
miles  and  cents:  so  he  would  in  feet  and  cents,
pounds  and  cents."  On  7  May,  1784,  congress
elected  Jefferson  for  a  third  time  plenipotentiary
to  France,  to  join  Franklin  and  Adams  in  negoti-
ating commercial  treaties  with  foreign  powers.
On  5  July  he  sailed  from  Boston  upon  this  mission,
and  thirty-two  days  later  took  up  his  abode  in
Paris.  On  2  May,  1785,  he  received  from  Mr.  Jay
his  commission  appointing  him  sole  minister  pleni-
potentiary to  the  king  of  France  for  three  years
from  10  March,  1785.  "  You  replace  Dr.  Franklin,"
said  the  Count  de  Vergennes  to  him,  when  he  an-
nounced his  appointment.  Jefferson  replied :  "  I
succeed ;  no  one  can  replace  him."  The  impres-
sion that  France  made  upon  Jefferson's  mind  was
painful  in  the  extreme.  While  enjoying  the  treas-
ures of  art  that  Paris  presented,  and  particularly
its  music,  fond  of  the  people,  too,  relishing  their
amiable  manners,  their  habits  and  tastes,  he  was
nevertheless  appalled  at  the  cruel  oppression  of
the  ancient  system  of  government.  "  The  people,*'
said  he,  "  are  ground  to  powder  by  the  vices  of  the
form  of  government,"  and  he  wrote  to  Madison
that  government  by  hereditary  rulers  was  a  "  gov-
ernment of  wolves  over  sheep,  or  kites  over  pig-
eons." Beaumarchais's  "  Marriage  of  Figaro  "  was
in  its  first  run  when  Jefferson  settled  in  Paris,  and
the  universal  topic  of  conversation  was  the  defects
of  the  established  regime.  Upon  the  whole,  he
enjoyed  and  assiduously  improved  his  five  years'
residence  in  Europe.  His  official  labors  were  ardu-
ous and  constant.  He  strove,  though  in  vain,  to
procure  the  release  of  American  captives  in  Al-
giers without  paying  the  enormous  ransom  de-
manded by  the  dey.  With  little  more  success,  he
endeavored  to  break  into  the  French  protective
system,  which  kept  from  the  kingdom  the  cheap
food  that  America  could  supply,  and  for  want  of
which  the  people  Were  perishing  and  the  monarchy
was  in  peril.  He  kept  the  American  colleges  ad-
vised of  the  new  inventions,  discoveries,  and  books
of  Europe.  He  was  particularly  zealous  in  sending
home  seeds,  roots,  and  nuts  for  trial  in  American
soil.  During  his  journey  to  Italy  he  procured  a
quantity  of  the  choicest  rice  for  the  planters  of
South  Carolina,  and  he  supplied  Buffon  with
American  skins,  skeletons,  horns,  and  similar  ob-
jects for  his  collection. In  Paris  he  published  his


"  Notes  on  Virginia,"  both  in  French  and  English,
a  work  full  of  information  concerning  its  main
subject,  and  at  the  same  time  surcharged  with  the
republican  sentiment  then  so  grateful  to  the  peo-
ple of  France.  In  1786,  when  at  length  the  Virginia
legislature  passed  his  "Act  for  Freedom  of  Re-
ligion," he  had  copies  of  it  printed  for  distribu-
tion, and  it  was  received  with  rapture  by  the  ad-
vanced Liberals.  It  was  his  custom  while  travelling
in  France  to  enter  the  houses  of  the  peasants  and
converse  with  them  upon  their  affairs  and  condi-
tion. He  would  contrive  to  sit  upon  the  bed,  in  or-
der to  ascertain  what  it  was  made  of,  and  get  a
look  into  the  boiling  pot,  to  see  what  was  to  be
the  family  dinner.  He  strongly  advised  Lafayette
to  do  the  same,  saying :  "  You  must  ferret  the  peo-
ple out  of  their  hovels  as  I  have  done,  look  into
their  kettles,  eat  their  bread,  loll  on  their  beds,  on
pretence  of  resting  yourself,  but  in  fact  to  find  if
they  are  soft."  His  letters  are  full  of  this  subject.
He  returns  again  and  again  to  the  frightful  in-
equalities of  condition,  the  vulgarity  and  incapacity
of  the  hereditary  rulers,  and  the  hopeless  destiny
of  nineteen  twentieths  of  the  people.  His  com-
passion for  the  people  of  France  was  the  more  in-
tense from  his  strong  appreciation  of  their  excel-
lent qualities.  Having  received  a  leave  of  absence
for  six  months,  he  returned  with  his  daughters  to
Virginia,  landing  at  Norfolk,  18  Nov.,  1789.  His
reception  was  most  cordial.  The  legislature  ap-
pointed a  committee  of  thirteen,  with  Patrick
Henry  at  their  head,  to  congratulate  him  on  his
return,  and  on  the  day  of  his  landing  he  read  in  a
newspaper  that  President  Washington,  in  settling
the  new  government,  had  assigned  to  Thomas
Jefferson  the  office  of  secretary  of  state.  "  I  made
light  of  it,"  he  wrote  soon  afterward,  "  supposing
1  had  only  to  say  no,  and  there  would  be  an  end
of  it."  On  receiving  the  official  notification  of  his
appointment,  he  told  the  president  that  he  pre-
ferred to  retain  the  office  he  held.  "  But,  he
added,  "  it  is  not  for  an  individual  to  choose  his
post.  You  are  to  marshal  us  as  may  be  best  for
the  public  good."  He  finally  accepted  the  ap-
pointment, and  after  witnessing  at  Monticello,  23
Feb.,  1790,  the  marriage  of  his  eldest  daughter,
Martha,  to  Thomas  Mann  Randolph,  he  began  his
journey  to  New  York.  During  his  absence  in
France,  his  youngest  daughter,  Lucy,  had  died,
leaving  him  Martha  and  Maria.  On  Sunday,  21
March,  1790,  he  reached  New  York,  to  enter  upon
the  duties  of  his  new  office.  He  hired  a  house  at
No.  57  Maiden  lane,  the  city  then  containing  a
population  of  35,000.  His  colleagues  in  the  cabi-
net were  Alexander  Hamilton,  secretary  of  the
treasury ;  Henry  Knox,  secretary  of  war ;  and  Ed-
mund Randolph,  attorney  -  general.  Jefferson's
salary  was  $3,500,  and  that  of  the  other  members
of  the  cabinet  $3,000,  a  compensation  that  proved
painfully  inadequate.

He  soon  found  himself  ill  at  ease  in  his  place.
He  had  left  Paris  when  the  fall  of  the  Bastile  was
a  recent  event,  and  when  the  revolutionary  move-
ment still  promised  to  hopeful  spirits  the  greatest
good  to  France  and  to  Europe.  He  had  been  con-
sulted at  every  stage  of  its  progress  by  Lafayette
and  the  other  Republican  leaders,  with  whom  he
was  in  the  deepest  sympathy.  He  left  his  native
land  a  Whig  of  the  Revolution  ;  he  returned  to  it
a  Republican-Democrat.  In  his  reply  to  the  con-
gratulations of  his  old  constituents,  he  had  spoken
of  the  "  sufficiency  of  human  reason  for  the  care
of  human  affairs."  He  declared  "  the  will  of  the
majority  to  be  the  natural  law  of  every  society,
and  the  only  sure  guardian  of  the  rights  of  man."


420


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


He  added  these  important  words,  which  contain  the
most  material  article  of  his  political  creed :  "  Per-
haps even  this  may  sometimes  err ;  but  its  errors
are  honest,  solitary,  and  short-lived.  Let  us,  then,
forever  bow  down  to  the  general  reason  of  so-
ciety. We  are  safe  with  that,  even  in  its  devia-
tions, for  it  soon  returns  again  to  the  right  way."
To  other  addresses  of  welcome  he  replied  in  a
similar  tone.  He  brought  to  New  York  a  settled
conviction  that  the  republican  is  the  only  form  of
government  that  is  not  robbery  and  violence  or-
ganized. Feeling  thus,  he  was  grieved  and  aston-
ished to  find  a  distrust  of  republican  government
prevalent  in  society,  and  to  hear  a  preference  for
the  monarchical  form  frequently  expressed.  In
the  cabinet  itself,  where  Hamilton  dominated  and
Knox  echoed  his  opinions,  the  republic  was  ac-
cepted rather  as  a  temporary  expedient  than  as  a
final  good.  Jefferson  and  Hamilton,  representing
diverse  and  incompatible  tendencies,  soon  found
themselves  in  ill-accord,  and  their  discussions  in
the  cabinet  became  vehement.  They  differed  in
some  degree  upon  almost  every  measure  of  the  ad-
ministration, and  on  several  of  the  most  vital  their
differences  became  passionate  and  distressing.  In
May,  1791,  by  openly  accepting  and  eulogizing
Thomas  Paine's  "  Rights  of  Man,"  a  spirited  reply
to  Burke's  "Reflections  on  the  Revolution  in
France,"  Jefferson  placed  himself  at  the  head  of
the  Republican  party  in  the  United  States.  The
difference  between  the  two  chief  members  of  the
cabinet  rapidly  developed  into  a  personal  antipa-
thy, and  both  of  them  ardently  desired  to  with-
draw. Both,  however,  could  have  borne  these  dis-
agreeable dissensions,  and  we  see  in  their  later  let-
ters that  the  real  cause  of  their  longing  to  resign
was  the  insufficiency  of  their  salaries.  Jefferson's
estate,  much  diminished  by  the  war,  was  of  little
profit  to  him  in  the  absence  of  the  master's  eye.
Gen.  Washington,  who  did  equal  justice  to  the
merits  of  both  these  able  men,  used  all  his  influence
and  tact  to  induce  them  to  remain,  and,  yielding
to  the  president's  persuasions,  both  made  an  hon-
est attempt  at  external  agreement.  But  in  truth
their  feelings,  as  well  as  their  opinions,  were  natu-
rally irreconcilable.  Their  attitude  toward  the
French  revolution  proves  this.  Hamilton  con-
tinually and  openly  expressed  an  undiscriminating
abhorrence  of  it,  while  Jefferson  deliberately  wrote
that  if  the  movement  "  had  desolated  half  the
earth,"  the  evil  would  have  been  less  than  the  con-
tinuance of  the  ancient  system.  Writing  to  an  old
friend  he  went  farther  even  than  this :  "  Were  there
but  an  Adam  and  an  Eve  left  in  every  country,  and
left  free,  it  would  be  better  than  as  it  now  is."  On
every  point  of  difficulty  created  by  the  French
revolution  the  disagreement  between  the  two  sec-
retaries was  extreme.  On  other  subjects  there  was
little  real  concord,  and  it  was  a  happy  moment  for
both  when,  on  1  Jan.,  1794,  President  Washington
accepted  Jefferson's  resignation.  He  left  office  at
a  fortunate  time  for  his  reputation,  since  his  cor-
respondence with  the  English  plenipotentiary,
George  Hammond,  and  the  French  plenipoten-
tiary, Edmond  Genet,  had  just  been  published  in
a  large  pamphlet.  Jefferson's  letters  to  those
gentlemen  were  so  moderate,  so  just,  and  so  con-
ciliatory as  to  extort  the  approval  of  his  oppo-
nents. Chief- Justice  Marshall,  an  extreme  Feder-
alist, remarks,  in  his  "  Life  of  Washington,"  that
this  correspondence  lessened  the  hostility  of  Jeffer-
son's opponents  without  diminishing  the  attach-
ment of  his  friends.  Five  days  after  his  release
from  office  he  set  out  for  home,  having  been  secre-
tary of  state  three  years  and  ten  months.


All  his  interest  in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  now
returned  to  him,  and  he  supposed  his  public  life
ended  forever.  In  September,  1794,  after  the  re-
tirement of  Hamilton  from  the  cabinet,  Washing-
ton invited  Jefferson  to  go  abroad  as  special  en-
voy to  Spain ;  but  he  declined,  declaring  that  "  no
circumstances  would  evermore  tempt  him  to  en-
gage in  anything  public."  Nevertheless,  in  1796,
Washington  having  refused  to  serve  a  third  term
in  the  presidency,  he  allowed  his  name  to  be  used
as  that  of  a  candidate  for  the  succession.  The
contest  was  embittered  by  the  unpopularity  of  the
Jay  treaty  with  Great  Britain.  Jefferson  had  de-
sired the  rejection  of  the  treaty,  and  he  remained
always  of  the  opinion  that  by  its  rejection  the
government  of  the  United  States  might  at  length
have  secured  ua  respect  for  our  neutral  rights"
without  a  war.  Jefferson  had  a  narrow  escape
from  being  elected  to  the  presidency  in  1796.
John  Adams  received  seventy-one  electoral  votes,
and  Jefferson  sixty-eight,  a  result  that,  as  the  law
then  stood,  gave  him  the  vice-presidency.  In  view
of  the  duties  about  to  devolve  upon  him,  he  began
to  prepare,  chiefly  for  his  own  guidance  in  the
chair  of  the  senate,  his  "  Manual  of  Parliamentary
Practice,"  a  code  that  still  substantially  governs
all  our  deliberative  bodies.  He  deeply  felt  the  im-
portance of  such  rules,  believing  that  when  strictly
enforced  they  operated  as  a  check  on  the  majority,
and  gave  "  shelter  and  protection  to  the  minority
against  the  attempts  of  power."  Jefferson  much
enjoyed  the  office  of  vice-president,  partly  from  the
interest  he  took  in  the  art  of  legislation  and  partly
because  his  presidency  of  the  Philosophical  society
brought  him  into  agreeable  relations  with  the  most
able  minds  of  the
country.  He  took  no
part  whatever  in  the
administration  of  the
government,  as  Mr.
Adams  ceased  to  con-
sult him  on  political
measures  almost  im-
mediately after  his
inauguration.  The
administration  of
Adams,  so  turbulent
and  eventful,  in-
flamed party  spirit
to  an  extreme  de-
gree. The  reactionary  policy  of  Hamilton  and  his
friends  had  full  scope,  as  is  shown  by  the  pas-
sage of  the  alien  and  sedition  laws,  and  by  the
warlike  preparations  against  France.  During  the
first  three  years  Jefferson  endeavored  in  various
ways  to  influence  the  public  mind,  and  thus  to
neutralize  in  some  degree  the  active  and  aggres-
sive spirit  of  Hamilton.  He  was  clearly  of  opin-
ion that  the  allien  and  sedition  laws  were  not
merely  unconstitutional,  but  were  so  subversive  of
fundamental  human  rights  as  to  justify  a  nullifi-
cation of  them.  The  Kentucky  resolutions  of
1798,  in  which  his  abhorrence  of  those  laws  was
expressed,  were  originally  drawn  by  him  at  the  re-
quest of  James  Madison  and  Col.  W.  C.  Nicholas.
"  These  gentlemen,"  Jefferson  once  wrote,  "  pressed
me  strongly  to  sketch  resolutions  against  the  con-
stitutionality of  those  laws."  In  consequence  he
drew  and  delivered  them  to  Col.  Nicholas,  who  in-
troduced them  into  the  legislature  of  Kentucky,
and  kept  the  secret  of  their  authorship.  These
resolutions,  read  in  the  light  of  the  events  of  1798,
will  not  now  be  disapproved  by  any  person  of  re-
publican convictions ;  they  remain,  and  will  long
remain,  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  valuable


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


421


contributions  to  the  science  of  free  government.
It  is  fortunate  that  this  commentary  upon  the
alien  and  sedition  laws  was  written  by  a  man  so
firm  and  so  moderate,  who  possessed  at  once  the
erudition,  the  wisdom,  and  the  feeling  that  the
subject  demanded.

Happily  the  presidential  election  of  1800  freed
the  country  from  those  laws  without  a  convulsion.
Through  the  unskilful  politics  of  Hamilton  and
the  adroit  management  of  the  New  York  election
by  Aaron  Burr,  Mr.  Adams  was  defeated  for  re-
election, the  electoral  vote  resulting  thus :  Jeffer-
son, 73 ;  Burr,  73 ;  Adams,  65 ;  Charles  C.  Pinck-
ney,  64;  Jay,  1.  This  strange  result  threw  the
election  into  the  house  of  representatives,  where
the  Federalists  endeavored  to  elect  Burr  to  the  first
office,  an  unworthy  intrigue,  which  Hamilton  hon-
orably opposed.  After  a  period  of  excitement,
which  seemed  at  times  fraught  with  peril  to  the
Union,  the  election  was  decided  as  the  people
meant  it  should  be:  Thomas  Jefferson  became
president  of  the  United  States  and  Aaron  Burr
vice-president.  The  inauguration  was  celebrated
throughout  the  country  as  a  national  holiday ;
soldiers  paraded,  church-bells  rang,  orations  were
delivered,  and  in  some  of  the  newspapers  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence  was  printed  at  length.
Jefferson's  first  thought  on  coming  to  the  presi-
dency was  to  assuage  the  violence  of  party  spirit,
and  he  composed  his  fine  inaugural  address  with
that  view.  He  reminded  his  fellow-citizens  that  a
difference  of  opinion  is  not  a  difference  of  princi-
ple. "  We  are  all  Republicans,  we  are  all  Federal-
ists. If  there  be  any  among  us  who  would  wish  to
dissolve  this  Union  or  to  change  its  republican  form,
let  them  stand  undisturbed  as  monuments  of  the
safety  with  which  error  of  opinion  may  be  tolerated
where  reason  is  left  free  to  combat  it."  He  may
have  had  Hamilton  in  mind  in  writing  this  sen-
tence, and,  in  truth,  his  inaugural  was  the  briefest
and  strongest  summary  he  could  pen  of  his  argu-
ment against  Hamilton  when  both  were  in  Wash-
ington's cabinet.  "  Some  honest  men,"  said  he,
"fear  that  a  republican  government  cannot  be
strong — that  this  government  is  not  strong  enough.
I  believe  this,  on  the  contrary,  the  strongest  on
earth.  I  believe  it  is  the  only  one  where  every
man,  at  the  call  of  the  laws,  would  fly  to  the  stand-
ard of  the  law,  and  would  meet  invasions  of  the
public  order  as  his  own  personal  concern."  Among
the  first  acts  of  President  Jefferson  was  his  pardon-
ing every  man  who  was  in  durance  under  the  sedi-
tion law,  which  he  said  he  considered  to  be  "a
nullity  as  absolute  and  palpable  as  if  congress  had
ordered  us  to  fall  down  and  worship  a  golden  im-
age." To  the  chief  victims  of  the  alien  law,  such
as  Kosciuszko  and  Volney,  he  addressed  friendly,
consoling  letters.  Dr.  Priestley,  menaced  with  ex-
pulsion under  the  alien  law,  he  invited  to  the
White  House.  He  wrote  a  noble  letter  to  the  ven-
erable Samuel  Adams,  of  Massachusetts,  who  had
been  avoided  and  insulted  during  the  recent  con-
test. He  gave  Thomas  Paine,  outlawed  in  Eng-
land and  living  on  sufferance  in  Paris,  a  passage
home  in  a  national  ship.  He  appointed  as  his
cabinet  James  Madison,  secretary  of  state:  Albert
Gallatin,  secretary  of  the  treasury ;  Henry  Dear-
born, secretary  of  war;  Robert  Smith,  secretary
of  the  navy ;  Gideon  Granger,  postmaster-general ;
Levi  Lincoln,  attorney-general — all  of  whom  were
men  of  liberal  education.  With  his  cabinet  he
lived  during  the  whole  of  his  two  terms  in  perfect
harmony,  and  at  the  end  he  declared  that  if  he
had  to  choose  again  he  would  select  the  same  in-
dividuals. With  regard  to  appointments  and  re-


movals the  new  president  found  himself  in  an  em-
barrassing position,  as  all  our  presidents  have  done.
Most  of  the  offices  were  held  by  Federalists,  and
many  of  his  own  partisans  expected  removals
enough  to  establish  an  equality.  Jefferson  resisted
the  demand.  He  made  a  few  removals  for  strong
and  obvious  reasons:  but  he  acted  uniformly  on
the  principle  that  a  difference  of  politics  was  not  a
reason  for  the  removal  of  a  competent  and  faithful
subordinate.  The  few  removals  that  he  made  were
either  for  official  misconduct  or,  to  use  his  own
language,  "  active  and  bitter  opposition  to  the  or-
der of  things  which  the  public  will  has  estab-
lished." He  abolished  at  once  the  weekly  levee  at
the  White  House,  as  well  as  the  system  of  prece-
dence that  had  been  copied  from  the  court  etiquette
of  Europe.  When  congress  assembled  he  sent  them
a  message,  instead  of  delivering  to  them  a  speech,
which  had  the  effect  of  preventing,  as  he  remarked,
"the  bloody  conflict  to  which  the  making  an  an-
swer would  have  committed  them."  He  abolished
also  all  the  usages  that  savored  of  royalty,  such
as  the  conveyance  of  ministers  in  national  vessels,
the  celebration  of  his  own  birthday  by  a  public
ball,  the  appointment  of  fasts  and  thanksgiving-
days,  the  making  of  public  tours  and  official  visits.
He  refused  to  receive,  while  travelling,  any  mark  of
attention  that  would  not  have  been  paid  to  him  as
a  private  citizen,  his  object  being  both  to  repub-
licanize  and  secularize  the  government  completely.
He  declined  also  to  use  the  pardoning  power  unless
the  judges  who  had  tried  the  criminal  signed  the
petition.  He  refused  also  to  notice  in  any  way  the
abuse  of  hostile  newspapers,  desiring,  as  he  said,  to
give  the  world  a  proof  that  "  an  administration
which  has  nothing  to  conceal  from  the  press  has
nothing  to  fear  from  it."

A  few  of  the  acts  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  administra-
tion, which  includes  a  great  part  of  the  history  of
the  United  States  for  eight  years,  stand  out
boldly  and  brilliantly.  That  navy  which  had
been  created  by  the  previous  administration  against
France,  Jefferson  at  once  reduced  by  putting  all
but  six  of  its  vessels  out  of  commission.  He  de-
spatched four  of  the  remaining  six  to  the  Mediter-
ranean to  overawe  the  Barbary  pirates,  who  had
been  preying  upon  American  commerce  for  twenty
years ;  and  Decatur  and  his  heroic  comrades  exe-
cuted their  task  with  a  gallantry  and  success
which  the  American  people  have  not  forgotten.
The  purchase  of  Louisiana  was  a  happy  result  of
the  president's  tact  and  promptitude  in  availing
himself  of  a  golden  chance.  Bonaparte,  in  pursuit
of  his  early  policy  of  undoing  the  work  of  the
seven-years'  war,  had  acquired  the  vast  unknown
territory  west  of  the  Mississippi,  then  vaguely
called  Louisiana.  This  policy  he  had  avowed,  and
he  was  preparing  an  expedition  to  hold  New  Or-
leans and  settle  the  adjacent  country.  At  the
same  time,  the  people  of  Kentucky,  who,  through
the  obstinate  folly  of  the  Spanish  governor,  were
practically  denied  access  to  the  ocean,  were  in-
flamed with  discontent.  At  this  juncture,  in  the
spring  of  1803,  hostilities  were  renewed  between
France  and  England,  which  compelled  Bonaparte
to  abandon  the  expedition  which  was  ready  to  sail,
and  he  determined  to  raise  money  by  selling
Louisiana  to  the  United  States.  At  the  happiest  .
possible  moment  for  a  successful  negotiation,  Mr.
Jefferson's  special  envoy.  James  Monroe,  arrived
in  Paris,  charged  with  full  powers,  and  alive  to
the  new  and  pressing  importance  of  the  transfer,
and  a  few  hours  of  friendly  parleying  sufficed  to
secure  to  the  United  States  this  superb  domain,
one  of  the  most  valuable  on  the  face  of  the  globe.


422


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


Bonaparte  demanded  fifty  millions  of  francs.  Mar-
bois,  his  negotiator,  asked  a  hundred  millions,  but
dropped  to  sixty,  with  the  condition  that  the  United
States  should  assume  all  just  claims  upon  the  ter-
ritory. Thus,  for  the  trivial  sum  of  little  more
than  $15,000,000,  the  United  States  secured  the
most  important  acquisition  of  territory  that  was
ever  made  by  purchase.  Both  parties  were  satis-
fied with  the  bargain.  "  This  accession,"  said  the
first  consul,  "strengthens  forever  the  power  of
the  United  States,  and  I  have  just  given  to  Eng-
land a  maritime  rival  that  will  sooner  or  later
humble  her  pride."  The  popularity  of  the  admin-
istration soon  became  such  that  the  opposition  was
reduced  to  insignificance,  and  the  president  was
re-elected  by  a  greatly  increased  majority.  In  the
house  of  representatives  the  Federalists  shrank
at  length  to  a  little  band  of  twenty-seven,  and  in
the  senate  to  five.  Jefferson  seriously  feared  that
there  would  not  be  sufficient  opposition  to  furnish
the  close  and  ceaseless  criticism  that  the  public
good  required.  His  second  term  was  less  peaceful
and  less  fortunate.  During  the  long  contest  be-
tween Bonaparte  and  the  allied  powers  the  infrac-
tions of  neutral  rights  were  so  frequent  and  so
exasperating  that  perhaps  Jefferson  alone,  aided
by  his  fine  temper  and  detestation  of  war,  could  have
kept  the  infant  republic  out  of  the  brawl.  When
the  English  ship  "Leopard,"  within  hearing  of
Old  Point  Comfort,  poured  broadsides  into  the
American  frigate  "  Chesapeake,"  all  unprepared
and  unsuspecting,  killing  three  men  and  wounding
eighteen,  parties  ceased  to  exist  in  the  United
States,  and  every  voice  that  was  audible  clamored
for  bloody  reprisals.  "I  had  only  to  open  my
hand,"  wrote  Jefferson  once,  "and  let  havoc
loose."  Thei'e  was  a  period  in  1807  when  he  ex-
pected war  both  with  Spain  and  Great  Britain,  and
his  confidential  correspondence  with  Madison
shows  that  he  meant  to  make  the  contest  self-
compensating.  He  meditated  a  scheme  for  remov-
ing the  Spanish  flag  to  a  more  comfortable  distance
by  the  annexation  of  Florida,  Mexico,  and  Cuba,
and  thus  obtaining  late  redress  for  twenty-five
years  of  intrigue  and  injury.  A  partial  reparation
by  Great  Britian  postponed  the  contest.  Yet  the
offences  were  repeated ;  no  American  ship  was  safe
from  violation,  and  no  American  sailor  from  im-
pressment. This  state  of  things  induced  Jefferson
to  recommend  congress  to  suspend  commercial
intercourse  with  the  belligerents,  his  object  being
"  to  introduce  between  nations  another  umpire  than
arms."  The  embargo  of  1807,  which  continued  to
the  end  of  his  second  term,  imposed  upon  the
commercial  states  a  test  too  severe  for  human  na-
ture patiently  to  endure.  It  was  frequently  vio-
lated, and  did  not  accomplish  the  object  proposed.
To  the  end  of  his  life,  Jefferson  was  of  opinion
that,  if  the  whole  people  had  risen  to  the  height  of
his  endeavor,  if  the  merchants  had  strictly  ob-
served the  embargo,  and  the  educated  class  given
it  a  cordial  support,  it  would  have  saved  the  coun-
try the  war  of  1812,  and  extorted,  what  that  war
did  not  give  us,  a  formal  and  explicit  concession
of  neutral  rights.

On  4  March,  1809,  after  a  nearly  continuous
public  service  of  forty-four  years,  Jefferson  retired
to  private  life,  so  seriously  impoverished  that  he
was  not  sure  of  being  allowed  to  leave  Washington
without  arrest  by  his  creditors.  The  embargo,  by
preventing  the  exportation  of  tobacco,  had  reduced
his  private  income  two  thirds,  and,  in  the  peculiar
circumstances  of  Washington,  his  official  salary
was  insufficient.  "  Since  I  have  become  sensible  of
this  deficit,"  he  wrote,  "  I  have  been  under  an


agony  of  mortification."  A  timely  loan  from  a
Richmond  bank  relieved  him  temporarily  from
his  distress,  but  he  remained  to  the  end  of  his  days
more  or  less  embarrassed  in  his  circumstances.
Leaving  the  presidency  in  the  hands  of  James
Madison,  with  whom  he  was  in  the  most  complete
sympathy  and  with  whom  he  continued  to  be  in
active  correspondence,  he  was  still  a  power  in  the
nation.  Madison  and  Monroe  were  his  neighbors
and  friends,  and  both  of  them  administered  the
government  on  principles  that  he  cordially  ap-
proved. As  has  been  frequently  remarked,  they
were  three  men  and  one  system.  On  retiring  to
Monticello  in  1809,  Jefferson  was  sixty-six  years  of
age,  and  had  seventeen  years  to  live.  His  daughter
Martha  and  her  husband  resided  with  him,  they
and  their  numerous  brood  of  children,  six  daugh-
ters and  five  sons,  to  whom  was  now  added  Francis
Eppes,  the  son  of  his  daughter  Maria,  who  had
died  in  1804.  Surrounded  thus  by  children  and
grandchildren,  he  spent  the  leisure  of  his  declin-
ing years  in  endeavoring  to  establish  in  Virginia
a  system  of  education  to  embrace  all  the  chil-
dren of  his  native  state.  In  this  he  was  most
zealously  and  ably  assisted  by  his  friend,  Joseph
C.  Cabell,  a  member  of  the  Virginia  senate.  What
he  planned  in  the  study,  Cabell  supported  in  the
legislature ;  and  then  in  turn  Jefferson  would  ad-
vocate Cabell's  bill  by  one  of  his  ingenious  and  ex-
haustive letters,  which  would  go  the  rounds  of  the
Virginia  press.  The  correspondence  of  these  two
patriots  on  the  subject  of  education  in  Virginia
was afterward published  in an octavo  of 528

J  ages,  a  noble  monument  to  the  character  of  both,
efferson  appealed  to  every  motive,  including  self-
interest,  urging  his  scheme  upon  the  voter  as  a
"  provision  for  his  family  to  the  remotest  posterity."
He  did  not  live  long  enough  to  see  his  system  of
common  schools  established  in  Virginia,  but  the
university,  which  was  to  crown  that  system,  a
darling  dream  of  his  heart  for  forty  years,  he  be-
held in  successful  operation.  His  friend  Cabell,
with  infinite  difficulty,  induced  the  legislature  to
expend  $300,000  in  the  work  of  construction,  and
to  appropriate  $15,000  a  year  toward  the  support
of  the  institution.  Jefferson  personally  superin-
tended every  detail  of  the  construction.  He  en-
gaged workmen,  bought  bricks,  and  selected  the
trees  to  be  felled  for  timber.  In  March,  1825,  the
institution  was  opened  with  forty  students,  a  num-
ber which  was  increased  to  177  at  the  beginning  of
the  second  year.  The  institution  has  continued
its  beneficent  work  to  the  present  day,  and  still
bears  the  imprint  of  Jefferson's  mind.  It  has  no
president,  except  that  one  of  the  professors  is
elected  chairman  of  the  faculty.  The  university
bestows  no  rewards  and  no  honors,  and  attend-
ance upon  all  religious  services  is  voluntary.  His
intention  was  to  hold  every  student  to  his  respon-
sibility as  a  man  and  a  citizen,  and  to  permit  him
to  enjoy  all  the  liberty  of  other  citizens  in  the  same
community.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  Jefferson
became  distressingly  embarrassed  in  his  circum-
stances. In  1814  he  sold  his  library  to  congress
for  $23,000 — about  one  fourth  of  its  value.  A  few
years  afterward  he  endorsed  a  twenty-thousand-
dollar  note  for  a  friend  and  neighbor  whom  he
could  not  refuse,  and  who  soon  became  bankrupt.
This  loss,  which  added  $1,200  a  year  to  his  ex-
penses, completed  his  ruin,  and  he  was  in  danger
of  being  compelled  to  surrender  Monticello  and
seek  shelter  for  his  last  days  in  another  abode.
Philip  Hone,  mayor  of  New  York,  raised  for  him,
in  1826,  $8,500,  to  which  Philadelphia  added  $5,000
and  Baltimore  $3,000. He  was  deeply  touched


JEFFERSON


JEFFERSON


423


pared  by  his  own  hand :


by  the  spontaneous  generosity  of  his  countrymen.
"  No  cent  of  this,"  he  wrote,  "  is  wrung  from  the
tax-payer. It  is  the  pure  and  unsolicited  offering
of  love." He  retained  his  health  nearly  to  his  last
days,  and  had  the  happi-
ness of  living  to  the  fiftieth
anniversary  of  the  Decla-
ration of Independence.
He  died  at  twenty  min-
utes to  one  p.  m.,  4  July,
1826. John  Adams  died
a  few  hours  later  on  the
same  day,  saying,  just  be-
fore he  breathed  his  last,
"  Thomas Jefferson still
lives." He  was  buried  in
his own grave -yard at
Monticello, beneath a
stone  upon  which  was  en-
graved an  inscription  pre-
Here  was  buried  Thomas
Jefferson,  author  of  the  Declaration  of  American
Independence,  of  the  Statute  of  Virginia  for  Re-
ligious Freedom,  and  Father  of  the  University  of
Virginia." He  died  solvent,  for  the  sale  of  his  es-
tate discharged  his  debts  to  the  uttermost  farthing.
His  daughter  and  her  children  lost  their  home  and
had no means  of  support. Their  circumstances
becoming  known,  the  legislature  of  South  Carolina
and  Virginia  each  voted  her  a  gift  of  $10,000,
which  gave  peace  and  dignity  to  the  remainder  of
her  life. She  died  in  1836.  aged  sixty-three,  leav-
ing numerous  descendants.

The  writings  of  Thomas  Jefferson  were  pub-
lished by  order  of  congress  in  1853,  under  the  edi-
torial supervision  of  Henry  A.  Washington  (9  vols.,
8vo).  This  publication,  which  leaves  much  to  be
desired  by  the  student  of  American  history,  in-
cludes his  autobiography,  treatises,  essays,  selec-
tions from  his  correspondence,  official  reports,
messages,  and  addresses.  The  most  extensive  bi-
ography of  Jefferson  is  that  of  Henry  S.  Randall
(3  vols.,  New  York,  1858).  See  also  the  excellent
work  of  Prof.  George  Tucker,  of  the  University  of
Virginia,  "  The  Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson  "  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia  and  London,  1837) ;  "  The  Life  of
Thomas  Jefferson,"  by  James  Parton  (Boston,
1874) ;  and  "  Thomas  Jefferson,"  by  John  T.  Morse,
Jr.,  "  American  Statesmen  "  series  (Boston,  1883).
A  work  of  singular  interest  is  "  The  Domestic  Life
of  Thomas  Jefferson,"  bv  his  great-granddaughter,
Sarah  N.  Randolph  (New  York,  1871).  Jefferson's
"  Manual  of  Parliamentary  Practice  "  has  been  re-
peatedly republished;  the  Washington  edition  of
1871  is  among  the  most  recent.  Consult  also  the
"Memoirs,  Correspondence,  and  Miscellanies  of
Thomas  Jefferson,"  by  Thomas  J.  Randolph  (4  vols.,
Boston,  1830).  The  lovers  of  detail  must  not  over-
look "Jefferson  at  Monticello,"  compiled  by  Rev.
Hamilton  W.  Pierson,  D.  D.,  of  Kentucky,  from
conversations  with  Edmund  Bacon,  who  was  for
twenty  years  Jefferson's  steward  and  overseer.  The
correspondence  between  Jefferson  and  Cabell  upon
education  in  Virginia  is  very  rare.  An  impression
of  Jefferson's  seal,  shown  in  the  illustration  on  page
420,  is  now  in  the  possession  of  George  Bancroft.

The  portraits  of  Jefferson,  which  were  as  numer-
ous in  his  own  time  as  those  of  a  reigning  monarch
usually  are,  may  well  baffle  the  inquirer  who  would
know  the  express  image  of  his  face  and  person.
They  differ  greatly  from  one  another,  as  in  truth
he  changed  remarkably  in  appearance  as  he  ad-
vanced in  life,  being  in  youth  raw-boned,  freckled,
and  somewhat  ungainly,  in  early  manhood  better
looking,  and  in  later  life  becoming  almost  hand-


some— in  friendly  eyes.  The  portrait  by  Rem-
brandt Peale,  taken  in  1803,  which  now  hangs  in
the  library  of  the  New  York  historical  society,  is
perhaps  the  most  pleasing  of  the  later  pictures  of
him  now  accessible.  The  portrait  by  Matthew
Brown,  painted  for  John  Adams  in  1786,  and  en-
graved for  this  work,  has  the  merit  of  presenting
him  in  the  prime  of  his  years.  Daniel  Webster's
minute  description  of  his  countenance  and  figure
at  fourscore  was  not  accepted  by  Mr.  Jefferson's
grandchildren  as  conveying  the  true  impression  of
the  man.  "  Never  in  my  life,"  wrote  one  of  them,
"  did  I  see  his  countenance  distorted  by  a  single
bad  passion  or  unworthy  feeling.  I  have  seen  the
expression  of  suffering,  bodily  and  mental,  of  grief,
pain,  sadness,  just  indignation,  disappointment,
disagreeable  surprise,  and  displeasure,  but  never  of
anger,  impatience,  peevishness,  discontent,  to  say
nothing  of  worse  or  more  ignoble  emotions.  To
the  contrary,  it  was  impossible  to  look  on  his  face
without  being  struck  with  its  benevolent,  intelli-
gent, cheerful,  and  placid  expression.  It  was  at
once  intellectual,  good,  kind,  and  pleasant,  whilst
his  tall,  spare  figure  spoke  of  health,  activity,  and
that  helpfulness,  that  power  and  will,  '  never  to
trouble  another  for  what  he  could  do  himself,'
which  marked  his  character." — His  wife,  Martha
Wayles,  b.  in  Charles  City  county,  Va.,  19  Oct.,
1748;  d.  at  Monticello,  near  Charlottesville,  Va.,
6  Sept.,  1782,  was  the  daughter  of  John  Wayles,
a  wealthy  lawyer,  from  whom  she  inherited  a
large  property.  Her  first  husband,  Bathurst  Skel-
ton.  died  before  she  was  twenty  years  of  age,  and
Mr.  Jefferson  was  one  of  her  many  suitors.  She
is  described  as  very  beautiful,  a  little  above  mid-
dle height,  auburn-haired,  and  of  a  dignified  car-
riage. She  was  well  educated  for  her  day,  and
a  constant  reader.  Previous  to  her  second  mar-
riage, while  her  mind  seemed  still  undecided  as
to  which  of  her  many  lovers  would  be  accepted,
two  of  them  met  accidentally  in  the  hall  of  her
father's  house.  They  were  about  to  enter  the
drawing-room  when  the  sound  of  music  caught
their  ear.  The  voices  of  Jefferson  and  Mrs.  Skel-
ton,  accompanied  by  her  harpsichord  and  his  violin,
were  recognized,  and  the  disconcerted  lovers,  after
exchanging  a  glance,  took  their  hats  and  departed.
She  married  Mr.  Jefferson  in  1772.  He  retained  a
romantic  devotion  for  her  throughout  his  life,  and
because  of  her  failing  health  refused  foreign  ap-
pointments in  1776,  and  again  in  1781,  having
promised  that  he  would  accept  no  public  office  that
would  involve  their
separation.  For  four
months  previous  to  her
death  he  was  never  out
of  calling,  and  he  was
insensible  for  several
hours  after  that  event.
Two  of  their  children
died  in  infancy,  Mar-
tha, Mary,  and  Lucy
Elizabeth  surviving,
the  latter  dying  in  ear-
ly girlhood. — Martha,
b.  at  Monticello  in  Sep-
tember, 1772 ;  d.  in
Albemarle  count  v,  Va.,
27  Sept..  1836,  after  the
death  of  her  mother
accompanied  her  fa-
ther to  Europe  in  1784
and  remained  several
years  in  a  convent,  until  her  desire  to  adopt  a
religious life  induced  her  father  to remove  her


efflc^Sjc/yU


424


JEFFREY


from  the  school.  In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year
(1789)  she  married  her  cousin,  Thomas  Mann  Ran-
dolph, afterward  governor  of  Virginia,  and,  being
engrossed  with  the  cares  of  her  large  family,  passed
only  a  portion  of  her  time  in  the  White  House,
which  she  visited  with  her  husband  and  children
in  1802,  with  her  sister  in  1803,  and  during  the
winter  of  1805-6.  After  the  retirement  of  Mr.
Jefferson  she  devoted  much  of  her  life  to  his  de-
clining years.  He  describes  her  as  the  "  cherished
companion  of  his  youth  and  the  nurse  of  his  old
age,"  and  shortly  before  his  death  remarked  that
the  "last  pang  of  life  was  parting  with  her."
After  the  business  reverses  and  the  death  of  her
father  and  husband,  she  contemplated  establishing
a  school,  but  was  relieved  from  the  necessity  by  a
donation  of  $10,000  each  from  South  Carolina  and
Virginia.  She  left  a  large  family  of  sons  and
daughters,  whom  she  carefully  educated.  The  por-
trait on  page  423  represents  Mrs.  Randolph.  There
is  no  known  portrait  of  Mrs.  Jefferson. — Her  sister,
Mary,  b.  at  Monticello,  1  Aug.,  1778:  d.  in  Albe-
marle county,  Va.,  17  April,  1804,  was  also  edu-
cated in  the  convent  at  Panthemont,  France,  and
is  described,  in  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Abigail  Adams,
"as  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  remarkable
children  she  had  ever  known."  She  married  her
cousin,  John  Wayles  Epps,  early  in  life,  but  was
prevented  by  delicate  health  from  the  enjoyment,
of  social  life.  She  spent  the  second  winter  of  Mr.
Jefferson's  first  term  with  her  sister  as  mistress  of
the  White  House.  She  left  two  children,  one  of
whom,  Francis,  survived. — Jefferson's  last  surviv-
ing granddaughter,  Mrs.  Septima  Randolph  Meik-
leham,  died  in  Washington,  D.  C,  on  16  Sept.,
1887.  See  "  Domestic  Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson,"
by  his  great-granddaughter,  Sarah  N.  Randolph
(New  York,  1871).

JEFFREY,  Rosa  Vertner  Griffith,  author,  b.
in  Natchez,  Miss.,  in  1828.  She  was  the  daughter
of  John  Y.  Griffith,  who  gained  a  reputation  as  a
writer  of  tales  and  poems.  Miss  Griffith  was  edu-
cated at  the  Episcopal  seminary  in  Lexington,  Ky.,
and  at  seventeen  years  of  age  married  Claude  M.
Johnson,  and  after  his  death  Alexander  Jeffrey,
of  Edinburgh,  Scotland.  She  became  a  contribu-
tor to  the  "  Louisville  Journal "  in  1850,  under  the
pen-name  of  "Rosa,"  and  has  published,  among
other  works,  "  Poems,  by  Rosa "  (Boston,  1857) ;
"  Woodburn,"  a  novel  (New  York,  1864) ;  "  Daisy
Dare  and  Baby  Power,"  poems  (Philadelphia,  1871) ;
"  The  Crimson  Hand  and  other  Poems "  (1881) ;
and  "  Marsh,"  a  novel  (1884).

JEFFRIES,  Benjamin  Joy,  physician,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  26  March,  1833.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1854,  and  in  the  medical  department
there  in  1857,  and,  after  two  years'  study  in  Europe,
settled  in  Boston,  making  a  specialty  of  diseases  of
the  eye  and  skin.  He  is  ophthalmic  surgeon  to
the  Massachusetts  eye  and  ear  infirmary,  to  Carney
hospital,  and  to  the  New  England  hospital  for
women  and  children,  and  is  a  member  of  various
medical  societies.  Dr.  Jeffries  has  taken  much
interest  in  the  subject  of  color-blindness,  and  has
tested  the  eyes  of  thousands  of  people  in  various
parts  of  the  country.  His  examinations,  reported
in  his  manual  on  "Color-Blindness,  its  Dangers,
and  its  Detection  "  (Boston,  1873),  shows  that  in
the  United  States,  as  elsewhere,  four  per  cent,  of
males  and  one  fourth  of  one  per  cent,  of  females
have  defective  color-sense ;  their  results  have  also
brought  about  a  systematic  examination  of  the
form-  and  color-sense  of  railroad  employes  and
pilots,  and  the  gradual  establishment  of  laws  of
control  of  these. He  has  published  "  The  Eye  in


JEMISON

Health  and  Disease"  (Boston,  1871):  "Animal  and
Vegetable  Parasites  of  the  Human  Hair  and  Skin."
a  Boy  Is  ton  prize  essay  on  "Diseases  of  the  Skin"
(1872) ;  a  prize  essay  on  "  The  Eye,"  Massachusetts
medical  society  publication ;  and  "Enucleation  of
the  Eyeball,"  "Reports  of  Cataract  Operations,"
and  articles  on  dangers  of  defective  vision,  and
the  necessity  for  legislative  enactment.

JEFFRIES,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  5  Feb.,  1745 ;  d.  there,  16  Sept.,  1819.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1763,  and  studied
medicine  in  London  and  Aberdeen,  receiving  his
medical  degree  at  the  latter  place  in  1769.  He  then
returned  to  Boston,  continued  to  practise  with  suc-
cess, and  was  from  1771  till  1774  surgeon  of  a
British  ship  of  the  line  at  that  port.  At  the  evacu-
ation of  Boston  by  the  British  he  accompanied
the  troops  to  Halifax,  where  he  was  made,  by  Lord
Howe,  surgeon-general  of  the  forces  in  Nova  Scotia.
In  March,  1779,  he  went  to  England  and  was  made
surgeon-major  to  the  forces  in  America,  entering
upon  his  duties,  11  March,  1780,  at  Charleston,  S.
C.  In  December  of  that  year  he  resigned  and  re-
turned to  London,  where  he  practised  successfully
and  occupied  himself  with  scientific  investigations.
He  undertook  two  aerial  voyages,  the  second  of
which,  7  Jan.,  1785,  was  from  Dover  across  the
British  channel  into  the  forest  of  Guienne,  in  the
province  of  Artois,  France.  In  the  summer  of
1789  he  returned  to  Boston,  where  he  delivered  the
first  public  lecture  on  anatomy  that  was  ever  given
in  New  England ;  but,  public  feeling  being  against
dissections,  he  was  forced  by  mob  violence  to  dis-
continue his  discourses.  He  published  a  "  Narra-
tive of  Two  Aerial  Voyages"  (London,  1786).

JEMISON,  Mary  (or  Dehewamis),  b.  at  sea  in
1742  or  1743 ;  d.  on  Buffalo  creek  reservation,  19
Sept.,  1833.  She  was  the  fourth  child  of  Thomas
Jemison  and  Jane  Irwin,  who  left  Ireland  for
Philadelphia  prior  to  her  birth.  The  family  set-
tled near  Marsh  creek,  on  the  frontier  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  there  followed  a  farming  life  until  the
spring  of  1755,  when  they  were  captured  by  the
Indians.  The  elder  members  of  the  family  were
killed,  but  Mary's  life  was  spared,  and  she  was
adopted  into  one  of  the  tribes  of  the  Senecas.  A
few  years  afterward  she  married  Shenijee,  who
treated  her  with  kindness,  and  by  whom  she  had
two  children.  In  1759  she  went  to  live  with  her
Indian  mother  at  Little  Beard's  town,  on  the  banks
of  the  Genesee  river,  and  there  spent  the  remaining
seventy-two  years  of  her  life.  Her  first  husband
died  soon  after  her  removal  to  New  York,  and,
after  three  years,  she  married  Hiokatoo.  Thence-
forth she  remained  with  the  tribe  into  which  she
had  been  adopted,  acquired  in  her  own  right  a
large  amount  of  property,  and  was  naturalized  in
1817.  She  was  the  mother  of  eight  children.  In
1831  she  removed  to  the  Buffalo  creek  reserva-
tion, and  in  the  summer  of  1833,  a  few  months
prior  to  her  death,  adopted  the  Christian  faith.
She  was  widely  known  as  "the  white  woman."
See  "  The  Life  of  Mary  Jemison,"  by  James  E.
Seaver  (Batavia,  N.  Y.,  1842).

JEMISON,  Robert,  legislator,  b.  in  Lincoln
county,  Ga.,  17  Sept.,  1802;  d.  in  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,
16  Oct.,  1871.  He  removed  in  1821  to  Alabama,
where  he  became  an  active  Whig,  and  was  long  in
the  legislature.  He  was  president  of  the  state  sen-
ate in  1863,  and  soon  afterward  entered  the  Con-
federate senate,  though  he  had  opposed  secession  in
1861.  He  did  much  toward  improving  the  finances
of  his  state,  and  was  the  founder  of  the  Alabama  in-
sane asylum.  The  construction  of  the  Alabama  and
Chattanooga  railroad  was  largely  due  to  his  efforts.


JENCKES


JENCKES


425


JENCKES,  Joseph,  inventor,  b.  in  Colbrooke,
England,  in  1602 ;  d.  in  that  part  of  Lynn,  Mass.,
that  is  now  Saugus,  16  March,  1683.  Iron-ore  was
early  discovered  about  Saugus  river.  The  great
need  of  the  colonists  for  iron  tools  led  Robert
Bridges  to  take  specimens  of  ore  to  London,  by
which  he  procured  the  formation  of  a  company  to
develop  its  working.  Joseph  Jenckes  was  induced
to  come  from  Hammersmith  in  1642,  as  master-
mechanic,  to  establish  the  "  iron-works  " — the  first
"foundry  and  forge"  in  the  colonies.  By  his
hands,  or  under  his  superintendence,  the  first  fur-
naces were  erected,  the  first  moulds  made,  the  first
domestic  utensils  cast,  and  the  first  machinery  and
iron  tools  manufactured.  The  iron  enterprise,  un-
der the  protection  of  the  Massachusetts  bay  gov-
ernment, appears  to  have  been  successful  for  sev-
eral years,  and  furnished  all  kinds  of  excellent  bar-
iron  to  the  colonies  at  a  price  not  exceeding  £20  a
ton.  Flowage  and  other  lawsuits,  with  fear  for  a
scarcity  of  fuel,  eventually  brought  about  a  col-
lapse. Mr.  Jenckes  introduced  to  the  colony  the
idea  of  patenting  inventions,  and  it  seems  to  have
been  a  motive  for  coming  to  the  new  country  that
he  might  protect  and  introduce  his  own  ideas.  In
1646  he  secured  a  patent  for  fourteen  years  on  an
improved  water-wheel,  also  a  newly  invented  saw-
mill. On  20  Jan.,  1647,  he  purchased  a  privilege
at  the  iron-works  to  build  a  forge  where  he  might
manufacture  scythes  and  other  edged  tools.  In
1652  a  mint  was  established  in  Boston  for  coining
silver.  The  pieces  had  "  Masatusets,"  with  a  pine-
tree,  on  one  side;  the  reverse,  "New  England,
Anno  1652,"  and  the  number  of  pence  in  Roman


numerals.  (See  illustration.)  The  dies  for  this
coin,  the  first  issued  in  this  country,  were  cut  by
Jenckes  at  the  Lynn  iron-works.  In  1654  he  built
a  fire-engine  on  the  order  of  the  selectmen  of  Bos-
ton— the  first  in  this  country.  In  1655  a  patent
was  granted  him  for  an  improved  grass-scythe.  It
had  been  withheld  nine  years,  because  it  was  deemed
too  valuable  to  be  monopolized.  This  instrument
has  been  and  is  used  among  all  nations  without
essential  improvement.  The  commissioner  of  pat-
ents, in  1846,  pronounced  the  improvement  to  have
been  of  greater  relative  mechanical  advancement
upon  previous  instruments  than  is'  the  mowing-
machine  of  to-day.  In  1667  government  aid  was
sought  to  enable  him  to  establish  machinery  for
wire-drawing,  and  he  also  proposed  the  coinage  of
money.  He  was  the  originator  of  many  improve-
ments in  tools  and  machinery,  and  received  patents
for  his  most  useful  inventions.  Mr.  Jenckes  was
the  progenitor  of  all  that  bore  his  name  in  his
juntry  up  to  1800.  Most  of  his  descendants  have
modified  the  spelling. — His  son,  Joseph,  manu-
facturer, b.  in  Buckinghamshire,  England,  in  1632 ;
d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1716.  About  1647  he
followed  his  father  to  Lynn,  Mass.,  and  acquired
his  trade  and  business.  The  rapid  destruction  of
the  forests  about  Lynn,  to  make  charcoal  for  smelt-
ing and  refining  iron,  caused  alarm,  and  to  estab-
lish himself  in  the  iron  business,  he  followed  Roger


Williams  to  Rhode  Island.  About  1655  he  pur-
chased from  the  Indians  a  tract  of  woodland  in
and  about  the  territorv  of  Providence,  on  Black-
stone  river,  including  Pawtueket  falls.  Iron  ore
was  discovered  near  the  falls,  where  he  built  a
foundry  and  forge,  which  were  destroyed  during
King  Philip's  war  in  1675,  but  were  rebuilt.  Mr.
Jenckes  became  the  founder  of  what  is  now  Paw-
tucket.  His  enterprise  laid  the  foundation  by
which  Providence  became  the  great  iron  work-shop
of  the  colonies  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.
In  1661  he  was  a  member  of  the  governor's  coun-
cil, and  he  served  for  several  years  as  a  member  of
the  house  of  deputies. — The  second  Joseph's  son,
Joseph,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,  b.  in  what  is
now  Pawtueket  in  1656;  d.  15  June.  1740,  was  a
land-surveyor,  and  much  employed  by  the  Rhode
Island  colonial  government  in  establishing  its
boundaries  with  adjoining  colonies.  He  was  a
member  of  the  general  assembly  from  1679  till  1693,
and  clerk  and  speaker  of  that  body.  He  was  com-
missioner of  the  colony  to  settle  the  many  bound-
ary disputes  that  arose  with  Massachusetts  and
Connecticut;  and  later,  between  Massachusetts
and  New  Hampshire,  and  Maine.  He  was  also
commissioned  to  reply  to  a  letter  of  the  king  as  to
the  "  condition  of  affairs  in  Rhode  Island,"  and  to
answer  twenty-seven  questions  that  were  pro-
pounded by  the  lords  of  the  privy  council.  He  was
councillor  most  of  the  years  from  1680  till  1712,
state  auditor  in  1697-1704.  and  in  1717  chair-
man of  a  commission  to  compile  and  publish  the
laws  of  the  colony,  and  to  make  a  map  of  the  colony
for  the  English  government.  He  was  again  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly  from  1700  till  1708,  deputy-
governor  from  1715  till  1727,  except  in  1721,  when
he  was  sent  to  England  with  plenipotentiary  pow-
ers to  settle  boundary  questions  before  the  king ;
and  governor  in  1727-32.  Being  the  first  gov-
ernor that  lived  outside  of  Newport,  he  was  voted
4' 100  by  the  assembly  to  defray  the  expense  of  re-
moving his  family  to  the  seat  of  government.  In
1731  he  vetoed  an  act  of  the  assembly  to  emit  paper
currency.  Alter  serving  five  years  as  governor,
contrary  to  the  usage  of  his  predecessors,  he  de-
clined a  re-election.  Gov.  Jenckes  was  a  giant  in
stature  (measuring  seven  feet  two  inches  in  his
stockings),  and  was  well  proportioned.

JENCKES,  Thomas  Allen,  congressman,  b.  in
Cumberland,  R.  I.,  2  Nov.,  1818 ;  d.  there,  4  Nov.,
1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1838,  and
was  a  tutor  in  mathematics  there  in  1839-'40.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  Rhode  Island  bar
in  1840,  and  attained  note  in  his  profession.  He
was  for  many  years  engaged  in  the  important  liti-
gation of  the  Sickles  and  Corliss  steam-engine
patents,  and  the  Day  and  Goodyear  rubber  suits.
He  had  an  office  in  New  York  for  many  years,  as
well  as  in  Providence,  and  was  retained  by  the
U.  S.  government  in  their  cases  brought  against
parties  to  the  Credit  Mobilier.  During  the  Dorr
rebellion  of  1842  Mr.  Jenckes  served  the  consti-
tuted authorities  in  a  civil  and  military  capacity,
and  with  his  pen  as  well.  He  was  a  secretary  of
the  landholders'  convention  of  1841,  and  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of  1842.
When  the  governor's  council  was  established  he
became  its  secretary.  He  served  in  both  houses  of
the  legislature,  and  in  the  case  of  Hazard  vs.  Ives,
involving  the  right  of  the  legislature  to  direct
a  new  trial,  convinced  that  body,  and  carried  it
against  its  previously  expressed  opinion,  and
against  all  other  obstacles.  This  is  recorded  as  one
of  the  greatest  forensic  triumphs  in  the  annals  of
Rhode  Island. In  1855  he  was  appointed  one  of


426


JENIFER


JENKINS


the  commissioners  to  revise  the  laws  of  the  state.
He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1862  as  a  Republican,
and  served  from  1863  till  1871,  being  at  the  head
of  the  committee  on  patents,  and  of  the  judiciary
committee.  His  greatest  services  in  congress  were
the  revision  of  the  patent  and  copyright  laws,  the
general  bankrupt  law  of  1867,  and  the  introduction
and  adoption  of  a  law  for  improving  and  regulat-
ing the  civil  service.  He  took  an  active  part  in
the  deliberations  of  the  house,  and  on  legal  ques-
tions was  an  acknowledged  authority.  He  foresaw
the  civil  war,  and  urged  upon  the  state  and  Federal
governments  active  measures  to  meet  it.  Witness-
ing a  torch-light  parade  in  the  political  canvass
of  1860,  he  said:  "It  will  not  take  much  to  turn
those  men  into  soldiers."  Mr.  Jenckes  became
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  a  uniform  system  of
bankruptcy  throughout  the  country,  and  to  that,
end  his  labors,  although  they  met  with  vigorous
opposition,  resulted  in  the  bankrupt  law  of  1867.
His  services  to  frame  a  bill  to  secure  reform  in  the
civil  service  brought  from  him,  as  chairman  of  the
joint  select  committee  on  retrenchment,  an  elabo-
rate report  on  the  civil-service  laws  of  the  world,  14
May,  1868.  His  bill  met  with  intense  and  partisan
opposition ;  but,  convinced  of  its  desirability,  he
forced  it  upon  the  attention  of  the  country  and  of
congress,  and,  after  a  struggle,  succeeded  in  secur-
ing its  passage.  His  advocacy  of  the  bankrupt
and  civil-service  laws  brought  him  before  the  New
York  chamber  of  commerce  and  Cooper  institute
audiences,  and  elsewhere.  In  congress  he  made
the  presentation  address  in  behalf  of  his  state
when  the  statue  of  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  was
presented  to  the  nation.

JENIFER,  Daniel,  member  of  congress,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1723;  d.  there,  6  Nov.,  1790.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  movements  preceding
the  Revolution,  was  a  delegate  from  Maryland  to
the  Continental  congress  in  1778-'82,  and  also  to
the  convention  that  formed  the  constitution  of  the
United  States. — His  son,  Daniel,  diplomatist,  b.
in  Charles  county,  15  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  Port
Tobacco,  Md.,  18  Dec,  1855,  was  liberally  educated,
became  a  local  magistrate,  and  was  frequently  a
member  of  the  Maryland  legislature.  He  was  a
member  of  congress  in  1831-'3,  and  in  1835-'41,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  and  was  U.  S.  min-
ister to  Austria  in  1841-'5.

JENKINS,  Albert  Gallatin,  soldier,  b.  in  Ca-
bell county,  Va.,  10  Nov.,  1830;  d.  in  Dublin,
Va.,  7  May,  1864.  He  was  educated  at  the  Virginia
military  institute,  Lexington,  Va.,  at  Jefferson
college,  Pa.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1848,  and
at  Harvard  law-school,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1850.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  never
practised,  devoting  himself  instead  to  agriculture.
He  was  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  con-
vention in  Cincinnati  in  1856,  a  member  of  con-
gress from  Virginia  in  1857-'61,  and  a  delegate
from  Virginia  to  the  provisional  Confederate  con-
gress in  the  latter  year.  He  then  entered  the  Con-
federate army,  and  was  appointed  brigadier-gener-
al, 5  Aug.,  1862.  He  commanded  a  brigade  in  A.
P.  Hill's  division,  and  afterward  in  Stuart's  cavalry
corps,  did  good  service  at  Gettysburg,  and  served
in  the  Shenandoah  valley  and  western  Virginia.
He  was  killed  in  action  at  Dublin,  Va.

JENKINS,  Anna  Alray,  benefactor,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  1  Sept.,  1790 ;  d.  there,  20  Nov.,  1849.
She  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and
inherited  a  large  fortune,  including  the  estate  of
her  father,  William  Almy,  most  of  that  of  Moses
Brown,  her  grandfather,  and  the  greater  part  of
that  of  her  uncle,  Obadiah Brown. She  married


William  Jenkins  in  1823,  early  in  life  became  a
prominent  preacher  among  the  Friends,  and  re-
peatedly visited  various  parts  of  the  United  States
and  Europe  in  this  capacity.  Her  charities  to  those
of  her  own  denomination,  and  to  others,  were  in-
numerable, founding  a  school,  and  an  orphan  asy-
lum for  colored  children  in  Providence.  Mrs.  Jen-
kins perished  in  the  burning  of  her  residence.

JENKINS,  Charles  Jones,  jurist,  b.  in  Beau-
fort district,  S.  C,  6  Jan.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Summerville,
Ga.,  13  June,  1883.  He  removed  with  his  parents
to  Jefferson  county,  Ga.,  in  1816,  and  was  educated
at  the  State  university  and  at  Union  college,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1824.  He  became  a  member
of  the  Georgia  legislature  in  1830,  was  attorney-
general  of  the  state  in  1831,  but  resigning  before
the  expiration  of  his  term,  and  was  again  chosen  to
the  legislature,  where  he  remained  from  1836
till  1850,  serving  as  speaker  of  the  house  when-
ever his  party  was  in  a  majority.  He  was  brought
up  in  the  state-rights,  Jeffersonian,  school  of
politics,  but  supported  Harrison  for  president
in  1840,  and  Clay  in  1844.  He  was  a  Union  mem-
ber of  the  Georgia  convention  in  1850,  and  as  its
chairman  was  the  author  of  the  resolutions  known
as  "The  Platform  of  1850,"  in  which  it  was  "re-
solved that  the  state  of  Georgia,  even  to  the  dis-
ruption of  every  tie  which  binds  her  to  the  Union,
resist  any  act  of  congress  abolishing  slavery."  He
declined  the  secretaryship  of  the  interior  which
was  offered  him  by  President  Fillmore  in  this  year,
was  state  senator  in  1856,  and  in  1860  was  ap-
pointed to  the  supreme  bench  of  Georgia  to  sup-
ply the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Lin-
ton Stephens.  He  held  this  office  till  the  close  of
the  war.  In  1865  he  was  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  that  was  called  on  the
proclamation  of  President  Johnson,  and,  being
elected  governor  the  same  year  under  the  constitu-
tion so  formed,  held  office  till  he  was  superseded
by  Gen.  Thomas  S.  Ruger,  of  the  U.  S.  army,  who
was  appointed  provisional  governor  under  the  re-
construction act  of  congress  in  1868.  He  then
retired  to  private  life,  but  was  president  of  the
Georgia  constitutional  convention  in  1877.  For
many  years  he  was  president  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees of  the  University  of  Georgia.  See  his  "  Life,"
by  Charles  Colcock  Jones  (Augusta,  Ga.,  1884).

'  JENKINS,  Edward,  British  author,  b.  in  Ban-
galore, India,  in  1838.  He  was  educated  in  Mon-
treal, Canada,  and  at  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia, was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  London  in  1864,
and  practised  till  1873,  when  he  entered  politics  as
an  ultra  Liberal.  In  1870  he  was  sent  to  British
Guiana  on  behalf  of  the  Aborigines'  protection  so-
ciety, and  was  also  associated  with  Sir  George  Grey
in  the  emigration  and  colonial  movement.  He  was
agent-general  for  Canada  in  1874-'6,  and  during
his  absence  there  was  elected  a  member  of  parlia-
ment. He  is  the  author,  among  other  works,  of
"  Ginx's  Baby,"  a  political  satire  (London,  1870) ;
"The  Colonies  an  Imperial  Unity  "  (London,  1871):
and  "The  Coolie"  (New  York,  1871).

JENKINS,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  East  Green-
wich, R.  I.,  15  Feb.,  1728;  d.  in  Pennsylvania  in
November,  1784.  He  was  an  original  proprietor  of
the  Susquehanna  company,  visited  the  Wyoming
valley  in  1753,  attended  the  purchase  of  the  Indian
title  in  1754,  surveyed  it  in  1755,  brought  on  set-
tlers in  1762-'3,  was  driven  off  on  15  Oct.,  1763,  re-
turned 1  Feb.,  1769,  and  settled  in  Kingston,  but
sold  out  and  removed  in  1772  to  Exeter,  of  which
town  he  was  one  of  the  grantees.  He  called  a
meeting  of  the  settlers,  1  Aug.,  1775,  over  which
he  presided,  whereat  t  hey  resolved  "  that  they  will


JENKINS


JENKINS


427


unanimously  join  their  brethren  in  America  in  the
common  cause  of  defending  their  liberty."  He
was  an  active  participant  in  the  Pennamite  war  at
Wyoming,  and  the  scribe  and  counsellor  of  the  set-
tlers. Driven  out  by  the  Pennamites  in  May,
1784,  in  a  cold  rain,  he  took  a  severe  cold,  which,
joining  with  the  rheumatism  and  settling  in  a
wound  in  his  knee  that  he  had  received  from  a
ball  at  the  taking  of  Louisburg  in  1745,  resulted  in
his  death  in  November,  1784.  He  was  a  teacher,
surveyor,  and  conveyancer,  justice  of  the  peace,
and  president-judge  of  the  first  county  court  at
Wyoming  in  1777. — His  son,  John,  b.  in  New  Lon-
don, Conn.,  27  Nov.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Wyoming,  Pa.,

19  March,  1827,  was  a  surveyor  and  conveyancer,
teacher,  constable,  agent  of  the  Susquehanna  com-
pany at  Wyoming,  and  afterward  a  merchant,  iron-
monger, and  farmer.  He  came  to  Wyoming  with
his  father  in  1769,  and  became  an  active  partici-
pant in  the  Pennamite  war  and  the  Revolution,  in
which  he  was  a  lieutenant.  With  Washington  he
planned  the  western  expedition  that  was  com-
manded by  Sullivan,  and  was  the  guide  of  the
march.  He  had  learned  the  route  while  a  prisoner
in  the  hands  of  the  Indians,  and  was  at  the  sur-
render of  Cornwallis.  He  was  in  command  of
Forty  Fort  at  the  time  of  the  massacre  of  Wyom-
ing. In  the  Pennamite  war  he  was  an  active  leader,
and  gained  repeated  triumphs  over  Gen.  Arm-
strong and  Col.  Pickering.  He  was  subsequently
elected  major  and  colonel  of  militia,  sheriff,  and
member  of  assembly.

JENKINS,  John  Stilwell,  author,  b.  in  Al-  I
bany,  N.  Y.,  15  Feb.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Weedsport,  N.  Y.,

20  Sept.,  1852.  After  passing  two  years  at  Hamil-  I
ton  college  he  studied  law,  and  began  to  practise  I
in  Weedsport,  N.  Y.,  in  1842,  also  editing  the
"Cayuga  Times."  Among  his  publications  are
"  Generals  of  the  Last  War  with  Great  Britain  "
(Auburn,  1841);  an  abridgment  of  Hammond's
"  History  of  New  York  "  (New  York,  1846) ;  "  Alice
Howard"  (Philadelphia,  1846);  "Life  of  Silas
Wright "  (New  York,  1847) :  "  History  of  the  Mexi-
can War"  (1848);  "Narrative  of  the  Exploring
Expedition  commanded  bv  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes.
1838-'42"  (1849);  "Lives  of  the  Governors  of
New  York  "  (1851) ;  "  Heroines  of  History  "  (1853) ;
and  "  Lives  of  Jackson,  Polk,  and  Calhoun  "  (1855).

JENKINS,  John  Theophilus,  Canadian  physi-
cian, b.  in  Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  island,  1
Jan.,  1829.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  town
and  in  England,  and  was  graduated  as  a  physician.
He  served  as  a  surgeon  in  the  Turkish  army  during
the  Crimean  war,  and  holds  the  British  and  Turk-
ish war  medals  for  his  services.  He  was  an  unsuc-
cessful candidate  for  Queens  county  in  the  Cana-
dian parliament  in  1873,  and  represented  Char-
lottetown in  the  provincial  assembly  from  1873  till
1876.  He  was  elected  a  representative  in  the  Cana-
dian parliament  for  Queens  in  1882,  and  again  in
October,  1883.

JENKINS,  Thornton  Alexander,  naval  of-
ficer, b.  in  Orange  county,  Va.,  11  Dec,  1811.  He
was  prepared  for  college,  but  entered  the  navy  as
a  midshipman,  1  Nov.,  1828,  and  in  the  following
spring  sailed  on  the  "  Natchez  "  for  Cuba,  where  he
performed  hazardous  services  in  breaking  up  nests
of  pirates.  In  1831  he  assisted  in  suppressing  Nat
Turner's  negro  insurrection  in  Virginia.  He  was
commissioned  as  lieutenant  on  9  Dec,  1839,  and
from  1834  till  1842  was  employed  as  assistant  to
Prof.  Ferdinand  R.  Hassler  on  the  coast  survey.
In  1845  he  was  sent  to  Europe  to  examine  light-
house systems  and  other  aids  to  navigation,  but  re-
turned in  about  a  year  to  prevent  being  detained  I


in  case  war  should  occur  with  Great  Britain.  In
1846  he  made  an  elaborate  report  of  the  illumi-
nants,  towers,  light-ships,  buoys,  beacons,  and  other
adjuncts  of  the  light-house  service  in  England,
France,  and  other  European  countries.  During
the  Mexican  war
he  served  as  execu-
tive officer  of  the
sloop  "  German-
town,"  and  after-
ward in  command
of  the  store-ship
"  Relief,"  and  of
the  supply  and
hospital  station  on
Salmadena  island.
In  the  capture  of
Tuspan  and  Tobas-
co  he  commanded
the  landing  parties
from  the  "  Ger-
mantown."  In  1848
-'51,when  Prof.  Al-
exander D.  Bache
was  superintend-
ent of  the  coast  survey,  he  was  engaged,  while  in
command  of  the  schooner  "  John  Y.  Mason  "  and
the  steamers  "Jefferson"  and  "Corwin"  in  me-
teorological and  hydrographic  observations,  and
in  taking  deep  -  sea  temperatures  in  the  Gulf
stream.  The  last-named  vessel  was  built  from  his
designs  and  under  his  superintendence.  In  Octo-.
ber,  1852,  he  was  appointed  naval  secretary  to  the
light-house  board,  having  for  two  years  previous
served  as  secretary  to  the  temporary  board.  He
was  promoted  commander  on  14  Sept.,  1855,  and
given  the  "  Preble  "  in  the  Paraguayan  expedition
of  1858-'9.  Immediately  on  his  return  he  was  or-
dered to  the  Caribbean  sea  in  search  of  the  filibus-
ter William  Walker,  and  thence  to  Vera  Cruz,
Mexico,  where  he  took  part  in  the  capture  of  the
"Miramon"  and  "Marquis  of  Havana,"  which  he
convoyed  to  New  Orleans.  In  conjunction  with
Capt.  "William  F.  Smith  he  was  instrumental  in
saving  the  forts  at  Key  West  and  Dry  Tortugas
from  falling  into  the  hands  of  an  expedition  that
was  sent  from  New  Orleans  before  the  civil  war
was  openly  begun.  In  February,  1861,  he  was
again  appointed  secretary  to  the  light-house  board,
and  during  that  year  performed  delicate  and  secret
services  at  the  request  of  President  Lincoln,  until
he  was  attacked  with  serious  illness  in  November.
He  was  promoted  captain,  16  July,  1862,  and
was  the  senior  officer  at  the  repulse  of  the  enemy
at  Coggin's  Point,  James  river,  and  at  the  attack
on  the  U.  S.  forces  at  City  Point  in  August,  1862.
In  the  autumn  of  1862  he  was  engaged  in  block-
ading Mobile  and  its  approaches  in  command  of
the  "Oneida,"  of  the  Western  Gulf  blockading
squadron.  He  was  fleet-captain  and  chief  of  staff
of  Farragut's  squadron  in  the  Mississippi,  com-
manding the  "  Hartford "  at  the  passing  of  the
Port  Hudson  and  Grand  Gulf  batteries.  He  had
encounters  with  the  enemy  at  various  points  on  the
river,  and  at  the  capture  of  Port  Hudson  was  in
chief  command  of  the  naval  forces,  Admiral  Farra-
gut  having  gone  some  time  before  on  necessary
business  to  New  Orleans.  In  the  blockade  of  Mo-
bile in  1864  he  commanded  the  "  Richmond"  and
the  2d  division  of  Admiral  Farragut's  fleet,  and  he
was  left  in  command  in  Mobile  bay  till  February,
1865,  when  he  was  ordered  to  the  James  river,  and
remained  there  until  after  the  surrender  of  Gen.
Lee.  He  then  went  to  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi
rivers  to  investigate  seamen's  bounty  claims,  and


428


JENKS


JENKS


was  president  of  a  board  that  awarded  a  large  ag-
gregate sum  to  enlisted  men  and  their  families,  lie
was  commissioned  as  commodore  on  25  July,  1866.
From  1865  till  he  resigned  the  office  on  the  change
of  administration  in  1869.  he  was  chief  of  the  board
of  navigation,  and  then  secretary  of  the  light-house
board  till  1871.  being  promoted  rear-admiral  on  13
July,  1870.  Afterward  he  commanded  the  naval
forces  on  the  Asiatic  station  until  he  was  retired
on  12  Dec,  1873.  He  had  charge  of  the  exhibit
of  the  navy  department  at  the  Centennial  exhibi-
tion at  Philadelphia  in  1876.

JENKS,  Edward  Watrons,  physician,  b.  in
Victor,  Ontario  co.,  N.  Y.,  31  March,  1833.  His
father,  Nathan  Jenks,  removed  to  La  Grange
county,  Ind.,  in  1843,  laid  out  the  village  of  Onta-
rio, and  endowed  La  Grange  collegiate  institute.
The  son  was  educated  at  that  institution,  began
the  study  of  medicine  in  New  York  university,  and
was  graduated  at  Castleton,  Vt.,  medical  school  in
1855,  and  afterward  at  Bellevue  hospital  medical
college,  N.  Y.  After  practising  in  La  Grange
county,  Ind.,  and  Warsaw,  N.  Y.,  he  went  to  De-
troit, Mich.,  in  1864.  and  for  four  years  was  one  of
the  editors  of  the  "  Review  of  Medicine."  In  1868
he  became  professor  of  obstetrics  in  the  medical
college  there,  of  which  he  was  the  projector  and  its
president,  and  he  was  also  lecturer  at  Bowdoin
college,  Me.,  on  the  diseases  of  women.  Dr.  Jenks
was  surgeon  to  various  hospitals,  president  of  the
Michigan  state  medical  society,  and  one  of  the
founders  and  an  active  member  of  the  American
gynecological  society,  and  correspondent  of  Detroit
medical  library  association.  In  1878  Albion  col-
lege conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  In
1879  he  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of  medical  and
surgical  diseases  of  women  in  Chicago  medical  col-
lege, and  moved  to  that  city.  After  five  years  of
residence  there,  climatic  difficulties  necessitated  a
return  of  his  family  to  Detroit,  where  he  is  now
(1887)  in  practice.  Dr.  Jenks  has  invented  obstet-
rical forceps  and  other  surgical  instruments  for  use
in  gynecology.  He  is  the  author  of  numerous  con-
tributions to  professional  literature,  including  "  Re-
port of  a  Successful  Case  of  Cesarean  Section "
(New  York,  1877) ;  "  Practice  of  Gynecology  in
Ancient  Times  "  (in  "  Gynecological  Transactions,"
1882) ;  and  "  New  Mode  of  Operating  for  Fistula
in  Ano  "  (New  York,  1883).  He  is  one  of  the  au-
thors of  "  American  System  of  Practical  Medicine,"
edited  by  Dr.  William  Pepper  (5  vols.,  Philadel-
phia, 1885-7),  and  of  the  "American  System  of
Gynecology  "  (1887).

JENKS,  John  Whipple  Polter,  naturalist,  b.
in  West  Boylston,  Mass.,  1  May,  1819. He  was

fraduated  at  Brown  in  1838,  was  principal  of
'eirce  academy  from  1842  till  1871,  professor  of
zoology  in  Boston  horticultural  society  in  1858-'60,
and  has  held  the  chair  of  agricultural  zoology  and
the  curatorship  of  the  museum  in  Brown  univer-
sity since  1873.  In  the  promotion  of  his  profession
he  has  been  an  extensive  traveller  in  almost  every
country  in  Europe,  and  also  since  1885  in  every
state  and  territory  of  the  Union.  The  gathering  of
the  extensive  collections  of  Brown  university  is
mainly  due  to  his  labors.  He  was  the  first  natu-
ralist to  explore  the  everglades  of  Florida  and  the
region  around  Lake  Okechobee.  Mr.  Jenks's  pub-
lications include  bulletins  on  the  "  Food  of  Birds  "
in  the  annual  reports  of  the  Boston  horticultural
society  (1859) ;  "  Hunting  in  Florida  "  (1874) ;  and
"  Jenks  and  Steele's  Zoology,"  a  text-book  for  high-
schools  (1876,  revised  ed.,  1887).

JENKS,  Phoebe,  artist,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.
H.,  28  July.  1847. She  is  the  daughter  of  Denis


Hoyt,  and  was  married  to  Lewis  E.  Jenks.  She
began  the  study  of  art  in  Boston  in  1873,  early  de-
veloped skill  in  painting,  and  almost  immediately
became  successful  in  her  profession.  She  has  fre-
quently exhibited  at  the  Boston  art  club  and  the
National  academy  of  design.  Among  her  ideal
productions  that  have  attracted  general  attention
are  "  La  Cantatrice,"  "  The  Triumph,"  "  Priscilla,
the  Spinner,"  and  "Mamma's  Comb."  She  is  emi-
nently successful  as  a  painter  of  the  portraits  of
women  and  children.

JENKS,  William,  clergvman,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1778;  d.  in  Boston,  13  Nov.,  1866.
He  was  sixth  in  descent  from  Joseph,  of  Lynn.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1797,  and  for  a
time  was  reader  in  Christ's  church,  Cambridge,
Mass.  Later  he  was  engaged  as  a  private  tutor,
received  a  license  to  preach  from  the  Boston  asso-
ciation, and  was  ordained  over  the  1st  Congrega-
tional church,  Bath,  Me.,  on  26  Dec,  1805.  He  re-
mained there  twelve  years,  and  was  chaplain  to  a
Bath  regiment  during  the  war  of  1812.  In  con-
nection with  pastoral  duties  he  held  for  three
years  the  professorship  of  oriental  language  and
English  literature  in  Bowdoin.  In  1818  he  re-
turned to  Boston  and  instituted  special  meetings
for  seamen,  of  which  he  was  pioneer.  He  opened
the  first  free  chapel  for  seamen  on  Central  wharf,
and  another  at  the  west  end,  the  former  growing
into  the  Mariners'  church  and  sailors'  home,  the
basis  of  the  present  City  missionary  society.  After
building  a  chapel  in  Botolph  street  a  congregation
was  gathered  and  a  church  erected  in  Green  street,
over  which  Dr.  Jenks  was  settled  from  1826  till
1845.  In  1825  Bowdoin  conferred  on  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.,  and  in  1862  that  of  LL.  D.  Harvard
gave  him  that  of  D.  D.  in  1842.  Dr.  Jenks  was
a  founder  of  the  American  oriental  society,  and
a  member  of  the  American  antiquarian  society,
of  Worcester,  Mass.,  of  which  he  was  four  years
corresponding  secretary  and  thirteen  senior  vice-
president.  In  1813  and  1863  he  delivered  and  pub-
lished addresses  before  the  society.  For  many
years  he  was  a  member  and  contributor  to  the
Massachusetts  historical  society,  an  honorary  mem-
ber of  the  New  England  historic  genealogical  so-
ciety from  its  beginning  in  1845,  and  five  years
chairman  of  its  publishing  committee.  A  portrait
of  Dr.  Jenks  hangs  in  the  library  of  the  society.
Besides  occasional  sermons  and  addresses  he  pub-
lished a  "Commentary  on  the  Bible,"  of  which
120,000  volumes  were  sold  (5  vols.,  Brattleboro,  Vt.,
1834 ;  6  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1851),  and  "  Explana-
tory Bible  Atlas  and  Scripture  Gazetteer  "  (Boston,
1849).  He  also  edited  other  works.  —  His  son,
Joseph  William,  educator,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,  23
Nov.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Newtonvilfe,  Mass.,  7  June,  1884,
was  graduated  from  Amherst  in  1829,  and  received
an  appointment  as  chaplain  and  professor  of  math-
ematics in  the  U.  S.  navy,  serving  on  the  "  Con-
cord "  under  Com.  Perry.  Resigning  his  commis-
sion, he  became  a  student  in  the  Royal  school  of
languages  in  Paris,  and  on  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  spent  seven  years  aiding  his  father  in  the
preparation  of  the  "  Comprehensive  Commentary  "
on  the  Bible.  He  was  principal  of  a  private  school
for  young  ladies  in  Boston  in  1850-'2,  and  in  1852
became  professor  of  languages  in  Urbana  uni-
versity, Ohio.  He  afterward  established  the  first
agricultural  paper  in  Illinois.  Mr.  Jenks  was  an  ex-
tensive writer  on  educational,  oriental,  and  general
topics,  and  a  linguist,  having  a  practical  knowl-
edge of  nearly  thirty  languages,  mostly  oriental.
He  was  a  life-member  of  the  American  oriental
society,  and  a  frequent  contributor  to  its  literature


JENNESS


JEQU1TINH0NHA


429


and  discussions.  He  edited  the  "  Rural  Poetry  of
the  English  Language  "  (Boston,  1856). — William's
grandson,  Henry  Fitch,  clergyman,  son  of  John
H.  Jenks,  b.  in  Boston,  17  Oct.,  1842,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1863,  and  at  the  divinity-school
in  1866.  In  1867  he  became  pastor  of  the  Unita-
rian church  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.,  and  has  since
been  pastor  of  churches  in  Charleston,  S.  O,  and
Lawrence  and  Canton,  Mass.  He  has  been  actively
connected  with  the  management  of  many  of  the
organized  charities  of  Boston,  is  a  member  of  the
American  oriental  society,  the  Massachusetts  his-
torical society,  and  many  similar  associations,  and
has  published  a  "  Catalogue  of  the  Boston  Public
Ijatin-School,  1635-1885,"  with  notes  and  an  intro-
ductory historical  sketch  (Boston,  1885).

JENNESS,  Benning  Wentworth,  senator,  b.
in  Deerfield,  N.  H,  14  July,  1806 ;  d.  in  Cleveland,
Ohio,  16  Nov.,  1879.  He  received  a  good  educa-
tion at  Bradford  academy,  Mass.,  and  in  1823
moved  to  Strafford,  N.  H.,  and  entered  into  mer-
cantile business,  which  he  successfully  pursued  for
thirty  years.  He  was  postmaster  fifteen  years,  and
repeatedly  represented  his  adopted  town  in  the
lower  branch  of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature.
He  held  the  office  of  sheriff  of  Strafford  county
five  years,  and  was  judge  of  probate  for  the  same
county  five  years.  Mr.  Jenness  received  appoint-
ment to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate  from  No-
vember, 1845,  till  June,  1846,  occasioned  by  the
promotion  of  Levi  Woodbury  to  the  U.  S.  supreme
court.  He  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  elec-
tion to  the  seat,  and  in  1846  was  the  unsuccessful
Democratic  candidate  for  congress.  In  1850  he
was  a  member  of  the  convention  to  revise  the  con-
stitution of  New  Hampshire.  In  1852  he  was  a
member  of  the  Democratic  national  convention
that  nominated  Franklin  Pierce.  In  1861  he  was
nominated  for  governor,  but  withdrew  in  favor  of
Gen.  George  Starke.  Judge  Jenness  moved  to
Cleveland,  Ohio,  to  attend  to  large  financial  and
lumber  interests  in  that  state  and  in  Michigan,
and  there  spent  his  remaining  years.

JENNINGS,  Jonathan,  statesman,  b.  in  Hun-
terdon county,  N.  J.,  about  1776 ;  d.  near  Charles-
town,  Clarke  co.,  Ind.,  26  July,  1834.  He  emigrated
to  the  northwest,  and  was  the  first  delegate  from
Indiana  territory  to  congress,  serving  from  1809
till  1816.  On  the  admission  of  that  territory  as  a
state  in  December,  1816,  he  was  elected  its  first  gov-
ernor, remaining  in  office  till  1822.  He  was  ap-
pointed Indian  commissioner  in  1818,  and  from
1822  till  1831  was  again  a  member  of  congress.

JENNINGS,  Samuel,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
England;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  in  1708.  He
came  from  Bucks  county,  England,  in  1680,  and
settled  at  Burlington,  N.  J.  Shortly  after  his  ar-
rival he  was  appointed  by  Byllynge  the  first  depu-
ty-governor of  West  Jersey,  in  which  office  he
served  until  1683,  when  he  was  chosen  governor
by  the  provincial  assembly.  Byllynge  denied  the
right  of  the  assembly  to  so  elect,  and  removed  Jen-
nings from  office.  At  a  later  date  he  took  up  his
residence  in  Philadelphia,  where,  in  1690-3,  he
was  justice  of  the  quorum  and  judge  of  the  county
court.  He  became  involved,  on  the  Quaker  side,  in
the  controversy  provoked  by  George  Keith,  Thomas
Budd,  and  others.  Out  of  this  controversy  grew
the  historical  pamphlet "  The  Plea  of  the  Innocent,"
issued  by  Keith  and  Budd  (1692),  in  which  Jennings
was  charged  with  "being  too  high  and  imperi-
ous in  worldly  courts,"  and  was  called  "  an  impu-
dent, presumptuous,  and  insolent  man."  Keith
and  Budd  were  arrested,  charged  with  "  defaming-
ly  accusing  "  Jennings,  on  which  charge  they  were


indicted,  tried,  convicted,  and  fined,  and  for  the

fmnting  of  the  pamphlet,  among  others  of  a  simi-
ar  character,  William  Bradford^  press  was  seized
by  the  authorities.  In  1694  Jennings  went  to
London,  where,  in  the  famous  trial,  lasting  six
days,  before  the  London  yearly  meeting,  on  the
appal  of  Keith  from  the  action  of  the  Philadel-
phia Quakers,  he  appeared  in  person  on  behalf  of
the  latter,  and  ably  confuted  the  statements  and
arguments  of  Keith.  While  in  London  he  wrote
and  published  "The  Case  Stated."  Soon  after-
ward he  returned  to  this  country  and  resumed  his
residence  at  Burlington,  where  he  subsequently
served  in  the  provincial  assembly  and  the  council  of
West  Jersey,  under  Lord  Cornbury.  He  was  chosen
speaker  of  the  assembly,  and  in  this  body  fearless-
ly opposed  the  arbitrary  rule  of  Cornbury,  and
wrote  the  address  to  the  crown  which  led  to  the
governor's  removal.  He  did  more  than  any  of  his
contemporaries  in  organizing  the  civil  government
of  West  Jersey.  He  was  a  noted  preacher  among
the  Quakers,  both  in  England  and  in  this  country,
and  in  his  work  made  many  pilgrimages  to  Massa-
chusetts, Long  Island,  New  York,  and  Maryland.

JENNINGS,  Samuel  Kennedy,  preacher,  b.  in
Essex  county,  N.  J.,  6  June,  1771 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  19  Oct.,  1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Rutgers
in  1790,  studied  and  practised  medicine  in  Penn-
sylvania, and  in  1794  became  an  itinerant  minister
in  the  Methodist  church,  being  ordained  elder  in
1814.  He  removed  to  Baltimore  in  1817,  was  one
of  the  prime  movers  in  the  introduction  of  lay  rep-
resentation in  the  conferences  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  and  finally  was  expelled  from
this  connection  and  organized  a  new  body  known
as  "  The  Methodist  Protestant  church."  He  was
distinguished  as  a  pulpit  orator  and  evangelist.

JENNINGS,  Thomas  Reed,  physician,  b.  in
Steubenville,  Ohio,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  Narragansett,
R.  I.,  7  July,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Washing-
ton college.  Pa.,  in  1823,  received  his  medical  edu-
cation in  Baltimore,  removed  to  Tennessee  in  1828,
and  during  the  Asiatic  cholera  epidemic  of  1833
established  a  large  practice.  In  1838  he  opened
dissecting-rooms  in  Nashville,  and  was  the  first
teacher  of  anatomy  in  the  state.  He  served  in  the
state  senate,  declined  a  nomination  to  congress,  in
1854  became  professor  of  the  institutes  of  medi-
cine and  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  University  of
Nashville,  and  in  1856  filled  the  chair  of  anatomy.

JENNISON,  Samuel,  antiquary,  b.  in  Brook-
field,  Mass.,  24  Feb.,  1788;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,
1  March,  1860.  He  went  to  reside  with  his  uncle
in  Worcester  in  1800,  and  was  connected  with  the
Worcester  bank,  first  as  accountant,  and  until
1846  as  cashier.  He  was  also  treasurer  of  the
Worcester  county  savings  institution  from  1828
till  1853.  Mr.  Jennison  was  for  many  years  con-
nected with  the  American  antiquarian  society  as
librarian  and  corresponding  secretary,  and  was  also
town-clerk  of  Worcester  and  treasurer  of  the  state
lunatic  asylum  from  1847  till  1857.  He  wrote
both  in  prose  and  verse,  and  collected  a  large  mass
of  valuable  biographical  material,  which  is  incor-
porated in  the  second  edition  of  Dr.  William  Al-
len's "  Biographical  Dictionarv  "  (Boston,  1832).

JEQUITINHONHA,  Francisco  G€  Acaiaba
de  Montesuma  (hay-ke-tin-yon'-yah),  Viscount  of,
Brazilian  statesman,  b.  in  Bahia,  23  March,  1794 ;
d.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1870.  His  father  intended  him
to  enter  the  religious  order  of  St.  Francis,  and
sent  him  to  the  convent  in  1810,  but  he  abandoned
the  cloister  six  months  afterward  and  proceeded  to
Portugal,  where  he  entered  the  University  of  Coim-
bra,  and  was  graduated  as  a  lawyer  in  1820. In


430


JEREMIE


JERVIS


1821  he  joined  a  secret  society  called  "  Keporative,"
or  "  Jardineiros,"  and  came  to  Brazil  to  establish
branches  of  it.  He  did  good  service  in  the  strug-
gle for  independence,  and  was  obliged  to  escape  to
Reconcavo,  where,  in  the  town  of  San  Francisco,
he  organized  a  provisional  government.  On  10
Dec,  1822,  he  was  commissioner  to  the  army  in
Bahia,  where  he  issued  the  "  Independente  Consti-
tucional "  until  the  authority  of  Pedro  1.  was  es-
tablished. In  1823  he  was  elected  to  the  assembly,
but  at  the  dissolution  of  that  body  he  was  impris-
oned, and,  having  escaped,  went  to  Europe.  In
1831,  when  Pedro  I.  abdicated,  he  returned  and
published  the  paper  "  lpiranga '"  in  opposition  to
the  absolutists,  and  the  pamphlet "  A  libertade  das
Republicas  "  against  the  federal  Republicans.  In
1837  he  was  a  minister  in  the  cabinet  of  the  cele-
brated Father  Diego  Feijo,  and  in  1838  he  was
elected  representative  to  the  assembly.  In  1840  he
was  appointed  special  envoy  to  England,  and  on
his  return  exerted  his  influence  to  found  the  Insti-
tute dos  advocados,  over  which  he  presided  till
1850,  when  he  was  called  again  to  the  assembly.
In  1851  he  was  elected  senator  of  the  empire,  and
in  1854  the  emperor  made  him  viscount  of  Jequi-
tinhonha.  From  1855  till  1862  he  constantly
favored  the  emancipation  of  the  negroes,  and  his
eloquence  was  much  feared  by  his  opponents.

JEREMIE,  French  soldier,  b.  about  1660;  d.
after  1714.  He  served  as  ensign  in  Fort  Bourbon,
or  Port  Nelson,  on  Hudson  bay,  when  it  was  at-
tacked by  an  English  fleet  in  1696.  When  the
English  attempted  a  landing  he  formed  an  ambus-
cade with  forty  f usileers  behind  bushes,  and  poured
such  well-directed  volleys  into  the  first  boats  that
advanced  as  to  compel  them  to  withdraw.  The
fort  was  afterward  forced  to  surrender,  and  Jere-
mie,  with  the  garrison,  was  taken  to  England,  con-
trary to  the  terms  of  capitulation.  He  returned
with  D'Iberville  to  Canada  in  1697,  and  remained
there  as  interpreter  and  lieutenant  under  several
commanders  till  1707,  when  he  went  to  Europe.
He  returned  in  1708,  was  appointed  commandant
of  Fort  Bourbon,  and  held  that  post  up  to  1714,
when  he  surrendered  it  to  the  English,  agreeably
to  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  Utrecht.  He  wrote
"Relation  du  Detroit  &  de  la  Baye  d'Hudson,  a.
Monsieur  .  .  .  par  Monsieur  Jeremie."  Charlevois
says  that  he  knew  the  author,  and  that  his  rela-
tion is  very  instructive  and  judiciously  written.

JEREZ,  Francisco  de  (hay-ray th'),  Spanish  his-
torian, b.  in  Seville  in  1504 ;  d.  there  about  1570.
He  came  in  his  early  youth  to  America  in  search  of
fortune,  and  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  some  ed-
ucation, as  he  confesses  that  he  received  47  marks
in  silver  and  1,110  gold  castellanos  for  his  services
in  arranging  the  contract  of  copartnership  between
Pizarro,  Almagro,  and  Luque,  10  March,  1526.  He
went  to  Peru  with  Pizarro  in  his  second  voyage
in  1531,  and  participated  in  the  conquest,  as  also
in  the  capture  of  Atahualpa.  He  was  severely
wounded  in  battle,  and  afterward  was  Pizarro's
secretary,  and  by  his  orders  collected  notes  of  all
historical  events  from  the  beginning  of  the  con-
quest till  the  death  of  Atahualpa.  He  seems  to
have  taken  good  care  to  enrich  himself,  and  when
in  1534  Hernando  Pizarro  was  sent  on  a  commis-
sion to  Spain,  Jerez  solicited  permission  to  go  with
him.  Of  his  later  life  there  is  but  little  trust-
worthy information,  except  that  he  founded  many
charities.  He  published  "  Verdadera  relation  de
la  conquista  del  Peru  y  provincia  del  Cuzco  "  (Se-
ville, 1540;  2d  ed.,  Salamanca,  1547).  This  is  re-
printed in  Barcia's  "  Collection  of  Primitive  His-
torians "  (1740). Giambattista  Ramusio  translated


the  work  into  Italian,  and  published  it  in  his  "  Col-
lection of  Voyages  "  (3  vols.,  1550-9) ;  and  there  is
also  a  German  translation  (1843).

JEROME,  Irene  Elizabeth,  artist,  b.  in  Elli-
cottville,  N.  Y.,  9  June,  1858.  She  is  a  daughter  of
the  Rev.  Charles  Jerome,  was  educated  in  Clinton
and  Cazenovia  seminaries,  and  in  1875  removed  to
Chicago,  where  she  spent  three  months  in  drawing
from  casts  in  the  Academy  of  design.  With  the
exception  of  this,  and  a  few  lessons  from  teachers
outside  the  academy,  she  is  self-taught  in  art.  In
1882  she  exhibited  eighteen  sketches  of  Colorado
scenery,  which  were  received  with  much  favor.
She  also  illustrated  and  arranged  "  One  Year's
Sketch-Book"  (Boston,  1885);  "The  Message  of
the  Blue-Bird"  (1886);  "Nature's  Hallelujah"
(1887) ;  and  "  A  Bunch  of  Violets  "  (1887).

JERVIS,  Sir  John,  Earl  of  St.  Vincent,  British
naval  officer,  b.  in  Meaford,  Staffordshire,  9  Jan.,
1734;  d.  15  March,  1823.  He  entered  the  navy  at
the  age  of  ten  years,  became  a  post-captain  in
1760,  was  made  a  C.  B.  in  1782,  and  in  this  year
accompanied  Lord  Howe  in  his  expedition  for  the
relief  of  Gibraltar.  He  became  rear-admiral  in
1787,  and  was  in  parliament  from  1782  until  the
beginning  of  the  French  revolution,  when  he
sailed  to  the  West  Indies  and  captured  Martinique,
Guadeloupe,  and  Saint  Lucia.  He  was  appointed
admiral  of  the  blue,  1  June,  1795,  and  on  14  Feb.,
1797,  off  Cape  St.  Vincent,  defeated  a  Spanish  fleet
which  was  nearly  twice  as  strong  as  his  own.  For
this  he  was  made  a  peer  by  the  title  of  Earl  of  St.
Vincent  and  Baron  Jervis  of  Meaford,  receiving  a
pension  of  £3,000.  He  was  first  lord  of  the  ad-
miralty from  1801  till  1804.

JERVIS,  John  Bloomfleld,  engineer,  b.  in
Huntington.  N.  Y.,  14  Dec,  1795 ;  d.  in  Rome,  N.  Y.,
12  Jan.,  1885.  When  about  three  years  of  age  he
removed  to  Rome,  N.  Y.,  where  he  afterward  re-
sided. He  assisted  in
the  construction  of  the
Erie  canal,  and  con-
ducted the  survey  and
construction  of  the
Delaware  and  Hudson
canal.  He  was  chief
engineer  of  the  Albany
and  Schenectady  and
the  Schenectady  and
Saratoga  railroads,
and  for  the  latter  road
invented  the  locomo-
tive truck,  the  princi-
ple of  which  is  still  in
use  on  all  locomotives.
The  first  locomotive
with  his  improvement
was  made  to  order  in
England  in  1832.  In  1833  Mr.  Jervis  was  appointed
chief  engineer  of  the  Chenango  canal,  and  origi-
nated on  this  work  the  method  of  providing  artifi-
cial reservoirs  for  the  supply  of  its  summit  with
water.  In  1835  he  was  commissioned  to  make  the
surveys  and  estimates  on  the  eastern  section  of  the
Erie  canal,  in  view  of  its  proposed  enlargement.
In  1836  he  was  the  engineer  in  charge  of  the  con-
struction of  the  Croton  aqueduct,  and  from  1846
till  1848  he  was  consulting  engineer  of  the  Boston
water-works.  In  1847  he  was  made  chief  engineer
of  the  Hudson  River  railroad,  which  office  he  re-
signed in  1849,  but  remained  connected  with  the
road  as  consulting  engineer  till  1850.  He  was  engi-
neer of  the  Chicago  and  Rock  Island  railroad  in
1851,  and  in  1854  its  president,  and  was  next  en-
gaged on  the  Pittsburg,  Fort  Wayne,  and  Chicago


cfyuJjyfc^


JESSUP


JEWELL


431


railroad  till  1866.  In  1868  he  was  made  one  of  the
trustees  of  the  Rome  merchant-iron  mill  company
upon  its  organization,  and  he  continued  in  office  till
his  death.  In  1855  he  received  the  Democratic
nomination  for  the  place  of  state  engineer,  but  was
defeated.  In  1878  Hamilton  college  conferred  on
Mr.  Jervis  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  is  the  author
of  a  "  Description  of  the  Croton  Aqueduct "  (New
York,  1842);  a  "Report  on  the  Hudson  River
Railroad"  (1846);  "Railway  Property"  (1859);
"  The  Construction  and  Management  of  Railways  "
(1861) ;  and  "  Labor  and  Capital "  (1877).

JESSUP,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Southampton,
N.  Y.,21  June,  1797;  d.  in  Montrose,  Pa.,  11  Sept.,
1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1815,  removed
to  Montrose  in  1818,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
there.  From  1838  till  1851  he  was  presiding  judge
of  the  11th  judicial  district  of  Pennsylvania,  and
in  April,  1861,  was  one  of  the  committee  of  three
that  was  sent  by  the  governors  of  Pennsylvania,
New  York,  and  Ohio  to  confer  with  President
Lincoln  relative  to  raising  75,000  men.  He  was  a
pioneer  in  the  cause  of  education  and  temperance
in  northern  Pennsylvania,  and  the  chief  founder  of
the  County  agricultural  society.  In  1848  Hamilton
college  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D. — His
son,  Henry  Harris,  missionary,  b.  in  Montrose,
Pa.,  19  April,  1832,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1851,
and  at  Union  theological  seminary  in  1855,  and
was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  November,  1855.  He  was  a  missionary  at
Tripoli  and  Syria  in  1856-'60,  and  since  then  has
been  stationed  at  Beirut.  He  was  moderator  of
the  general  assembly  that  met  at  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,
in  1879.  The  University  of  New  York  and  Prince-
ton conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1865.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Mohammedan  Missionary
Problem  "  (Philadelphia,  1879),  and  "  Women  of
the  Arabs"  (New  York,  1873).  —  Another  son,
Samuel,  missionary,  b.  in  Montrose,  Pa.,  21  Dec,
1833,  after  engaging  for  a  time  in  mercantile  pur-
suits, entered  Yale,  and  then  Union  theological
seminary,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1861.  In
1862  he  was  ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  Mon-
trose, and  has  since  been  engaged  in  mission  work
in  Syria,  having  charge  of  the  mission  printing  es-
tablishment and  publishing  house  in  that  city.  He
is  the  author  of  "  Husn  Sulayman  "  (Palestine  ex-
ploration society,  2d  statement,  1873).

JESUP,  Morris  Ketchum,  banker,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  21  June,  1830.  At  an  early  age  he
settled  as  a  merchant  in  New  York  city,  and  later
engaged  in  the  banking  business.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Five  Points  house  of  industry  in  1870,
of  the  Young  men's  Christian  association  in  1871-'5,
and  later  became  vice-president  of  the  city  mission
and  manager  of  the  Presbyterian  hospital.  For
several  years  he  has  also  been  president  of  the
New  York  museum  of  natural  history.  His  dona-
tions to  the  latter  institution  have  been  frequent
and  valuable,  and  he  gave  a  handsome  home  in  the
Bowery  for  newsboys.

JESUP,  Thomas  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1788 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  10  June,
1860.  He  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  of  infantry
m  the  U.  S.  army  in  1808,  and  in  the  beginning  of
the  war  of  1812  served  as  adjutant-general  to
Gen.  William  Hull.  He  was  promoted  captain  in
January,  1813,  major  on  6  April,  1813,  lieutenant-
colonel  by  brevet  for  bravery  at  the  battle  of
Chippewa  on  5  July,  1814,  and  colonel  by  brevet
in  the  same  month  for  services  at  the  battle  of
Niagara,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  be-
came a  full  lieutenant-colonel  on  30  April,  1817:
adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  on  27


March,  1818,  and  quartermaster-general,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  on  8  May,  1818.  On  8
May,  1828,  he  received  the  brevet  of  major-general
for  ten  years'  faithful  service  in  the  same  rank.  On
20  May,  1836,  he  assumed  command  of  the  army
in  the  Creek  nation,  and  on  8  Dec.  of  the  same
year  he  succeeded  Gen.  Richard  K.  Call  in  the
command  of  the  army  in  Florida.  On  24  Jan..
1838,  he  was  wounded  in  an  action  with  the  Semi-
noles  at  Jupiter  inlet,  after  which  he  was  relieved
by  Col.  Zachary  Taylor.

JETER,  Jeremiah  Bell,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bed-
ford county.  Va.,  18  July,  1802 ;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  25  Feb.,  1880.  He  began  to  preach  in  1822,
and  for  four  years  travelled  through  Virginia  as  a
missionary  exhorter.  He  was  ordained  as  a  Baptist
minister  on  4  May,  1824,  and  became  pastor  of  two
churches  in  Campbell  county  in  1826.  He  held
various  pastorates  till  1835,  when  he  took  charge
of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Richmond,  Va.,  with
which  he  remained  connected  for  nearly  fourteen
years.  In  1849  he  accepted  a  pastorate  in  St.
Louis,  but  in  1852  returned  to  Richmond,  and  be-
came pastor  of  the  Grace  street  church.  After  the
division  of  the  denomination,  he  presided  over  the
southern  Baptist  conventions  for  several  years.
He  was  for  some  time  president  of  Richmond  col-
lege, and  held  the  offices  of  president  of  the  South-
ern foreign  missionary  board,  and  president  of  the
trustees  of  the  Baptist  theological  seminary  at
Louisville,  Ky.  At  the  instance  of  the  board  of
missions  he  visited  Italy  to  supervise  the  mission-
ary work  in  that  country,  and  to  provide  a  chapel
in  Rome.  About  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  be-
came editor  of  the  "  Religious  Herald,"  published
in  Richmond.  He  was  distinguished  as  a  preacher
and  controversialist,  and  successful  as  an  author.
Among  his  published  works  are  a  "  Life  of  Mrs.
Henrietta  Shuck,  the  first  American  Female  Mis-
sionary to  China;  "Memoir  of  the  Rev.  Andrew
Broaddus"  (1850) :  "  Campbellism  Examined  "  (New
York,  1854);  "Campbellism  Re-Examined";  "The
Christian  Mirror,  or  a  Delineation  of  Seventeen
Classes  of  Christians "  (Charleston,  1856) ;  "  The
Seal  of  Heaven"  (New  York,  1871);  "The  Life  of
the  Rev.  Daniel  Witt";  and  "Recollections  of  a
Long  Life."  With  the  Rev.  Richard  Fuller  he
compiled  "The  Psalmist,"  a  book  of  hymns  that
came  into  general  use  in  the  Baptist  congrega-
tions of  the  United  States,  and  was  introduced  in
British  North  America  and  in  England.  See  "  The
Life  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  J.  B.  Jeter,"  by  the  Rev.
William  E.  Hatcher  (Baltimore).

JEWELL,  James  Stewart,  phvsician,  b.  near
Galena,  111.,  8  Sept.,  1837;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  19
April,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Chicago  medical
college  in  1860,  practised  in  Williamson  county,
111.,  for  two  years,  and  then  settled  in  Chicago,
where  he  acquired  a  reputation  as  a  specialist  in
nervous  and  mental  diseases.  During  the  civil  war
he  was  a  contract  surgeon  in  Gen.  Sherman's  com-
mand. He  was  professor  of  anatomy  in  Chicago
medical  college  from  1864  till  1869,  and  of  nervous
and  mental  diseases  from  1872  till  his  death.  In
1874  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Quarterly
Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease."

JEWELL,  Marshall,  postmaster-general,  b.
in  Winchester,  N.  H.,  20  Oct.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  10  Feb.,  1883.  He  was  descended  in
the  seventh  generation  from  Thomas  Jewell,  an
Englishman,  who  received  a  grant  of  land  at  North
Wollaston,  near  Quincy,  Mass.,  in  1639.  Marshall's
father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather  were
tanners.  In  1845  his  father,  Pliny  Jewell,  who  had
been  an  active  Whig  in  New  Hampshire  and  a


432


JEWELL


JEWETT


member  of  the  legislature,  removed  to  Hartford
and  established  the  leather-belting  business.  The
son  learned  the  trade  of  a  tanner  under  his  father's
supervision,  and  in  1847  went  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
where  he  also  learned  the  art  of  telegraphy,  then
in  its  infancy.  Eor  three  years  he  followed  this
calling  in  Ohio,  Tennessee,  Mississippi,  and  the
southwestern  states.  In  1850,  his  father's  business
having  increased,  Mr.  Jewell  was  recalled  to  Hart-
ford, becoming  a  partner  of  his  father  and  brothers,
and  remaining  so  until  his  death.  It  was  very
largely  through  his  energy  and  business  capacity
that  the  business  grew  into  its  subsequent  impor-
tance. He  was  among  the  earliest  members  of  the
Republican  party  in  Connecticut.  In  1868  he  was
a  candidate  for  the  state  senate,  without  success,
and  was  also  nominated  for  governor  of  Connecti-
cut, but  was  defeated  by  a  small  majority. In

1869  he  was  again  nominated,  and  was  elected. In

1870  he  was  defeated  by  James  E.  English,  but  he
was  again  elected  in  1871  and  1872.  Mr.  Jewell's
administration  of  the  state  government  was  marked
by  various  legislative  and  executive  reforms.
Among  these  were  the  reorganization  of  the  state
militia,  a  change  in  the  laws  concerning  the  mar-
ried woman's  right  to  property,  the  laws  of  divorce,
the  government  of  Yale  college,  biennial  elections,
and  the  erection  of  the  new  state-house  at  Hart-
ford. He  was  appointed  minister  to  Russia  in
1873,  and  during  his  mission  negotiated  a  conven-
tion protecting  trade-marks.  It  was  due  to  the
investigations  of  Mr.  Jewell,  and  the  information
that  came  from  his  knowledge  of  the  leather  in-
dustry, that  the  method  known  as  the  Russian  pro-
cess of  tanning  was  introduced  into  the  United
States.  In  August,  1874,  Mr.  Jewell  was  recalled
from  his  mission  and  made  postmaster-general.
He  gave  Benjamin  H.  Bristow  his  warm  support
in  the  latter's  whiskey  ring  prosecutions,  and  was
also  favorable  to  Mr.  Bristow's  aspirations  for  the
presidency.  When  Mr.  Bristow  left  the  cabinet,
Mr.  Jewell  also  resigned.  It  was  the  policy  adopt-
ed by  Mr.  Jewell  as  postmaster-general,  which
brought  him  into  antagonism  with  certain  ele-
ments in  both  parties,  that  led  to  the  star-route
trials,  and  many  wholesome  reforms  in  the  postal
system.  Mr.  Jewell's  return  to  Connecticut  was
made  the  occasion  of  public  demonstrations,  espe-
cially in  Hartford.  He  gave  Mr.  Hayes  his  warm
support,  and  in  1879,  when  he  became  a  candidate
for  the  senate,  was  defeated  by  only  two  votes  in
the  caucus.  In  1880,  when  Gen.  Grant  was  a  can-
didate for  nomination,  Mr.  Jewell  declined  to  take
an  active  part  in  the  convention,  for  the  reason
that  while  not  in  favor  of  Gen.  Grant's  candidature,
he  would  not,  having  sat  in  his  cabinet,  openly  op-
pose him.  Gen.  Garfield  was  nominated,  and  Mr.
Jewell  was  made  chairman  of  the  National  Repub-
lican committee,  conducting  the  canvass  that  re-
sulted in  Garfield's  election.  This  was  Mr.  Jewell's
last  public  service.  The  labors  of  the  canvass
made  serious  inroads  upon  his  health,  and,  return-
ing to  Hartford,  he  gave  his  attention  to  the  busi-
ness which  his  father  had  founded,  and  in  which
he  was  associated  with  his  brothers,  Pliny,  Lyman,
and  Charles. — His  elder  brother,  Harvey,  b.  in
Winchester,  N.  H.,  26  May,  1820 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  8  Dec,  1881.  As  a  boy  Harvey  learned  the
tanning  trade  with  his  father,  but  afterward  en-
tered Dartmouth  college,  where  he  graduated  in
1844.  He  then  taught  in  Boston,  at  the  same
time  studied  law  with  Lyman  Mason,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  1  Oct.,  1847.  Mr.  Jewell's  special
faculty  was  the  drafting  of  contracts,  charters  of
incorporation,  and  preparing  causes  for  trial. He


gave  special  attention  to  maritime  law.  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  politics  of  Massachusetts  as
an  old  Whig,  and  later  as  a  Republican.  He  was
a  member  of  the  municipal  councils  of  Boston  in
1851  and  1852,  in  1861  was  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture of  Massachusetts  and  served  for  several  terms,
during  four  of  which  he  was  speaker  of  the  house.
In  1871  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  governorship  of
Massachusetts.  Gen.  Butler  was  also  a  formidable
candidate,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  defeating  the
latter,  Mr.  Jewell  withdrew  from  the  canvass.  In
1875  President  Grant  appointed  Mr.  Jewell  judge
of  the  court  of  commissioners  of  Alabama  claims,
which  office  he  held  two  years,  when  he  returned
to  Boston  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1875.

JEWETT,  Isaac  Appleton,  author,  b.  in  Bur-
lington, Vt.,  17  Oct.,  1808 :  d.  in  Keene,  N.  H.,  14
Jan.,  1853.  He  svas  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1830,
studied  law,  and  practised  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and
afterward  in  New  Orleans,  La.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Passages  in  Foreign  Travel "  (Boston,  1838),
and  "  The  Appleton  Memorial"  (1850).

JEWETT,  John  Punchard,  publisher,  b.  in
Lebanon,  Me.,  16  Aug.,  1814;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,
14  May,  1884.  He  was  employed  when  a  boy  in  a
book-store  and  bindery  in  Salem,  Mass.,  became  a
partner  in  the  business,  and  about  1849  established
himself  in  Boston.  He  was  a  member  in  1835  of
the  first  anti-slavery  society  in  New  England,  and
wrote  many  controversial  articles  for  the  news-
papers. His  firm  brought  out  in  1852  the  first  edi-
tion of  Mrs.  Stowe's  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."  They
also  published  Maria  S.  Cummins's  "  Lamplighter,"
and  other  popular  works.  He  was  a  personal  friend
of  Charles  Sumner,  Wendell  Phillips,  Gov.  John
A.  Andrew,  and  John  A.  Whittier.  After  losing
his  property  in  the  panic  of  1857,  he  went  to  Eu-
rope in  1862  in  order  to  introduce  a  patent,  and
there  became  interested  in  a  process  of  making  lu-
cifer-matches,  and  on  his  return  established  a  fac-
tory in  Roxbury,  Mass.  In  1867  he  removed  to
New  York  city. — His  brother,  Charles  Coffin,  bib-
liographer, b.  in  Lebanon,  Me.,  12  Aug.,  1816 ;  d.
in  Braintree,  Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1868,  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1835,  taught  two  years  in  Uxbridge  acad-
emy, and  studied  theology  at  Andover,  where  he
was  for  a  time  librarian  of  the  seminary,  and  pre-
pared a  catalogue  of  the  library.  He  intended  to
become  a  missionary  in  the  east,  and  while  at  An-
dover made  a  special  study  of  oriental  languages
and  antiquities.  After  graduation,  in  1840,  he
took  charge  of  an  academy  in  Wrentham,  Mass.
He  was  appointed  librarian  of  Brown  university
in  1841,  rearranged  and  catalogued  the  library,  and
in  1843  became  professor  of  modern  languages.
The  catalogue,  published  in  1843,  attracted  much
attention.  He  went  to  Europe  for  study,  and  to
inspect  the  library  system  of  other  countries,  pur-
chased many  books  for  the  department  of  Greek
and  Latin  literature,  also  the  works  of  classical
French,  German,  and  Italian  authors,  and  after  his
return  filled  the  two  offices  till  1848,  when  he  be-
came librarian  and  assistant  secretary  of  the  newly
organized  Smithsonian  institution.  He  prepared
an  extended  report  of  the  public  libraries  of  the
United  States,  which  was  published  as  an  appendix
to  the  annual  report  of  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion for  1850.  In  advocating  the  policy  of  devot-
ing a  large  part  of  the  income  of  the  institution  to
library  purposes,  he  took  issue  with  Prof.  Henry,
the  secretary,  and  other  officers.  He  perfected  a
system  of  cataloguing  by  stereotyping  separately
the  title  of  each  work  in  a  library.  When  the
building  of  the  Boston  public  library  was  com-


JEWETT

pleted  in  1858,  he  was  selected  to  be  its  superin-
tendent, and  filled  that  post  until  his  death.  The
catalogues  that  he  prepared  and  the  rules  that  he
suggested  served  as  models  of  library  economy
throughout  the  United  States.  Besides  the  works
mentioned  above,  he  was  the  author  of  a  pamphlet
entitled  "  Facts  and  Considerations  relative  to  Du-
ties on  Books  "  (1846) :  "  Notices  of  Public  Libra-
ries in  the  United  States"  (Washington,  1854);
and  a  work  "  On  the  Construction  of  Catalogues  of
Libraries  and  their  Publication  by  Means  of  Sepa-
rate Stereotyped  Titles,  with  Rules  and  Examples  "
(1852). — Another  brother,  George  Baker,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Lebanon.  Me.,  11  Sept.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  9  June,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in
1840.  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1842.
He  was  a  tutor  in  Amherst  during  the  next  two
years,  and  then  taught  in  private  schools  at  Salem
and  Lowell  till  1850,  when  he  was  chosen  profes-
sor of  Latin  and  modern  languages  at  Amherst.  On
24  May,  1855,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  Congre-
gational church  at  Nashua,  N.  fl..  but,  in  conse-
quence of  a  railroad  accident,  by  which  he  lost  a
leg,  on  15  April,  1856,  left  his  charge.  Finding
various  kinds  of  artificial  legs  unsatisfactory,  he
invented  one  of  novel  design,  and  engaged  in  its
manufacture  at  Salem.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Baptism  versus  Immersion"  (3d  ed.,  Salem,  1869) ;
I A  Critique  on  the  Greek  Text  of  the  New  Testa-
ment as  edited  by  the  American  Bible  Union "
(Salem,  1869) ;  made  "  Translation  of  the  Notes  of
Wendell's  Edition  of  Farrar's  '  Life  of  Christ ' "
(Albany) ;  edited  the  third  and  fourth  volumes  of
Punchard  s  "  History  of  Congregationalism,'  com-
prising the  portions  of  the  work  relating  to  Ameri-
can Congregationalism  (Boston,  1880-'l) ;  and  as-
sisted in  preparing  J.  Henry  Thayer's  "  Greek-
English  Lexicon  of  the  New  Testament"  (New
York,  1886).

JEWETT,  Luther,  clergyman,  b.  in  Canter-
bury, Conn.,  24  Dec,  1772 ;  d.  in  St.  Johnsburv,
Vt.*  8  March,  1860.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1795,  studied  divinity  and  afterward
medicine,  was  graduated  at  the  Dartmouth  medi-
cal school  in  1810,  and  practised  at  Putney,  Vt.
He  was  for  fifteen  years  a  representative  in  the
state  legislature,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Federalist,  serving  from  4  Dec.,  1815,  to  3  March,
1817.  He  removed  to  St.  Johnsburv,  and  was  set-
tled as  pastor  of  a  church  at  Newbury,  Vt.,  in  1821.
In  1828  he  returned  to  St.  Johnsburv,  and  began
the  publication  of  the  "  Farmer's  Herald,"  and  in
1830  of  the  "  Freemason's  Friend,"  both  of  which
he  edited  till  1832.— His  nephew,  Milo  Parker,
educator,  b.  in  St.  Johnsburv,  Vt.,  27  April,  1808 ;
d.  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  9  June,  1882,  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1828,  taught  for  a  year,  began
the  study  of  law,  and  then  entered  Andover  theo-
logical seminary,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1833.
During  his  vacations  he  lectured  on  the  common-
school  system  in  various  parts  of  New  England.
On  his  graduation  he  accepted  a  professorship  in
the  newly  founded  Marietta  college.  A  year  or
two  after  arriving  in  Ohio  he  took  part  in  an  edu-
cational convention  which  led  to  the  establish-
ment of  the  common-school  system  of  that  state.
Having  adopted  Baptist  doctrines,  he  resigned  his
professorship  of  rhetoric  and  political  economy  in
1838,  and  in  January  of  the  following  year  founded
the  Judson  female  institute  in  Marion,  Ala.  He
also  conducted  the  "Alabama  Baptist."  After
managing  his school  with success  for  seventeen

fears,  he  returned  to  the  north  in  1855,  and  estab-
ished  a  seminary  for  girls  at  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Rochester
vol.  in. — 28


JEWETT


433


university  in  1861.  He  suggested  to  Matthew
Vassar  the  plan  of  an  endowed  institution  for  the
higher  education  of  women,  and,  when  Vassar  col-
lege was  established,  was  chosen  its  first  president
in  1862.  The  same  year  he  visited  the  universities
and  libraries  of  Europe,  of  which  he  gave  a  report
on  his  return.  He  also  made  a  report  on  the  or-
ganization of  Vassar  college.  He  resigned  the
presidency  of  the  college  in  1864,  and  in  1867
settled  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  where  he  devoted  him-
self to  educational,  philanthropic,  and  religious  ob-
jects. He  published  a  short  treatise  on  "  Baptism  "
(Boston,  1840) ;  also  "  Relations  of  Boards  of  Health
and  Intemperance "  (1874) ;  " The  Model  Academy"
(1875) ;  and  other  pamphlets.

JEWETT,  Susan  W.,  poet.  She  married  Charles
A.  Jewett,  an  engraver,  resided  in  Cincinnati,  and
between  1840  and  1857  contributed  frequently  to
periodicals  and  newspapers.  In  1847  she  conducted
a  juvenile  monthly  magazine,  called  the  "  Youth's
Visitor."  She  was  the  author  of  "  The  Old  Corner
Cupboard,"  containing  poems  and  prose  sketches
of  everv-dav  life  (Cincinnati,  1856).

JEWETT,  Theodore  Herman,  physician,  b.
in  South  Berwick,  Me.,  24  March,  1815 ;  d.  in
Crawford  Notch.  White  Mountains,  N.  H,  20
Sept.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in
1834,  and  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1840.  He
was  professor  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women
and  children  in  the  medical  department  of  Bow-
doin, consulting  surgeon  to  the  Maine  general
hospital,  surgeon  of  the  first  Maine  district  during
the  civil  war,  and  president  of  the  Maine  medical
society,  and  made  many  important  contributions
to  current  medical  literature. — His  daughter,
Sarah  Orne,  author,  b.  in  South  Berwick,  Me.,  3
Sept.,  1849.  was  educated  at  home  and  in  the  Ber-
wick academy,  and  has  travelled  extensively  in
Europe,  Canada,  and  the  United  States.  In  addi-
tion to  contributions  to  periodicals,  she  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Deephaven  "  (Boston,  1877) ;  "  Plav-Davs"
(1878);  "  Old  Friends  and  New  "  (1880) ;  "Countrv
Bv-Wavs"  (1881):  '-The  Mate  of  the  Davlight"
(1883); ""A  Countrv  Doctor"  (1884);  "A"  Marsh
Island"  (1885);  "A  White  Heron"  (1886);  and
"  The  Storv  of  the  Normans  "  (New  York.  1887).

JEWETT,  Thomas  L.,  railroad  president,  b.  in
Maryland  about  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  No-
vember, 1875.  He  was  a  practising  lawyer  in  Steu-
benville,  Ohio,  and  was  at  one  time  a  judge  in  a
state  court,  but  became  interested  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  Pan-Handle  railroad,  and  was  chosen
its  president.  As  Virginia  was  unwilling  to  grant
a  charter  for  a  connecting-line  across  her  territory
for  the  Pennsylvania  central  railroad,  Judge  Jewett
sought  the  interposition  of  the  government  at  Wash-
ington. When  a  system  of  railroad  government  by
commissioners  that  were  nominated  by  the  com-
panies was  in  contemplation,  he  was  selected  as  one
of  the  commissioners.  He  was  long  well  known  as
a  railroad  manager  in  Ohio,  and  held  important
offices  in  various  companies. — His  brother.  Hugh
J.,  railroad  president,  b.  in  Deer  Creek,  Harford
co.,  Md.,  about  1812.  He  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  in  1840  removed  to  St.
Clairsville,  Ohio,  where  he  began  practising  his
profession.  In  1848  he  settled  in  Zanesville,  Ohio,
and  soon  became  noted  for  his  skill  in  cases  in-
volving financial  questions.  He  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  Muskingum  branch  of  the  Ohio  state
bank  in  1852,  a  presidential  elector  the  same  year,
and  a  state  senator  in  1853,  and  was  soon  after  ap-
pointed U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  southern  dis-
trict of  Ohio.  His  experience  as  a  railroad  finan-
cier began  in  1855,  when  he  was  elected  a  director


434


JICOTENCAL


JIMENEZ PEREZ


of  the  Central  Ohio  railroad  company,  becoming
vice-president  and  general  manager  in  1856  and
president  in  1857.  In  1860  he  was  nominated  for
member  of  congress,  in  1861  for  governor  of  Ohio,
and  in  1863  for  U.  S.  senator,  but  was  defeated  in
each  election.  He  was  returned  to  the  state  senate
in  1867,  and  elected  a  member  of  congress  in  1872.
His  success  as  a  railroad  manager  led  to  his  elec-
tion to  the  presidency  of  the  Little  Miami,  Colum-
bus, and  Xenia  railroad  company  in  1869,  and
shortly  afterward  to  that  of  the  Cincinnati  and
Muskingum  valley  railroad  company.  On  remov-
ing to  Columbus  he  was  elected  vice-president  of
the  Pittsburg,  Cincinnati,  and  St.  Louis  railroad
company.  In  1871  he  retired  from  active  railroad
management,  and  was  appointed  general  counsel
for  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  company.  Two  years
later  he  resigned  his  seat  in  congress  to  accept  the
receivership  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  railroad
company,  to  which  he  had  agreed  to,  devote  his
whole  time  for  a  period  of  ten  years.  He  succeeded
in  extricating  the  discredited  and  bankrupt  cor-
poration from  its  embarrassments,  secured  its  re-
lease from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts,  and  be-
came president  of  the  reorganized  board.  On  the
expiration  of  his  ten  years  contract  he  retired  to
his  home  in  Zanesville,  Ohio,  being  succeeded  in
the  presidency  of  the  newly  named  New  York,
Lake  Erie,  and  Western  railroad  company  by  John
King.  Mr.  Jewett's  name  was  mentioned  as  a  can-
didate for  the  presidential  nomination  by  the
Democratic  party  in  1880.

JICOTENCAL,  or  XICOTENCATL  (he-co-ten'-
cal),  Tlascalan  warrior,  b.  in  Tlascala  in  1486;  d.
in  Texcoco  in  May,  1521.  When  Hernando  Cortes
(q.  v.)  approached  the  republic  of  Tlascala  the  popu-
lar assembly  and  the  majority  of  the  senate,  headed
by  Xicotencatl's  father,  of  the  same  name,  an  aged
and  blind  senator,  who  was  much  esteemed  for  his
wise  counsels,  voted  for  resistance,  and  according-
ly, when  Cortes  passed  the  frontier  of  the  repub-
lic, 1  Sept.,  he  found  himself  confronted  by  part  of
the  Tlascalan  army,  which  he  defeated  after  a  pro-
longed fight.  The  next  day,  however,  the  main
army,  under  command  of  the  general-in-chief,
young  Xicotencatl,  opposed  the  conqueror's  prog-
ress, and  the  latter  had  to  fight  against  an  army,
the  strength  of  which  is  set  down  by  different  his-
torians at  from  30,000  to  100,000.  The  superior
arms  and  discipline  of  the  Spaniards  won  the  vic-
tory, but  they  were  so  exhausted  that  they  could
not  pursue  the  enemy,  and  sent  a  renewed  em-
bassy with  offers  of  peace.  Xicotencatl.  who  had
collected  a  stronger  army  on  the  road  to  Tlascala,
answered  that  the  Spaniards  would  enter  the  city
only  on  their  way  to  the  sacrificial  stone.  So,  af-
ter preparing  his  little  army  and  auxiliary  Indian
force,  Cortes  marched  on  5  Sept.  against  the  ene-
my, whose  number,  in  his  letter  to  the  emperor,  he
estimated  at  150,000,  while  Bernal  Diaz  puts  it  at
50,000,  and  a  fierce  battle  followed,  where  again
the  firearms  of  the  invaders  won  the  victory,  and
Xicotencatl  was  compelled  to  retreat.  An  attempt
to  surprise  the  Spanish  camp  by  night  was  also  re-
pulsed by  the  vigilance  of  the  sentries,  and  the  sen-
ate decided  to  send  messengers  of  peace  to  Cortes,
with  provisions  for  his  exhausted  forces,  while  Xi-
cotencatl received  orders  to  make  another  night
attack ;  but  Cortes,  warned  by  Marina,  his  Indian
mistress,  returned  the  ambassadors  with  their
hands  cut  off  and  the  message  that  he  was  ready
to  defeat  them  again  either  by  night  or  day.  Thor-
oughly alarmed,  the  Tlascalan  senate,  notwith-
standing old  Xicotencatl's  opposition,  resolved  to
accept  peace,  and  ordered  the  younger  Xicotencatl


to  cease  resistance.  As  he  refused  to  obey  he  was
deposed,  and  Cortes,  entering  Tlascala  on  2  Sept.,
received  the  submission  of  the  republic.  He  was
accompanied  on  his  march  to  Cholula  and  Mexico
by  a  strong  auxiliary  army  of  Tlascala;  but  young
Xicotencatl  refused  to  take  command,  remaining
in  his  country.  After  the  retreat  of  Cortes  from
Mexico,  1  July,  1520,  and  the  battle  of  Otumba,  he
returned  to  Tlascala  on  9  July  to  rally  his  forces,
and  was  favorably  received  by  the  senate.  When
Cortes  marched  the  second  time  against  Mexico,
28  Dec,  1520,  he  was  accompanied  by  an  auxiliary
Tlascalan  army  of  10,000  men,  this  time  under
command  of  Xicotencatl.  But  when  the  second
attack  on  Mexico  was  made,  Xicotencatl,  fearing
for  the  independence  of  his  country  after  the  final
subjugation  of  the  Aztec  empire,  conspired  against
the  Spaniards,  and,  being  denounced  by  the  second
in  command,  was  obliged  to  fly.  Cortes  sent  forces
in  pursuit,  under  Cristoval  de  Olid,  and  Xicoten-
catl was  captured  near  Texcoco.  He  was  brought
to  that  city,  and,  after  a  short  trial,  hanged  in  the
market-place  in  the  presence  of  the  Indian  allies.
The  senate  of  Tlascala  approved  his  execution,  and
even  his  aged  father  was  forced  to  vote  for  it,  but
he  died  of  grief  during  the  following  year.

JIMENEZ,  Jesus  (he-may'-neth),  Central
American  statesman,  b.  in  San  Jose  de  Costa  Rica
about  1820.  He  received  his  education  in  his
native  city,  and  began  his  political  career  in  early
life,  being  a  minister  under  President  Mora.  In
1863  he  was  chosen  president  of  Costa  Rica.  Dur-
ing his  administration  he  pursued  a  conciliatory
policy,  and  founded  the  College  of  San  Isidro  in
Cartago.  He  was  succeeded,  in  1866,  by  Dr.  Jose
Maria  Castro,  who  left  the  presidency  at  the  end  of

1868,  and  the  country  was  in  danger  of  a  revolu-
tion. Jimenez  was  then  called  by  a  great  majority
of  the  people  to  assume  the  executive  office,  with
power  to  call  a  constituent  assembly.  He  accord-
ingly placed  himself  at  the  head  of  affairs,  and
convoked  the  assembly,  to  meet  on  1  Jan.,  sum-
moning the  people  also  to  choose  the  next  presi-
dent, together  with  senators  and  representatives  for
the  coming  constitutional  term,  beginning  1  May,

1869.  The  new  constitution  was  framed  on  18  Feb.,
and  promulgated  in  April,  1869,  and  Jimenez  was
elected  president.  Afterward,  when  congress  re-
fused to  pass  a  railroad  bill,  Jimenez  abruptly  re-
signed his  office,  and  left  the  capital ;  but  his  resig-
nation was  not  accepted,  and  he  was  induced  to  re-
turn. Subsequently,  on  account  of  prevailing  party
violence,  congress  decreed  a  suspension  of  the  con-
stitution, but  on  27  April,  1870,  a  revolution  began,
the  president  was  seized,  and  for  a  day  kept  a  pris-
oner. Bruno  Carranza  was  then  proclaimed  pro-
visional president,  and  assumed  the  duties  on  the
28th,  the  ex-president  and  his  minister  being  de-
tained to  answer  charges  that  would  be  preferred
against  them.  Jimenez  was  allowed  to  reside  in
Cartago  under  surveillance,  but  fearing  for  his  life,
as  he  alleged,  escaped.  On  10  Oct.,  1871,  the  dic-
tator Guardia  gave  amnesty  to  Jimenez,  and,  re-
turning to  his  country,  the  latter  devoted  himself
to  the  promotion  of  improvements  in  public  edu-
cation, without  taking  an  active  part  in  politics.

JIMENEZ  PEREZ,  Manuel  (he-may'-neth),
Spanish  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Soto,  Spain,  in  1720;  d.
in  Porto  Rico  in  1781.  He  was  a  Benedictine
monk  of  the  monastery  of  Santa  Maria  la  Real,  was
elected  bishop  of  Porto  Rico  in  1770,  and  took  pos-
session of  his  cathedral,  25  May,  1772.  He  made
his  pastoral  visits  to  the  islands  and  adjacent  prov-
inces as  far  as  the  Orinoco,  performing  many  acts  of
charity. Bishop  Jimenez  repaired  several  churches,


JOGUES


JOGUES


435


erected,  besides  many  parochial  edifices,  the  hos-
pital "  Nuestra  Senora  de  la  Concepcion  "  in  the
city  of  Saint  John,  with  a  capacity  of  500  beds,
and  rebuilt  the  episcopal  palace,  that  had  lain
many  years  in  ruins,  at  his  own  expense.  He
never  abandoned  the  habits  and  methods  of  his
early  life,  observing  them  as  rigorously  as  when  he
was  an  inmate  of  the  cloister.  He  performed  in-
numerable works  of  charity,  setting  apart  Satur-
day of  each  week  for  the  distribution  of  alms,  and
frequently  giving  so  freely  as  to  stint  himself  and
family.  He  left  many  important  manuscript  docu-
ments that  are  preserved  in  the  ecclesiastical  ar-
chives of  Porto  Rico,  and  have  greatly  aided  in
historical  researches  regarding  the  West  Indies.

JOGUES,  Isaac,  French  missionary,  b.  in  Or-
leans, Prance,  10  Jan.,  1607 :  d.  in  Ossernenon,  near
what  is  now  Auriesville,  Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,
18  Oct.,  1646.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Jesuit
order  in  October,  1624,  was  ordained  priest  in  1636.
and  went  in  the  same  year  to  Canada,  where  he  was
sent  to  labor  among  the  Hurons  at  Ihonatiria.  In
1638  he  wintered  among  the  Petuns,  and,  although
meeting  with  much  opposition,  converted  many  of
the  tribe.  He  was  next  stationed  at  the  mission  of
St.  Mary's  on  the  Wye,  visiting  at  the  same  time  five
Indian  towns  in  the  neighborhood.  In  the  sum-
mer of  1642  he  embarked  on  board  a  canoe,  accom-
panied by  several  Hurons,  and  reached  Quebec  in
search  of  supplies  for  the  missions.  He  visited
Sault  Sainte  Marie  on  the  way,  and  was  thus  the
first  missionary  to  plant  the  cross  on  Michigan  soil.
On  his  return  from  Quebec  to  the  Huron  country,
the  party  with  whom  he  was  travelling  fell  into  a
Mohawk  ambuscade.  The  Hurons.  overconfident
in  their  bravery,  landed  and  were  soon  beaten.
Father  Jogues  could  have  escaped,  but  when  he
saw  his  companions  prisoners,  he  surrendered  in
order  to  be  near  the  wounded  and  dying.  For  at-
tempting to  console  those  who  were  undergoing
torture,  he  was  beaten  until  he  was  senseless,  and
barbarously  treated.  The  Mohawks  then  embarked
on  Lake  Champlain,  and,  meeting  a  party  of  their
countrymen  on  an  island,  compelled  the  prisoners
to  run  the  gantlet  for  their  amusement.  The
missionary  sank  under  the  blows  that  he  received,
and  was  then  dragged  to  a  scaffold,  where  he  was
cruelly  tortured.  This  treatment  was  repeated  in
the  Mohawk  village  of  Ossernenon  on  14  Aug.,
and  in  two  other  villages,  in  one  of  which  he  bap-
tized two  Huron  catechumens,  in  the  midst  of  his
agony,  with  some  drops  of  dew  on  a  corn-stalk  that
was  thrown  him  by  an  Indian.  Then  the  Mohawks
decided  to  put  all  the  prisoners  to  death ;  but  on
further  consideration  they  contented  themselves
with  burning  three  Hurons  at  the  stake.  The
Dutch  of  Fort  Orange  raised  a  large  sum  of  money,
and  made  every  effort  to  ransom  Father  Jogues
and  his  servant  Rene  Goupil,  but  their  generous
efforts  were  unavailing. Soon  afterward  a  war

girty  arrived  that  had  been  defeated  by  the
rench,  and  the  Mohawks  resolved  to  kill  all  their
French  prisoners.  Father  Jogues  was  spared  for
the  time,  and  in  his  captivity  found  his  only  con-
solation in  instructing  and  confessing  prisoners
who  were  burned  at  the  stake,  sometimes  when
they  were  amid  the  flames.  He  was  forced  by  the
Mohawks  to  follow  them  to  their  hunting-grounds,
where  he  did  the  work  of  the  squaws  and  slaves.
After  his  labors,  he  wandered  about  the  forest,
chanting  psalms  or  praying  before  the  sign  of  the
cross  carved  on  some  tree.  The  Indians  took  him
several  times  to  the  Dutch  settlement  at  Renns-
selaerswyck,  and  he  wrote  from  this  station  in  Au-
gust, 1643,  a  letter  to  his  provincial,  giving  an  ac-


count of  his  captivity.  Finally,  by  the  aid  of  the
Dutch  settlers,  several  of  whom  imperilled  their
lives  in  his  behalf,  he  succeeded  in  escaping  just
as  his  captors  were  about  to  kill  him  in  revenge
for  a  defeat  they  had  suffered  from  the  French.
He  was  brought  to  New  Amsterdam,  where  his
misfortunes  excited  the  deepest  sympathy  among
all  classes.  Governor  Kieft  and  the  clergyman
Dominie  Megapolensis  especially  showed  him  the
warmest  affection.  In  November,  1643,  he  sailed
for  Europe,  but  was  driven  on  the  English  coast,
and  robbed  of  all  that  he  possessed.  He  finally
succeeded  in  reaching  France,  where  he  was  re-
ceived with  great  kindness.  But  he  could  not  con-
trol his  desire  to  return  to  Canada.  He  first  re-
quested permission  from  Innocent  XI.  to  say  mass
with  nmtilated  hands.  The  reply  of  the  pope  was:
"  Indignum  esse  Christi  martyrem  Christi  non  bi-
bere  sanguinem."  He  embarked  at  La  Rochelle  in
the  spring  of  1644,  was  stationed  for  some  time  at
Montreal,  and  was  sent  to  take  part  in  the  negotia-
tions between  the  French  and  Mohawks  at  Three
Rivers.  Peace  was  concluded,  but  its  ratification
was  delayed,  and,  to  bring  matters  to  a  final  settle-
ment, Father  Jogues  set  out  for  the  Mohawk  coun-
try with  Sieur  Bourdon,  16  May,  1646.  He  passed
through  Lake  George,  which  he  called  Lac  Sainte
Sacrement,  stopped  on  the  way  at  Fort  Orange
to  thank  the  Dutchmen  who  had  succored  him,
and  then  proceeded  to  the  Mohawk  town  of  One-
wyiure.  The  Mohawks  received  him  kindly,  and
peace  was  concluded.  He  then  went  to  Quebec,
but  only  rested  a  few  days.  Although  there  were
rumors  that  the  Mohawks  were  about  to  renew  the
war,  he  was  determined  on  establishing  a  mission
among  them.  Yet  he  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  end.
The  words  in  his  last  letter  were  prophetic  :  "  Ibo
et  non  redibo."  He  was  accompanied  by  several
Hurons  and  a  young  Frenchman  named  Lalande.
The  Hurons  abandoned  him  one  after  another,  but
the  Frenchman  remained  faithful  to  the  end.  They
met  a  party  of  Mohawks  in  their  war-paint,  and
Father  Jogues  entered  Ossernenon  a  second  time
as  a  captive,  17  Oct.,  1646.  On  his  previous  visit
he  had  left  a  chest  containing  his  vestments  and
chapel  service.  The  Mohawks  believed  that  the
caterpillars  that  devoured  their  crops,  and  a  fever
that  was  decimating  them,  owed  their  origin  to
this  chest.  They  therefore  resolved  that  he  should
die  as  a  sorcerer,  and  began  the  butchery  by  slicing
off  the  flesh  from  his  arms  and  back,  crying,  "  Let
us  see  if  this  white  flesh  is  that  of  an  otkon  "  (sor-
cerer). His  calm  remonstrances  in  the  midst  of
his  torture  seemed  to  produce  some  effect.  A  coun-
cil of  the  clans  assembled  to  decide  his  fate.  While
it  was  in  session  he  was  invited  to  a  supper,  and
had  scarcely  entered  the  hut  to  which  he  was  con-
ducted when  an  Indian  rushed  from  the  darkness
and  struck  him  down  lifeless  with  a  single  blow.
His  companion  was  also  killed,  and  their  heads
were  fixed  on  the  north  palisade,  and  their  bodies
flung  into  the  Mohawk.  Miracles  were  attributed
to  Father  Jogues  after  his  death,  and  the  third
plenary  council  of  Baltimore,  held  in  November,
1884,  took  steps  toward  his  canonization.  The  site
of  Ossernenon  has  been  identified.  A  chapel  was
erected  on  the  spot  in  1884  to  commemorate  his
death  and  that  of  Rene  Goupil.  and  Roman  Cath-
olics are  making  pilgrimages  thither.  Father
Jogues  wrote  a  "  Description  of  New  Netherlands
in  1642,"  a  "Notice  of  Rene  Goupil,"  and  a  "Jour-
nal "  of  his  captivity,  all  of  which  have  been  pub-
lished in  a  volume  of  the  "  Collections  of  the  New
York  Historical  Society,"  and  reprinted,  with  notes
and  a  memoir,  by  John  G.  Shea  (1862). His  jour-


436


JOHNS


JOHNSON


nal  was  published  by  Alejambe  in  his  "  Mortes  il-
lustres"  (Rome,  1667).  His  life  has  been  written
by  Felix  Martin  (Paris,  1873 ;  New  York,  1885).
"JOHNS,  James  Arnold  McGilvray,  author,
b.  in  the  island  of  Antigua,  W.  I.,  19  Jan.,  1830.
His  parents  were  Mandingo  negroes.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Buxton  Grove  academy,  and
studied  theology  under  Rt.  Rev.  George  Wall  Wes-
terby,  Moravian  bishop  of  the  West  Indies.  He
went  to  Jamaica  in  1861,  by  order  of  the  Moravian
bishops  at  Herrnhut,  Germany,  to  act  as  director  of
the  schools  that  were  connected  with  Bethany  Sta-
tion, and  also  to  be  assistant  pastor.  By  the  same
authority,  he  was  sent  to  the  island  of  St.  Christo-
pher to  take  charge  of  Bethel  station.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1879,  was  editor  of  the  "  West
Indian  Abroad  "  (1883-'4),  and  is  author  of  "  The
Last  Days  of  a  Pirate,"  "  Proverbial  Philosophy  of
the  Colored  Race,"  "  Climatology  of  the  West  In-
dies," and  other  works.

JOHNS,  Kensey,  jurist,  b.  in  Maryland,  14
June,  1759 ;  d.  in  New  Castle,  Del.,  21  Dec,  1848.
He  studied  law  with  George  Read,  and  after  twelve
years  of  practice  was  appointed  associate  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Delaware.  In  1792  he  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention,
and  in  March,  1794,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  sena-
tor, to  succeed  George  Read,  resigned,  but  the
senate  on  a  technicality  refused  to  admit  him.  In
1798,  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Read,  he  succeeded  him
as  chief  justice  of  Delaware,  retaining  the  office
for  thirty  years.  In  1828  he  became  chancellor  of
the  state,  holding  that  post  until  the  change  of
constitution  in  1832.  He  was  active  in  the  coun-
cils of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church. — His  son,
Kensey,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Castle,  Del.,  10  Dec,
1791 ;  d.  there,  28  March,  1857,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1810,  studied  law  with  his  father,  and
was  admitted  to  practice  in  1813.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  from  Delaware  from  1827  till  1831,
and  was  then  appointed  chancellor  of  the  state,
succeeding  his  father  in  1832,  and  holding  the
office  until  his  death.  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1846. — Another  son,
John,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  New  Castle,  Del.,  10  July,
1796;  d.  in  Fairfax  county,  Va.,  6  April,  1876,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1815,  studied  theol-
ogy, and  was  ordained  priest  in  1820.  After  hav-
ing charge  of  two  parishes,  he  was  elected  assist-
ant bishop  of  Virginia  and  was  consecrated,  13
Oct.,  1842.  In  1862  he  became  the  successor  of
Bishop  Meade.  He  was  also  president  of  William
and  Mary  college  from  1849  till  1854.  In  1834  he
received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Princeton,
Columbia,  and  the  University  of  New  York,  while
William  and  Mary  conferred  on  him  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1855.  Dr.  Johns  published  a  "  Memorial  of
Bishop  Meade  "  (Baltimore,  1857).

JOHNSON,  Alexander  Bryan,  author,  b.  in
Gosport,  England,  29  May,  1786 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
9  Sept.,  1867.  He  removed  to  the  United  States
in  1801,  settled  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  but  did  not  practise,  and  engaged  in  bank-
ing for  more  than  forty-five  years.  He  published,
besides  numerous  lectures  and  addresses,  "The
Nature  of  Value,  Capital,  etc."  (New  York,  1813) ;
"  The  Philosophy  of  Human  Knowledge  "  (1828) ;
"  Treatise  on  Language  "  (1836) ;  "  Religion  in  Re-
lation to  the  Present  Life  "  (1840) ;  "  The  Meaning
of  Words  Analyzed  "  (1854) ;  "  Physiology  of  the
Senses  "  (1856) ;  "  An  Encyclopedia  of  Instruction  "
(1857);  and  a  "Guide  to  Right  Understanding  of
our  American  Union  "  (1857).

JOHNSON,  Alexander  Smith,  jurist,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  30  July,  1817;  d.  in  Nassau,  New


Providence,  26  Jan.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1835,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in
New  York  city.  In  1846  he  was  elected  a  judge
of  the  New  York  court  of  appeals,  and  served  till
1860,  when  he  went  to  Utica  and  resumed  practice
in  that  city.  In  1864  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  com-
missioner for  the  settlement  of  the  claims  of  the
Hudson  bay  and  Puget  sound  companies,  Great
Britain  being  represented  by  John  Rose,  of  Cana-
da. Warm  praise  was  awarded  Judge  Johnson  in
both  England  and  Canada  for  the  sagacity  that  he
displayed  in  the  peaceful  settlement  of  these  diffi-
culties, which  at  one  time  threatened  serious  re-
sults. During  his  term  as  commissioner  he  was
regent  of  the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York.
In  1873  he  succeeded  Judge  Ward  Hunt  as  com-
missioner of  the  court  of  appeals,  and  he  was  U.  S.
judge  of  the  2d  judicial  district  from  this  year
until  his  death.  Hamilton  college  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1859.

JOHNSON,  Andrew,  seventeenth  president  of
the  United  States,  b.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  29  Dec,
1808;  d.  near  Carter's  Station,  Tenn.,  31  July,
1875.  His  parents  were  very  poor,  and  when  he
was  four  years  old  his  father  died  of.  injuries  re-
ceived in  saving  another  from  drowning.  At  the
age  of  ten  Andrew  was  apprenticed  to  a  tailor.  A
natural  craving  to  learn  was  fostered  by  hearing  a
gentleman  read  from  "The  American  Speaker."
The  boy  was  taught  the  alphabet  by  fellow-work-
men, borrowed  the  book  and  learned  to  read.  In
1824  he  removed  to  Laurens  Court-House,  S.  C,
where  he  worked  as  a  journeyman  tailor.  The
illustration  on  page  437  represents  the  small  shop
in  which  he  pursued  the  calling  that  is  announced
on  the  sign  over  the  door.  In  May,  1826,  he  re-
turned to  Raleigh,  and  in  September,  with  his
mother  and  step-father,  he  set  out  in  a  two-
wheeled  cart,  drawn  by  a  blind  pony,  for  Green-
ville, Tenn.  Here  he  married  Eliza  McCardle,  a
woman  of  refinement,  who  taught  him  to  write,
and  read  to  him  while  he  was  at  work  during  the
day.  It  was  not  until  he  had  been  in  congress
that  he  learned  to  write  with  ease.  From  Green-
ville he  went  to  the  west,  but  returned  after  the
lapse  of  a  year.  In  those  days  Tennessee  was  con-
trolled by  landholders,  whose  interests  were  fos-
tered by  the  state  constitution,  and  Greenville
was  ruled  by  what  was  called  an  "  aristocratic  co-
terie of  the  quality."  Johnson  resisted  their  su-
premacy, and  made  himself  a  leader  of  the  oppo-
sition. In  1828  he  was  elected  alderman,  in  1829
and  1830  was  re-elected,  and  in  1830  was  ad-
vanced to  the  mayoralty,  which  office  he  held  for
three  years.  In  1831  the  county  court  appointed
him  a  trustee  of  Rhea  academy,  and  about  this
time  he  took  part  in  the  debates  of  a  society  at
Greenville  college.  In  1834  he  advocated  the
adoption  of  the  new  state  constitution,  by  which
the  influence  of  the  large  landholders  was  abridged.
In  1835  he  represented  Greene  and  Washington
counties  in  the  legislature.  He  resisted  the  popu-
lar mania  for  internal  improvements,  which  caused
his  defeat  in  1837,  but  the  reaction  justified  his
foresight,  strengthened  his  influence,  and  restored
his  popularity.  In  1839  he  was  returned.  In
1836  he  supported  Hugh  L.  White  for  the  presi-
dency, and  was  a  Bell  man  in  the  warm  personal
and  political  altercations  between  John  Bell  and
James  K.  Polk,  which  distracted  Tennessee  at  this
time.  Johnson  was  the  only  ardent  follower  of
Bell  that  failed  to  go  over  to  the  Whig  party.  In
1840  he  was  an  elector  for  the  state-at-large  on
Van  Buren's  ticket,  and  made  a  state  reputation
by  the  force  of  his  oratory. In  1841  he  was  elected


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


437


to  the  state  senate  from  Greene  and  Hawkins  coun-
ties, and  while  in  that  body  he  was  one  of  the
"  immortal  13  "  Democrats  who,  having  it  in  their
power  to  prevent  the  election  of  a  Whig  senator,
did  so  by  refusing  to  meet  the  house  in  joint  con-
vention. He  also  proposed  that  the  basis  of  rep-
resentation should  rest  upon  the  white  votes,  with-
out regard  to  the  ownership  of  slaves.

In  1843  he  was  elected  to  congress  over  John  A.
Asken,  a  U.  S.  bank  Democrat,  who  was  supported
by  the  Whigs.  His  first  speech  was  in  support  of
the  resolution  to  restore  to  Gen.  Jackson  the  fine
imposed  upon  him  at  New  Orleans.  He  supported
the  annexation  of  Texas.  In  1845  he  was  re-elect-
ed, and  sustained  Polk's  administration.  He  op-
posed all  expenditures  for  internal  improvements
that  were  not  general,  and  resisted  and  defeated
the  proposed  contingent  tax  of  ten  per  cent,  on  tea
and  coffee.  He  was  regularly  re-elected  until
1853.  During  this  period  he  made  his  celebrated
defence  of  the  veto  power,  and  urged  the  adoption
of  the  homestead  law,  which  was  obnoxious  to  the
slave-holding  power  of  the  south.  He  supported
the  compromise  measures  of  1850  as  a  matter  of
expediency,  but  opposed  compromises  in  general

as  a  sacrifice  of
principle.  In  1853
the  district  lines
were  so  "  gerry-
mandered "  as  to
throw  him  into  a
district  in  which
the  Whigs  had  an
overwhelming  ma-
jority. Johnson
at  once  announced
himself  a  candi-
date for  the  gov-
ernorship, and  was
elected  by  a  fair
majority.  In  his
message  to  the  leg-
islature he  dwelt
upon  the  home-
stead law  and  oth-
er measures  for  the  benefit  of  the  working-classes,
and  earned  the  title  of  the  "  mechanic  governor."
He  opposed  the  Know-nothing  movement  with
characteristic  vehemence.  In  1855  he  was  opposed
by  Meredith  P.  Gentry,  the  Whig  candidate,  and
defeated  him  after  a  canvass  remarkable  for  the
feeling  displayed.  Mr.  Johnson  earnestly  sup-
ported the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill.

In  1857  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  where
he  urged  the  passage  of  the  homestead  bill,  and
on  20  May,  1858,  made  his  greatest  speech  on  this
subject.  Finally,  in  1860,  he  had  the  momentary
gratification  of  seeing  his  favorite  bill  pass  both
houses  of  congress,  but  President  Buchanan  vetoed
it,  and  the  veto  was  sustained.  Johnson  revived
it  at  the  next  session,  and  also  introduced  a  reso-
lution looking  to  a  retrenchment  in  the  expendi-
tures of  the  government,  end  on  constitutional
grounds  opposed  the  grant  of  aid  for  the  construc-
tion of  a  Pacific  railroad.  He  was  prominent  in
debate,  and  frequently  clashed  with  southern  sup-
porters of  the  administration.  His  pronounced
Unionism  estranged  him  from  the  slave-holders  on
the  one  side,  while  his  acceptance  of  slavery  as
an  institution  guaranteed  by  the  constitution
caused  him  to  hold  aloof  from  "the  Republicans  on
the  other.  .This  intermediate  position  suggested
his  availability  as  a  popular  candidate  for  the
presidency ;  but  in  the  Democratic  convention  he
received  only  the  vote  of  Tennessee,  and  when  the


convention  reassembled  in  Baltimore  he  withdrew
his  name.  In  the  canvass  that  followed,  he  sup
ported  the  extreme  pro-slavery  candidate,  Breck-
inridge. Johnson  had  never  believed  it  possible
that  any  organized  attempt  to  dissolve  the  Union
could  be  made ;  but  the  events  preceding  the  ses-
sion of  congress  beginning  in  December,  1860,  con-
vinced him  of  his  error.  When  congress  met,  he
took  decided  and  unequivocal  grounds  in  opposi-
tion to  secession,  and  on  13  Dec.  introduced  a  joint
resolution,  proposing  to  amend  the  constitution  so
as  to  elect  the  president  and  vice-president  by  dis-
trict votes,  to  elect  senators  by  a  direct  popular
vote,  and  to  limit  the  terms  of  Federal  judges  to
twelve  years,  half  of  them  to  be  from  slave-hold-
ing and  half  from  non-slave-holding  states.  In
his  speech  on  this  resolution,  18  and  19  Dec,  he
declared  his  unyielding  opposition  to  secession,
and  announced  his  intention  to  stand  by  and  act  in
and  under  the  constitution.  The  southern  states
were  then  in  the  act  of  seceding,  and  every  word
uttered  in  congress  was  read  and  discussed  with
eagerness  by  thirty  millions  of  people.  Johnson's
speech,  coming  from  a  southern  man,  thrilled  the
popular  heart;  but  his  popularity  in  the  north
was  offset  by  the  virulence  with  which  he  was  as-
sailed in  the  south.  In  a  speech  delivered  2  March,
1861,  he  said,  referring  to  the  secessionists :  "  I
would  have  them  arrested  and  tried  for  treason,
and,  if  convicted,  by  the  eternal  God,  they  should
suffer  the  penalty  of  the  law  at  the  hands  of  the
executioner."  Returning  to  Tennessee  from  Wash-
ington, he  was  attacked  at  Liberty,  Va.,  by  a  mob,
but  drove  them  back  with  his  pistol.  At  Lynch-
burg he  was  hooted  and  hissed,  and  at  various
places  burned  in  effigy.  He  attended  the  East
Tennessee  union  convention,  in  Cincinnati,  30
May,  and  again  on  19  June  he  visited  the  same
place  and  was  received  with  enthusiasm.  Here  he
declared  for  a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.

He  retained  his  seat  in  the  senate  until  appoint-
ed by  President  Lincoln  military  governor  of
Tennessee,  4  March,  1862.  On  12  March  he  reached
Nashville,  and  organized  a  provisional  government
for  the  state.  On  18  March  he  issued  a  proclama-
tion, in  which  he  appealed  to  the  people  to  return
to  their  allegiance,  to  uphold  the  law,  and  to  ac-
cept "  a  full  and  competent  amnesty  for  all  past
acts  and  declarations.  He  required  the  city  coun-
cil to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United
States.  They  refused,  and  he  removed  them  and
appointed  others.  He  urged  the  holding  of  Union
meetings  throughout  the  state,  and  frequently  at-
tended them  in  person.  It  was  chiefly  due  to  his
courage  that  Nashville  was  held  against  a  Confed-
erate force.  He  completed  the  railroad  from  Nash-
ville to  Tennessee  river,  and  raised  25  regiments  for
service  in  the  state.  On  8  Dec,  1862,  he  issued  a
proclamation  ordering  congressional  elections,  and
on  the  15th  levied  an  assessment  upon  the  richer
southern  sympathizers,  "in  behalf  of  the  many
helpless  widows,  wives,  and  children  in  the  city  of
Nashville  who  have  been  reduced  to  poverty  and
wretchedness  in  consequence  of  their  husbands,
sons,  and  fathers  having  been  forced  into  the  ar-
mies of  this  unholy  and  nefarious  rebellion."  On
20  Feb.,  1863,  Gov.  Johnson  issued  a  proclamation
warning  the  agents  of  all  "  traitors  "  to  retain  their
collections  until  some  person  should  be  appointed
to  receive  them  for  the  United  States.  During
the  term  of  his  service,  Gov.  Johnson  exercised
absolute  and  autocratic  powers,  but  with  singular
moderation  and  discretion,  and  his  course  strength-
ened the  Union  cause  in  Tennessee.  The  Repub-
lican convention  assembled  in  Baltimore,  6  June,


438


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


1864,  and  renominated  Mr.  Lincoln  for  the  presi-
dency by  acclamation.  There  was  a  strong  senti-
ment in  favor  of  recognizing  the  political  sacri-
fices made  for  the  cause  of  the  Union  by  the  war
Democrats,  and  it  was  generally  conceded  that
New  York  should  decide  who  was  to  be  the  indi-
vidual. Daniel  S.  Dickinson,  of  that  state,  was
most  prominent  in  this  connection ;  but  internal
factional  divisions  made  it  impossible  for  him  to
obtain  the  solid  vote  of  that  state,  and  Sec.  Seward's
friends  feared  this  nomination  would  force  him  from
the  cabinet.  Henry  J.  Raymond  urged  the  name
of  Andrew  Johnson,  and  he  was  accordingly  se-
lected. Johnson,  in  his  letter  of  acceptance,  virtu-
ally disclaimed  any  departure  from  his  principles
as  a  Democrat,  but  placed  his  acceptance  upon  the
ground  of  "  the  higher  duty  of  first  preserving
the  government."  He  accepted  the  emancipation
proclamation  as  a  war  measure,  to  be  subsequently
ratified  by  constitutional  amendment.  In  his  in-
augural address  as  vice-president,  4  March,  1865,
a  lack  of  dignity  in  his  bearing  and  an  incoherency
in  his  speech  were  attributed  to  the  influence  of
strong  drink.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  was  much
worn  by  disease,  and  had  taken  a  little  stimulant
to  aid  him  in  the  ordeal  of  inauguration,  and  in
his  weakened  condition  the  effect  was  more  de-
cided than  he  anticipated.  This  explanation  was
generally  accepted  by  the  country.

On  14  April,  1865,  President  Lincoln  was  assas-
sinated, and  Mr.  Johnson  was  at  once  sworn  in  as
president,  at  his  rooms  in  the  Kirkwood  house,  by
Chief-Justice  Chase.  In  his  remarks  to  those
present  Mr.  Johnson  said :  "  As  to  an  indication
of  any  policy  which  may  be  pursued  by  me  in  the
administration  of  the  government,  I  have  to  say
that  that  must  be  left  for  development  as  the  ad-
ministration progresses.  The  message  or  declara-
tion must  be  made  by  the  acts  as  they  transpire.
The  only  assurance  I  can  now  give  of  the  future
is  reference  to  the  past."  In  his  addresses  to  vari-
ous delegations  that  called  upon  him,  he  empha-
sized the  fact  that  he  advocated  a  course  of  for-
bearance toward  the  mass  of  the  southern  people,
but  demanded  punishment  for  those  who  had  been
leaders.  "  Treason  is  a  crime,"  he  said  to  the  Illi-
nois delegation,  "  and  must  be  punished."  At  the
time  it  was  generally  supposed  that  Johnson,  who
was  known  to  be  personally  embittered  against  the
dominant  classes  in  the  south,  would  inaugurate  a
reign  of  terror  and  decimate  those  who  had  taken
up  arms  against  the  national  authority.  His  pro-
test against  the  terms  of  surrender  granted  to
Gen.  Lee  by  Gen.  Grant,  and  utterances  in  private
conversation,  strengthened  the  fear  that  he  would
be  too  bloody  and  vindictive.  He  was  supposed
not  to  have  been  in  accord  with  the  humane  policy
that  Lincoln  had  foreshadowed,  and  his  silence  in
reference  to  Lincoln's  policy,  which  amounted  to
ignoring  it,  was  accepted  as  a  proof  that  he  did
not  intend  to  follow  this  course.  On  one  occasion
he  said :  "  In  regard  to  my  future  course,  I  will  now
make  no  professions,  no  pledges."  And  again  :
"  My  past  life,  especially  my  course  during  the
present  unholy  rebellion,  is  before  you.  I  have  no
principles  to  retract.  I  defy  any  one  to  point  to
any  of  my  public  acts  at  variance  with  the  fixed
principles  which  have  guided  me  through  life."
It  was  evident  that  the  difference  in  views  of
public  policy,  which  were  kept  in  abeyance  dur-
ing the  war,  would  now  come  to  the  surface.  The
surrender  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston's  army,
26  April,  1865,  was  practically  the  end  of  the
war  (although  20  Aug.,  1866,  was  officially  fixed
as  the  close  of  the  civil  war  by  the  second  sec-


tion of  the  act  of  2  March,  1867).  and  on  29  April
President  Johnson  issued  a  proclamation  for  the
removal  of  trade  restrictions  in  most  of  the  in-
surrectionary states,  which,  being  in  contraven-
tion of  an  act  of  congress,  was  subsequently  modi-
fied. On  9  May,  1865,  he  issued  a  proclamation
restoring  Virginia  to  the  Union,  and  on  22  Mag
all  ports  except  four  in  Texas  were  opened  to  for-
eign commerce.  On  29  May  a  general  amnesty
was  declared  to  all  except  fourteen  specified  classes
of  citizens.  Among  the  number  excepted  were
"  all  participants  in  the  rebellion  the  estimated
value  of  whose  taxable  property  is  over  twenty
thousand  dollars."  This  exception  was  undoubt-
edly the  result  of  personal  feeling  on  the  part  of
the  president.  It  began  to  be  perceived  that  a
change  was  taking  place  in  his  sentiments,  and
this  was  attributed  to  the  influence  of  Sec.  Sew-
ard, who  was  popularly  supposed  to  perpetuate  the
humane  spirit  of  the  dead  president.  Those  who
had  fears  of  too  great  severity  now  anticipated
too  great  leniency.  After  the  amnesty  proclama-
tion, the  fundamental  and  irreconcilable  difference
between  President  Johnson  and  the  party  that  had
elevated  him  to  power  became  more  apparent.
The  constitution  made  no  provision  for  the  re-
admission  of  a  state  that  had  withdrawn  from  the
Union,  and  Mr.  Johnson,  as  a  state-rights  Demo-
crat, held  that  the  southern  states  had  never  been
out  of  the  Union  ;  that  the  leaders  were  solely  re-
sponsible :  that  as  soon  as  the  seceded  states  ap-
plied for  readmission  under  such  a  form  of  gov-
ernment as  complied  with  the  requirements  of  the
constitution,  the  Federal  government  had  no
power  to  refuse  them  admission,  or  to  make  any
conditions  upon  subjects  over  which  the  constitu-
tion had  not  expressly  given  congress  jurisdiction.
The  Republican  leaders  held  that  the  action  of  the
seceded  states  had  deprived  them  of  their  rights
as  members  of  the  Union ;  that  in  any  event  they
were  conquered,  and  as  such  at  the  mercy  of  the
conqueror;  and  that,  at  best,  they  stood  in  the
category  of  territories  seeking  admission  to  the
Union,  in  which  case  congress  could  admit  or  re-
ject them  at  will.  The  particular  question  that
brought  on  a  clash  between  these  principles  was
the  civil  status  of  the  negro.  The  13th  amend-
ment became  a  law,  18  Dec,  1865,  with  Johnson's
concurrence.  The  Republicans  held  that  slavery
had  been  the  cause  of  the  war ;  that  only  by  giving
the  freedman  the  right  to  vote  could  he  be  pro-
tected, and  the  results  of  the  war  secured ;  and
that  no  state  should  be  admitted  until  it  had
granted  the  right  of  suffrage  to  the  negroes  within
its  borders.  Johnson  held  this  to  be  a  matter  of  in-
ternal regulation,  beyond  the  control  of  congress.
From  9  May  till  13  July  he  appointed  provisional
governors  for  seven  states,  whose  duties  were  to
reorganize  the  governments.  The  state  govern-
ments were  organized,  but  passed  such  stringent
laws  in  reference  to  the  negroes  that  the  Re-
publicans declared  it  was  a  worse  form  of  slavery
than  the  old.  When  congress  met  in  'December,
1865.  it  was  overwhelmingly  Republican  and  firm-
ly determined  to  protect  the  negro  against  outrage
and  oppression.  The  first  breach  between  the
president  and  the  party  in  power  was  the  veto  of
the  freedman's  bureau  bill  in  February,  1866,
which  was  designed  to  protect  the  negroes.  One
of  the  grounds  of  the  veto  was,  that  it  had  been

Eassed  by  a  congress  in  which  the  southern  states
ad  no  representatives.  On  27  March  the  presi-
dent vetoed  the  civil  rights  bill,  which  made  freed-
men  citizens  without  the  right  of  suffrage.  The
chief  ground  of  objection  was  the  interference


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


439


with  the  rights  of  the  states.  This  bill  was  passed
over  the  veto.  On  16  June  the  14th  amendment
to  the  constitution,  which  contained  the  princi-
ple of  the  civil  rights  bill,  was  proposed,  disap-
proved by  the  president,  but  ratified  and  declared
in  force,  28  July,  1868.  Both  houses  of  congress
passed  a  joint  resolution  that  the  delegation  from
a  state  lately  in  rebellion  should  not  be  received
by  either  the  senate  or  the  house  until  both  united
in  declaring  said  state  a  member  of  the  Union.  In
July  the  second  freedman's  bureau  bill  was  passed,
vetoed,  and  passed  over  the  veto.  In  June,  1866,
the  Republicans  in  congress  brought  forward  their
plan  of  reconstruction,  which  was  called  the  "  con-
gressional plan,"  in  contradistinction  to  the  presi-
dent's plan,  of  which  he  spoke  as  "my  policy."
The  chief  features  of  the  congressional  plan  were,
to  give  the  negroes  the  right  to  vote,  to  protect
them  in  this  right,  and  to  prevent  the  Confed-
erate leaders  from  voting.  Congress  met  on  3
Dec.,  1866.  The  bill  giving  negroes  the  right
of  suffrage  in  the  District  of  Columbia  was  passed
over  a  veto.  An  attempt  was  made  to  impeach
the  president,  but  it  failed.  In  January,  1867,  a
bill  was  passed  to  deprive  the  president  of  the
power  to  proclaim  general  amnesty,  which  he  dis-
regarded. Measures  were  adopted  looking  to  the
meeting  of  the  40th  and  all  subsequent  congresses
immediately  upon  the  adjournment  of  the  prede-
cessor. The  president  was  deprived  of  the  com-
mand of  the  army  by  a  "  rider  "  to  the  army  ap-
propriation bill,  which  provided  that  his  orders
should  only  be  given  through  the  general,  who
was  not  to  be  removed  without  the  previous  con-
sent of  the  senate.  The  bill  admitting  Nebraska
provided  that  no  law  should  ever  be  passed  in  that
state  denying  the  right  of  suffrage  to  any  person
because  of  his  color  or  race.  This  was  vetoed,  and
passed  over  the  veto.  On  2  March,  1867,  the  "  bill
to  provide  efficient  governments  for  the  insurrec-
tionary states,"  which  embodied  the  congressional
plan  of  reconstruction,  was  passed,  vetoed,  and
passed  over  the  veto.  This  divided  the  southern
states  into  military  districts,  each  under  a  briga-
dier-general, who  was  to  preserve  order  and  exer-
cise all  the  functions  of  government  until  the  citi-
zens had  formed  a  state  government,  ratified  the
amendments,  and  been  admitted  to  the  Union.  On
2  March,  1867,  the  tenure-of-office  bill  was  passed
oyer  the  veto.  This  provided  that  civil  officers
should  remain  in  office  until  the  confirmation  of
their  successors ;  that  the  members  of  the  cabinet
should  be  removed  only  with  the  consent  of  the
senate;  and  that  when  congress  was  not  in  session,
the  president  could  suspend,  but  not  remove,  any
official,  and  in  case  the  senate  at  the  next  session
should  not  ratify  the  suspension,  the  suspended
official  should  be  reinducted  into  his  office.  The
elections  of  1866  were  uniformly  favorable  to  the
Republicans,  and  gave  them  a  two-third  majority
in  both  house  and  senate.  On  5  Aug.,  1867,  the
president  requested  Edwin  M.  Stanton  to  resign
his  office  as  secretary  of  war.  Mr.  Stanton  refused,
was  suspended,  and  Gen.  Grant  was  appointed  in
his  place.  When  congress  met,  it  refused  to  ratify
the  suspension.  Gen.  Grant  then  resigned,  and
Mr.  Stanton  again  entered  upon  the  duties  of  his
office.  The  president  removed  him,  and  appoint-
ed Lorenzo  Thomas,  adjutant-general,  U.  S.  army.
The  senate  declared  this  act  illegal,  and  Mr.  Stan-
ton refused  to  comply,  and  notified  the  speaker  of
the  house.  On  24  Feb.,  1868,  the  house  passed  a
resolution  for  the  impeachment  of  the  president.
The  trial  began  on  5  March.  The  main  articles  of
impeachment  were  for  violating  the  provisions  of


the  tenure-of-office  act,  which  it  was  claimed  he
had  done  in  order  to  test  its  constitutionality.
After  the  trial  began,  the  president  made  a  tour
through  the  northwest,  which  was  called  "  swing-
ing round  the  circle,"  because  in  his  speeches  he
declared  that  he  had  swung  around  the  entire  cir-
cle of  offices,  from  alderman  to  president.  He
made  many  violent  and  intemperate  speeches  to
the  crowds  that  assembled  to  meet  him,  and  de-
nounced the  congress  then  sitting  as  "  no  con-
gress," because  of  its  refusal  to  admit  the  repre-
sentatives and  senators  from  the  south,  and  on
these  speeches  were  based  additional  articles  of
impeachment.  On  16  May  the  test  vote"  was
had.  Thirty-five  senators  were  for  conviction  and
nineteen  for  acquittal.  A  change  of  one  vote
would  have  carried  conviction.  The  senate  ad-
journed sine  die,  and  a  verdict  of  acquittal  was
entered.  After  the  expiration  of  his  term  the
president  returned  to  Tennessee.  He  was  a  candi-
date for  the  U.  S.  senate,  but  was  defeated.  In
1872  he  was  a  candidate  for  congressman  from  the
state-at-large,  and,  though  defeated,  he  regained
his  hold  upon  the  people  of  the  state,  and  in  Janu-
ary, 1875,  was  elected  to  the  senate,  taking  his
seat  at  the  extra  session  of  1875.  Two  weeks  after
the  session  began  he  made  a  speech  which  was  a
skilful  but  bitter  attack  upon  Gen.  Grant.  He
returned  home  at  the  end  of  the  session,  and  in
July  visited  his  daughter,  who  lived  near  Carter's
station  in  east  Tennessee.  There  he  was  stricken
with  paralysis.  29  July,  and  died  the  next  day.
He  was  buried  at  Greenville.  His  "Speeches'*
were  published  with  a  biographical  introduction
by  Frank  Moore  (Boston,  1865),  and  his  "  Life  and
Times "  were  written  bv  an  anonvmous  author
(New  York,  1866).  See  also  "  The*  Tailor  Boy"
(Boston,  1865),  and  "The  Trial  of  Andrew  Johnson
on  Impeachment "  (3  vols.,  Washington,  1868). — His
wife.  Eliza  McCardle,  b.  in  Leesburg,  Washington
co.,  Tenn..  4  Oct..  1810;  d.  in  Home,  Greene  co.,
Tenn.,  15  Jan.,  1876,
was  the  only  daugh-
ter of  a  widow  in
Greenville.  Tenn.
On  27  May.  1826,
she  married  Andrew
Johnson,  and  devot-
ed herself  to  his  in-
terests and  educa-
tion, contributing  ef-
fectually toward  his
future  career.  She
remained  in  Green-
ville while  he  served
in  the  legislature,
and  in  1861  spent
two  months  in  Wash-
ington while  Mr.
Johnson  was  in  the

senate.  Owing  to  impaired  health  she  returned  to
Greenville,  and  while  there  received  an  order,  dated
24  April.  1862,  requiring  her  to  pass  beyond  the  Con-
federate lines  through  Nashville  in  thirty-six  hours.
This  was  impossible,  owing  to  her  illness,  and  she
therefore  remained  in  Greenville  all  summer,  hear-
ing constantly  rumors  of  Mr.  Johnson's  murder.  In
September  she  applied  for  permission  to  cross  the
line,  and,  accompanied  by  her  children  and  Mr.
Daniel  Stover,  she  began  her  journey  to  Nashville.
At  Murf  reesboro  they  were  met  by  Gen.  Forrest,  who
detained  them  until' Isham  G.  Harris  and  Andrew
Ewing  obtained  permission  from  the  authorities  at
Richmond  for  them  to  pass.  Mrs.  Johnson  joined
her  husband  at  Nashville. During  her  residence


440


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


in  Washington  Mrs.  Johnson  appeared  in  society
as  little  as  possible. — Their  daughter,  Martha,  b.
in  Greenville,  Tenn.,  25  Oct.,  1828,  was  educated  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  and  during  her  school-life  was
a  frequent  guest  in  the  White  House  in  President
Polk's  administration.  She  returned  to  east  Ten-
nessee in  1851,  and  on  13  Dec,  1857,  married  Judge
David  T.  Patterson.  She  presided  at  the  White
House  in  place  of  her  invalid  mother,  and,  with  her
sister,  assisted  in  the  first  reception  that  was  held
by  President  Johnson,  1  Jan.,  1866.  During  the
early  spring  an  appropriation  of  $30,000  was  made
by  congress  to  refurnish  the  executive  mansion,
and  Mrs.  Patterson  superintended  the  purchases.
— Another  daughter,  Mary,  b.  in  Greenville,  Tenn.,
8  May,  1832 ;  d.  in  Bluff  City,  Tenn.,  19  April,  1883,
married  Daniel  Stover,  of  Carter  county,  who  died
in  1862,  and  in  1869  she  married  William  R.  Bacon,
of  Greenville,  Tenn.  She  resided  at  the  White
House  from  August,  1865,  until  a  short  time  before
the  expiration  of  her  father's  term.

JOHNSON,  Andrew  Wallace,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  24  Feb.,  1826 ;  d.  there,  14
June,  1887.  He  was  appointed  midshipman  in
1841,  and  commissioned  lieutenant,  15  Sept.,  1855.
He  was  made  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
and  in  1864-'5  served  with  the  South  Atlantic
blockading  squadron,  being  on  the  iron-clads  "  Le-
high "  and  "  Montauk  "  in  their  engagements  with
Confederate  batteries  in  Stono  river,  S.  C,  in  July,
1864.  He  was  commissioned  commander,  2  Feb.,
1867,  and  captain,  5  April,  1874,  and  served  as
chief  of  staff  of  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  from
1869  till  1870.  After  being  assigned  to  special
duty  for  several  years  at  Washington,  D.  C,  and
at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  Capt.  Johnson  was  retired
by  operation  of  law.

JOHNSON,  Artemas  Nixon,  editor,  b.  in  Mid-
dlebury,  Vt.,  22  June,  1817.  He  was  educated  in
the  Boston  public  schools,  and  after  studying  mu-
sic in  Frankfort,  Germany,  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1844  and  engaged  in  editing  and  compil-
ing musical  publications.  His  publications  include
"  Thorough  Base  Instruction-Book  "  (Boston,  1844)-;
"  Choir  Chorus  Book  "  (1846) ;  "  Handel  Collection
of  Church  Music"  (1852);  "American  Choir"
(New  York  and  Boston,  1858) ;  "  Melodeon,  Organ,
and  Harmony"  (1864);  "Alleghany  Collection  of
Church  Music  "  (1868) ;  "  The  True  Singing-School
Text-Book"  (Cincinnati,  1871);  "The  Standard
Glee  Book"  (New  York,  1874);  "New  Harmony
Book  "  (Boston,  1880) ;  "  Parlor  Organ  Instruction  "
(1883) ;  and  "  Natural  Art  of  Singing  "  (1884).

JOHNSON,  Benjamin  Pierce,  agriculturist,
b.  in  Canaan,  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1793 ;
d.  in  Albany,  12  April,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1813,  studied  law  at  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  and  settled  in  Rome.  N.  Y.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  New  York  assembly  from  1827  till  1830,
was  president  of  the  State  agricultural  society  in
1845,  and  its  corresponding  secretary  from  1847
till  1869.  He  was  a  commissioner  to  the  Interna-
tional exhibitions  in  London  in  1851  and  1862,  and
throughout  his  life  was  actively  interested  in  agri-
culture. He  wrote,  besides  reports,  essays,  and
papers  on  agricultural  subjects,  "  The  Dairy"  (Al-
bany, 1857),  and  edited  "The  iNew  York  Farmer"
(1842-'4);  "The  Transactions  of  the  New  York
Agricultural  Society"  (1846-'54);  and  "Journal  of
the  New  York  Agricultural  Society  "  (1850-2).

JOHNSON,  Bradley  Tyler,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fred-
erick City,  Md.,  29  Sept.,  1829.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1849,  receiving  the  mathematical
oration,  studied  law  at  Harvard,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  North  Carolina  in  1851.  and  was  elected


state's  attorney  of  Frederick  county  in  November.
He  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  comptroller
of  the  state  in  1857,  chairman  of  the  Democratic
state  central  committee  in  1859-'60,  delegate  to  the
National  Democratic  convention  at  Charleston  and
Baltimore  in  1860,  and  withdrew  with  a  majority
of  the  Maryland  delegation  from  the  convention
and  united  in  the  nomination  of  Breckinridge  and
Lane.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  or-
ganized and  armed  a  company  at  his  own  expense,
which  was  mustered  into  the  service  of  the  Confed-
erate states,  he  being  captain.  On  16  June  he  was
made  major,  21  July  lieutenant-colonel,  and  18
March,  1862,  colonel.  He  commanded  his  regi-
ment in  all  the  battles  of  Jackson's  valley  cam-
{>aign  of  1862  and  in  the  seven  days'  battles  around
tichmond.  The  regiment  having  been  almost  an-
nihilated, in  August,  1862,  the  remnant  was  mus-
tered out,  and  Col.  Johnson  was  then  assigned  to
Jackson's  division.  On  28  June,  1864,  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-general  of  cavalry.  His  services
in  defeating  Dahlgren  on  his  raid  toward  Rich-
mond were  recognized  in  a  general  order,  and  Gen.
Wade  Hampton  presented  him  with  a  sabre.  He
commanded  a  brigade  of  cavalry  under  Early  in
the  campaign  of  1864.  On  Early's  advance  into
Maryland,  Gen.  Johnson  destroyed  the  railroad
bridges  north  of  Baltimore,  but  on  12  July  was  or-
dered by  Early  to  report  to  him.  In  December,
1864,  Gen.  Johnson  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  post  at  Salisbury,  N.  C.  When  the  prison-
ers were  actually  starving,  Gen.  Johnson  stopped  a
train  bound  for  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,
took  from  it  the  provisions  with  which  it  was
freighted,  and  used  them  to  feed  the  prisoners.
At  the  same  time  he  asked  to  be  allowed  to  carry
the  prisoners  to  Goldsboro  and  release  them  on  pa-
role, and  urged  upon  Gov.  Vance,  of  North  Caro-
lina, the  propriety  of  furnishing  them  with  blank-
ets and  clothes  from  the  depots  of  the  state.
After  the  war  Gen.  Johnson  settled  in  Richmond,
Va.,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  practice  of  law.
In  1872  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Demo-
cratic convention  at  Baltimore.  In  1875  he  pub-
lished "  Reports  of  Chase's  Decisions  on  the  4th
Circuit,"  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  to  the
senate  of  Virginia.  In  1877  he  made  a  report  from
the  committee  on  finance  on  the  public  debt  of
Virginia,  and  in  1879,  as  chairman  of  the  joint
committee  on  Federal  relations,  he  prepared  the
report  on  the  question  of  the  Federal  judicial  ju-
risdiction in  its  relation  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
state  courts.  In  1879  he  removed  to  Baltimore.  In
1883  he  published  an  examination  of  the  "  Founda-
tion of  Maryland  and  the  Maryland  Act  concern-
ing Religion."  In  1884  he  was  president  of  the
electoral  college  of  Maryland.

JOHNSON,  Bushro'd  Rust,  soldier,  b.  in  Bel-
mont county,  Ohio,  7  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  Brighton,
111.,  11  Sept.',  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1840,  served  in  the  Seminole
war,  and  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1844.  During
the  Mexican  war  he  participated  in  numerous  bat-
tles. He  became  professor  and  subsequently  super-
intendent of  the  Western  military  institute  of
Kentucky  at  Georgetown.  He  entered  the  Con-
federate service  in  1861,  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general, and  taken  prisoner  at  Fort  Donelson,
but  shortly  afterward  escaped,  and  was  wounded
at  Alleghany  camp,  and  again  at  Shiloh.  He  com-
manded a  division  at  the  battle  of  Chattanooga,
served  in  subsequent  engagements  in  the  Army  of
Tennessee,  was  promoted  major-general  in  1864,
and  in  command  of  a  division  at  the  surrender.
After  the  war  he  became  superintendent  of  the


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


441


ch
16
mi

*


military  college  in  the  University  of  Nashville,
and  chancellor  of  that  institution.

JOHNSON,  Cave,  postmaster  -  general,  b.  in
Robertson  county,  Tenn.,  11  Jan.,  1793;  d.  in
Clarksville,  Tenn.,  23  Nov.,  1866.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  practised  law  in  Clarksville
until  1820,  when  he  became  circuit  judge.  He
served  in  congress  in  1829-'37,  having  been  chosen
as  a  Democrat,  and  again  from  1829  till  his  ap-
pointment as  postmaster-general  under  President
Polk  in  1845.  At  the  close  of  this  administration
he  retired  to  private  life,  and  was  president  of  the
Bank  of  Tennessee  in  1850-9.  Age  prevented  his
taking  an  active  part  in  public  affairs  during  the
civil  war,  and  his  serving  in  the  state  senate  in
1863,  to  which  he  was  elected  as  a  Unionist.

JOHNSON,  Chapman,  lawyer,  b.  in  Louisa
countv,  Va..  12  March,  1779:  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,
12  July,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and
Mary  in  1802,  studied  law  under  St.  George  Tucker,
and,  establishing  himself  in  Staunton,  Va.,  became
eminent  as  a  lawyer  and  orator.  During  the  war
of  1812  he  was  captain  of  a  volunteer  company,
and  he  afterward  served  as  aide  to  Gen.  James
Breckinridge.  Prom  1815  till  1831  he  served  in
the  state  senate,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  Vir-
ginia convention  of  1829-'30  as  champion  of  the
White  Basis  party.  In  1824  he  removed  to  Rich-
mond in  order  to  attend  to  his  practice,  which  had
become  one  of  the  most  extensive  in  the  state.

JOHNSON,  Daniel,  English  buccaneer,  b.  in
Bristol,  England,  in  1629 ;  d.  in  Panama  in  1675.
He  served  for  several  years  as  a  sailor  in  a  mer-
chant-ship which  was  captured  by  the  Spanish  in
1654,  and  was  transported  to  Santo  Domingo,  re-
maining a  slave  there  till  1657.  when  he  escaped  to
"  e  French  island  of  Tortugas.  He  swore  to  re-
enge  himself  for  the  cruel  treatment  he  had  re-
ceived at  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards,  and  he  kept
his  word  so  well  that  he  was  named  by  the  Spanish
"Johnson  the  Terror."  He  enlisted  in  1657  under
the  buccaneer  Moyse  van  Vin,  and  soon  was  raised
to  the  rank  of  a  chief.  Van  Vin  made  him  his
lieutenant  in  1659 ;  but  they  had  difficulties  about
booty,  and  fought  a  duel,  in  which  Van  Vin  was
dangerously  wounded.  Johnson  then  joined  Pierre
le  Picard,  and  together  they  accompanied  Sir
Henry  Morgan  in  1661  in  his  expedition  to  Mara-
caibo  and  Panama.  In  1663  he  pillaged  and  ran-
sacked the  Bay  of  Honduras,  and  burned  the  city  of
Puerto  Cabello,  securing  booty  worth  $1,500,000.
In  the  following  year,  with  a  brig  carrying  24  guns,
he  attacked  a  ship  that  the  Spanish  authorities  of
Guatemala  sent  every  year  to  Spain  loaded  with
gold.  Although  she  was  a  vessel  of  900  tons,  carry-
ing 56  guns,  with  a  complement  of  400  men,  she
surrendered  to  Johnson  after  a  battle  of  one  hour.
This  capture  made  Johnson  famous,  and  the  Span-
iards offered  a  reward  of  $25,000  for  his  head.  In
1666  he  associated  with  other  adventurers,  and
ransacked  and  pillaged  the  coast  of  Venezuela.  On
returning  to  Tortugas  the  vessel  of  Johnson  foun-
dered at  sea  near  the  western  coast  of  Cuba,  and  he
escaped  with  a  few  companions  in  an  open  boat.
The  governor  of  Havana,  being  informed  of  his  mis-
fortune, sent  a  brig  carrying  15  guns  to  capture
him,  but  Johnson  attacked  the  vessel,  and  after  a
hard-fought  battle  took  possession  of  her.  As  his
crew  was  too  small  to  guard  200  Spanish  prisoners,
he  murdered  them  with  his  own  hand  and  sent
their  heads  to  the  governor.  At  last  he  was  sur-
rounded by  four  men-of-war  that  had  been  spe-
cially detailed  for  his  pursuit,  and  he  fell  a  prisoner,
after  receiving  17  wounds.  He  was  brought  to
Panama  and  put  in  charge  of physicians,  and


when  they  had  restored  him  to  health  he  was
hanged  in  the  public  square  of  the  citv.

JOHNSON,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  Louisa  county,
Va.,  3  Oct.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Limestone  Springs,  S.  C,
7  Jan.,  1855.  His  father  removed  with  his  family
to  Chester  district,  S.  C,  in  1789.  David  studied
law,  and  settled  in  Union  Court-House.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1812,  circuit  judge  in
1815-'24,  was  elevated  to  the  court  of  appeals  in
1824,  and  became  chancellor  in  1835.  In  1847  he
was  elected  governor  of  South  Carolina.  Although
Judge  Johnson  conceded  the  right  of  secession,  he
opposed  it  in  debate  and  public  speeches,  as  inju-
rious to  the  interests  of  the  country.

JOHNSON,  David,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
10  May,  1827.  He  was  educated  in  the  public
schools,  and  received  a  few  lessons  in  the  beginning
of  his  career  from  John  F.  Crosby,  but  since  that
time  has  pursued  his  work  without  "a  master,  spend-
ing his  professional  life  in  New  York.  His  style
is  carefully  finished,  rich  in  color,  and  indicates  a
faithful  study  of  American  scenery.  In  1860  he
was  elected  an  associate,  and  in  1862  a  member,  of
the  National  academy.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Artists'  fund  society,  and  has  exhibited
at  the  academy  "  Echo  Lake  "  (1867) ;  "  On  the
Wallkill  River"  (1869);  "New  Berlin,  N.  Y."
(1870) ;  "  View  of  Barrvtown,  N.  Y."  (1871) :  "  Lake
George  "  (1874) :  "  Near  Noroton,  Conn."  (1876) ;
"  Greenwood  Lake  "  (1877) ;  "  Morning  at  Harbor
Islands  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Dollar  Island  "  (1880).  He
exhibited  at  the  Centennial  of  1876  "  Scenery  on
the  Housatonic,"  which  was  also  shown  at  the  Paris
salon  in  1877:  "Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,"  and
"  A  Brook  Study."  which  received  one  of  the  first
awards.  Among  his  recent  paintings  are  "  View  of
Pompton,  N.  J."  (1882) ;  "  Oak  Grove,"  and  "  Oaks
on  the  Genesee  "  (1883) :  "  Pasturage  "  (1884) ;  "  Sun-
set" (1885):  and  "Landscape  and  Cattle"  (1887).

JOHNSON,  Eastman,  artist,  b.  in  Lovell.  Me.,
29  July,  1824.  Adopting  drawing  as  a  profession
at  eighteen,  he  settled  first  in  Augusta.  Me.,  work-
ing almost  wholly  on  portraits  in  black  and  white
and  in  pastel.  In  1845  he  removed  with  his  parents
to  Washington.  D.  C,  where  he  drew  portraits  of
many  distinguished  men,  including  Daniel  Web-
ster and  John  Quiney  Adams,  and  while  in  Boston
in  1846-'9  he  made  portraits  of  Longfellow  and
his  family,  Emerson.  Hawthorne,  and  Sumner.  He
went  to  Dusseldorf  in  1849,  studied  one  year  at  the
Royal  academy,  one  with  Leutze,  and  four  at  the
Hague,  painting  there  his  first  important  pictures
in  oil,  "  The  Savoyard  "  and  the  "  Card  Players,"
and  afterward  established  himself  in  Paris,  but
returned  to  the  United  States  in  1856.  He  was  in
Washington.  D.  G,  and  on  the  northern  shores  of
Lake  Superior  among  the  Indian  tribes  in  1856-'7,
returning  to  the  former  place  in  1858.  and  painting
the  "  Old  Kentucky  Home."  which  established  his
reputation  as  an  artist.  In  the  autumn  of  this  year
he  opened  a  studio  in  New  York,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  was  elected  an  academician  in
1860,  and  has  contributed  since  that  time  to  each
of  the  annual  exhibitions  of  the  National  academy.
His  genre  compositions,  suggested  by  American
scenes,  have  been  highly  popular,  appreciated  alike
by  artists  and  the  public,  and  many  of  them  have
been  engraved.  He  excels  as  a  portrait-painter,
and  is  particularly  happy  in  the  delineation  of
American  domestic  and  negro  character.  Among
his  pictures  are  "  The  Old  Kentucky  Home,"  "  Sun-
dav  Morning,"  "  Prisoners  of  State."  "  The  Bare-
foot Boy,"  "  Dropping  Off."  "  Fiddling  his  Way,"
"  The  Pension  Agent,"  "  Milton  Dictating  to  his
Daughters,"  "  The  Old  Stage-Coach,"  "  Husking  at


442


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


Nantucket,"  "  Bo-Peep "  (exhibited  at  the  Royal
academy,  London),  "  Bam  Swallows,  a  Group  of
Children,"  -'What  the  Shell  Says,"  and  "Old
Whalers  of  Nantucket."  His  portraits,  besides
those  already  mentioned,  include  likenesses  of
G rover  Cleveland,  Chester  A.  Arthur,  Dr.  James
McCosh,  and  William  M.  Evarts.

JOHNSON,  Edward,  historian,  b.  in  Heme
Hill,  Kent  co.,  England,  in  1599 ;  d.  in  Woburn,
Mass.,  23  April,  1672.  He  is  supposed  to  have  come
to  New  England  with  Gov.  John  Winthrop  in  1630,
and  was  active  in  the  organization  of  the  town  and
church  of  Woburn,  Mass.,  in  1642,  being  annually
elected  as  its  representative,  with  the  exception  of
the  year  1648,  from  1643  till  1671,  and  holding  at
the  same  time  the  office  of  recorder  from  1642  till
his  death.  In  1655  he  was  speaker  of  the  Massa-
chusetts house  of  representatives,  and  in  1665  he
was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  meet  Robert  Carr,
George  Cartwright,  and  Samuel  Maverick,  who  had
been  sent  to  England  to  "  assure  the  king  of  the
loyalty  of  his  subjects  and  at  the  same  time  to  en-
deavor to  establish  the  rights  and  privileges  then
enjoyed."  His  "Wonder-working  Providence  of
Zion's  Saviour  in  New  England  "  (London,  1654 ;  re-
printed in  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Collections  ")
is  a  somewhat  rambling  history  of  the  countrv
"from  the  English  planting  in  1628  till  1652."

JOHNSON,  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Chesterfield
county,  Va.,  16  April,  1816 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,
22  Feb.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1838,  was  brevetted  captain  in
1847  for  meritorious  service  during  the  Florida
wars,  and  major  in  1848  for  gallantry  at  Chapulte-
pec  and  the  city  of  Mexico,  being  presented  on  his
return  with  swords  of  honor  by  his  native  state  and
county.  He  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  in
1839,  and  captain  in  1851.  In  1861  he  resigned,  and,
joining  the  Confederate  army,  was  appointed  colo-
nel of  the  12th  Georgia  volunteers,  brigadier-gen-
eral in  1862,  and  major-general  in  1863.  He
commanded  a  division  at  Gettysburg,  was  taken
prisoner,  with  his  entire  force,  at  Spottsylvania
Court-House,  12  May,  1864,  and  subsequently  was
recaptured  at  Nashville  in  December  of  that  year.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  retired  to  his  farm  in
Chesterfield  county,  Va.

JOHNSON,  Evan  Malbone,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bristol,  R.  I.,  6  June,  1791 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
in  1865.  He  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Griswold  at
Newport,  8  July,  1813,  served  for  a  year  as  curate
at  Grace  church,  New  York  city,  and  removed
thence  to  Newtown,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  rector
until  1826.  In  1826  he  built,  on  his  own  ground
and  at  his  own  expense,  St.  John's  church,  Brook-
lyn, and  served  it,  without  remuneration,  for  more
than  twenty  years.  His  personal  history  is  inter-
woven with  the  interests  of  the  city  of  Brooklyn.
To  his  exertions  is  due  the  opening  of  the  impor-
tant thoroughfare  of  Myrtle  avenue.  On  the  peti-
tion asking  for  it  was  his  single  name,  and,  though
he  was  opposed  by  400  remonstrants,  his  energy  and
resolution  prevailed.  In  1847  Mr.  Johnson  estab-
lished a  mission  church,  St.  Michael's,  which  he
served  until  his  death.

JOHNSON,  Frank  Grant,  inventor,  b.  in  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  30  Jan.,  1835.  He  was  graduated
at  Wesleyan  university  in  1849,  taught,  and  studied
medicine  in  North  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  Wethers-
field,  Conn.,  and  received  his  degree  from  Castleton
medical  college,  Vermont,  in  1851.  He  practised
his  profession  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1852-'6,  and
still  (1887)  resides  in  that  city.  He  has  taken  out
about  100  patents  for  his  inventions,  which  include
philosophical  charts  for  schools,  unpiekable  locks,


water-metres,  the  revolving  book-case,  an  automatic
dredging-bucket,  steel  railroad-ties,  and  passenger*
elevators.  He  has  published  "The  Water-Metre
and  the  Actual  Measurement  System"  (New  York,
1862),  and  "  The  Nicholson  Pavement,  and  Pave-
ments Generally"  (1867);  "Health  Lifts "  (1877) ;
and  "  Infected  Air  and  Disinfectants  "  (1884).

JOHNSON,  Henry,  senator,  b.  in  Tennessee,  14
Sept.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Point  Coupee,  La.,  4  Sept.,  1864.
He  studied  law  in  Louisiana,  began  to  practise  at
Bringiers,  and  in  1809  was  clerk  of  the  territorial
court.  He  became  judge  of  the  parish  court  of  St.
Mary  in  1811,  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional
convention  in  1812,  and  in  the  same  year  was  a  de-
feated candidate  for  congress.  He  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  William  C.  C.  Claiborne,
who  had  died  before  taking  his  seat,  and  was  re-
elected, serving  from  1818  till  1824,  when  he  re-
signed to  become  governor  of  Louisiana,  which
office  he  held  four  years.  He  was  a  defeated  candi-
date for  the  senate  in  1829,  and  served  as  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  in  1834-'9,  having  been
elected  as  a  Whig.  On  the  death  of  Alexander
Porter,  Judge  Johnson  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate to  fill  his  place,  and  served  from  1844  till  1849.

JOHNSON,  Sir  Henry,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1748 ;  d.  18  March,  1835.  He
entered  the  army  in  1761,  became  captain  in  the
28th  foot  in  1763,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  17th  in
1778,  colonel  in  1782,  major-general  in  1793,  and
general  in  1808.  While  he  was  stationed  in  Phila-
delphia he  married  Rebecca,  daughter  of  David
Franks,  of  that  city,  who  was  celebrated  for  her
wit.  He  commanded  a  battalion  of  light  infantry
early  in  the  Revolution,  and  was  severely  wounded..
While  he  was  in  command  at  Stony  Point  he  was
surprised  by  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  (q.  v.)  in  the
night  of  15  July,  1779,  and  made  prisoner  with  his
entire  force.  He  returned  to  England  in  1782,  and
served  during  the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798.  On  3
March,  1818,  he  was  created  a  baronet.

JOHNSON,  Herman  Merrills,  educator,  b.  in
Butternuts,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  25  Nov.,  1815 ;  d.  in
Carlisle,  Pa.,  5  April,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university  in  1839,  held  the  professorship
of  ancient  languages  in  St.  Charles  college,  Mo.,
in  1839-'42,  and  then  that  of  ancient  languages  in
Augusta  college,  Ky.,  till  1844.  In  the  latter  year  he
was  appointed  professor  of  ancient  languages  and
literature  in  the  Ohio  Wesleyan  university,  where
he  remained  until  1850.  During  his  first  year  in
this  institution  he  was  its  acting  president,  organ-
ized its  curriculum,  and  was  interested  in  introduc-
ing therein  a  course  of  biblical  study  as  a  means  of
ministerial  education.  In  1850  he  became  professor
of  philosophy  and  English  literature  in  Dickinson
college,  which  post  he  retained  for  ten  years.
In  1860  he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  the  col-
lege and  the  chair  of  moral  science,  which  he  held
till  his  death.  He  entered  the  ministry  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1845,  and  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Ohio  Wesleyan  university
in  1852.  Dr.  Johnson  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  "  Methodist  Quarterly  Review "  and  other
periodicals,  and  published  an  edition  of  the  "  Clio  "
of  Herodotus  (1850).  He  edited  "  Orientalia  An-
tiquaria  Herodoti,"  and  at  his  death  had  nearly
completed  a  German  work  on  synonymes.

JOHNSON,  Herrick,  clergyman,  b.  near  Fonda,
N.  Y.,  21  Sept.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamil-
ton college  in  1857,  and  at  Auburn  theological
seminary  in  1860,  and  held  Presbyterian  pastorates
in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Pittsburg,  and  Philadelphia,  Pa.
In  1874  he  became  professor  of  homiletics  and  pas-
toral theology  in  Auburn  theological  seminary,  and


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


443


in  1880  he  accepted  a  pastorate  in  Chicago,  and
also  became  lecturer  on  sacred  rhetoric  in  the
Theological  seminary  of  the  northwest.  In  July,
1883,  he  resigned  his  pastoral  charge  and  accepted
the  professorship  of  sacred  rhetoric  and  pastoral
theology  in  the  seminary.  He  was  moderator  of
the  general  assembly  at  Springfield,  ill.,  in  1882,
and  is  president  of  the  Presbyterian  church  board
of  aid  for  colleges  and  academies,  and  of  the  board
of  trustees  of  Lake  Forest  university.  The  de-
gree of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Western  Re-
serve college  in  1867.  Besides  many  sermons  and
articles  in  periodicals,  he  has  published  "  Christi-
anity's Challenge  "  (Chicago,  1882) ;  "  Plain  Talks
about  the  Theatre  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Revivals,  their
Place  and  Power"  (1883).

JOHNSON,  Herschel  Vespasian,  statesman,
b.  in  Burke  county,  Ga.,  18  Sept.,  1812  ;  d.  in  Jef-
ferson county,  Ga.,  16  Aug.,  1880.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  university  of  Georgia  in  1834,  studied
law,  and  practised  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  till  1839,  when
he  removed  to  Jef-
ferson county.  In
1840  he  entered  poli-
tics as  a  Democrat,
and  in  1844  he  re-
moved to  Milledge-
ville,  serving  also  in
that  year  as  a  presi-
dential elector.  He
was  subsequently  ap-
pointed U.  S.  sena-
tor in  place  of  Wal-
ter T.  Colquitt,  re-
signed, serving  from
14  Feb.,  1848.  till  3
March,  1849.  In  No-
vember of  the  latter
year  he  was  elected,
by  the  legislature  of  Georgia,  judge  of  the  supe-
rior court  for  the  Ocmulgee  district,  which  office
he  occupied  until  his  nomination  as  governor  in
1853,  when  he  resigned.  He  had  in  the  mean
time  been  a  member  of  the  Southern  Rights  party,
but  when  Georgia  resolved  to  acquiesce  in  the  com-
promise measures  of  1850  he  was  one  of  the  first
to  declare  that  the  causes  that  had  led  to  the  or-

fanization  of  that  movement  had  ceased  to  exist.
Te  was  elected  governor  in  1853,  and  re-elected  in
1855.  In  1860  he  was  nominated  for  the  vice-
presidency  on  the  ticket  with  Stephen  A.  Douglas.
He  opposed  the  secession  of  Georgia  to  the  last ;
but  when  the  fact  was  accomplished  he  cast  his  lot
with  his  state,  and  was  chosen  to  the  Confederate
senate.  In  1864  he  began  the  "  peace  movement "
on  the  basis  of  state  sovereignty.  In  September
of  the  same  year  he  held  a  conference  with  An-
drew Johnson  regarding  reconstruction,  and  the
following  month  presided  over  the  Georgia  con-
stitutional convention.  In  January,  1866,  on  the
restoration  of  his  state  to  the  Union,  he  was  chosen
as  one  of  the  two  U.  S.  senators  to  which  Georgia
was  entitled,  but  was  unable  to  serve  under  the  re-
construction acts  of  congress.  He  then  resumed
the  practice  of  the  law,  and  when  his  disabilities
were  finally  removed  he  was,  in  1873,  placed  on
the  circuit  bench  for  the  term  of  eight  years,  which
office  he  filled  until  his  death.  As  an  orator,  a
constitutional  lawyer,  and  a  jurist.  Judge  Johnson
took  high  rank.

JOHNSON,  Horace  Channcey,  artist,  b.  in  Ox-
ford, Conn.,  1  Feb.,  1820.  He  was  educated  at  a
preparatory  school  in  Cheshire,  Conn.,  began  his
art  study  under  Albert  H.  Emmons,  at  Hartford,
and  afterward  entered  the  antique  school  of  the


(e^C^^^C


National  academy  in  New  York  city.  He  went  to
Italy  in  1856,  and  remaining  there  between  two  and
three  years,  most  of  the  time  in  Rome,  where  he
was  a  pupil  of  Ferraro,  and  also  studied  in  the
English  life-school  and  under  William  Page. His

Erofessional  career  has  been  passed  in  Italy  and  in
is  native  state,  where  he  now  resides,  at  Water-
bury.  His  work  has  consisted  chiefly  of  portraits.
Among  his  other  pictures  are  "  Roman  Mother  "
(1857) ;  "  Roman  Peasants  on  the  Campagna  "  and
"Grape  Gatherers  of  Gensano"  (1858);  "Italian
Kitchen  "  and  "  Betrothal  of  Joseph  and  Mary  "
(1865) ;  "  Italian  Girls  at  the  Fountain  "  and  "  Az-
rael  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Rebecca  at  the  Well  "  (1886).

JOHNSON,  Isaac,  colonist,  b.  in  Clipsham,  Rut-
landshire, England ;  d.  in  Boston,  30  Sept.,  1630.
He  first  came  to  this  country  with  Winthrop,  ar-
riving at  Salem  on  12  June,  1630,  and  was  one  of
the  four  that  founded  the  first  church  at  Charles-
town  on  30  July  of  that  year.  The  lack  of  good
water  at  Charlestown  induced  them,  on  7  Sept.,  to
remove  to  Shawmut,  now  Boston,  which  was  set-
tled under  Johnson's  supervision.  He  was  the
richest  man  in  the  colony,  and  was  noted  for  his
goodness  and  wisdom. — His  wife,  Arbella,  d.  in
Salem  about  30  Aug.,  1630,  was  the  daughter  of
Thomas,  14th  Earl  of  Lincoln.  She  accompanied
her  husband  to  New  England,  and  suffered  much
from  the  hardships  that  the  early  colonists  had  to
endure.  In  her  honor,  the  name  of  "  The  Eagle,"
Winthrop's  ship,  was  changed  to  "  The  Arbella."

JOHNSON,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Orange  coun-
ty, Va.,  1  Jan.,  1774;  d.  in  Great  Crossings,  Scott
co.,  Ky.,  14  Aug.,  1826.  He  was  the  son  of  Robert
Johnson,  who  emigrated  to  Kentucky  during  the
Revolutionary  war,  and  was  prominent  in  the  con-
flicts between  the  white  men  and  the  natives
that  grew  out  of  the  settlement  of  the  state.
James  was  early  inured  to  the  dangers  and  hard-
ships of  a  frontier  life,  and  his  training  enabled
him  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  war  of  1812,
in  which  he  served  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  his
brother's  regiment.  In  the  battle  of  the  Thames
he  did  much  toward  deciding  the  fortunes  of  the
day,  having  command  of  the  right  wing  of  the
U.  S.  forces.  After  the  war  he  was  a  contractor
for  supplying  the  troops  on  the  Mississippi  and
Missouri  rivers  in  1819-20.  He  was  subsequent-
ly elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  5  Dec.,  1825,  until  his  death. — His  brother,
Richard  Mentor,  vice-president  of  the  United
States,  b.  in  Bryant's  Station.  Ky.,  17  Oct.,  1781 ;
d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  19  Nov.,  1850,  was  educated
at  Transylvania  university,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Great  Cross-
ings, Ky.  He  was  elected  to  the  state  legisla-
ture in  1804,  and  in  1807  was  sent  to  congress
as  a  Republican.  Being  several  times  re-elected,
he  served,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  months,
from  26  Oct.,  1807,  till  3  March,  1819.  In  June,
1812,  he  voted  in  favor  of  a  declaration  of  war
with  Great  Britain,  and  immediately  after  the  ad-
journment of  congress  hastened  home,  where  he
raised  a  battalion  of  three  companies,  and  after  its
consolidation  with  another  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  regiment  thus  formed.  After  ten
months  of  active  service  he  returned  to  Washing-
ton, resuming  his  seat  in  congress,  and  materially
aiding  the  president  in  preparing  the  plan  of
campaign  for  the  following  summer.  Being  au-
thorized by  the  secretary  of  war  to  raise  a  regi-
ment of  one  thousand  mounted  volunteers,  he
went  to  Kentucky  at  the  end  of  the  session  in
March,  and  soon  raised  the  required  number  of
men. Making  his  brother  James  lieutenant-colo-


444


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


w_^<^-*^_


nel,  he  repaired  to  the  Ohio  frontier.  He  took  part
in  the  engagement  at  Chatham,  Ontario,  4  Oct.,
1813,  and  in  the  battle  of  the  Thames  on  the  day
following.  (See  Harrison,  William  Henry.)  Col.
Johnson  with  half  his  men  attacked  the  Indians,
while  his  brother  James,  with  the  remainder,  fell

upon  the  British
regulars.  During  the
combat  Col.  Johnson
killed  an  Indian
chief,  whom  he  sup-
posed to  be  Tecum-
seh  (q.  v.).  The  colo-
nel was  borne  from
the  field  almost  life-
less, having  re-
ceived several  bullet
wounds.  Although
not  sufficiently  re-
covered to  be  taken
home  until  Novem-
ber, he  was  again  in
Washington  in  Feb-
ruary, though  still
unable  to  walk,  and
resumed  his  seat.  On  his  way  to  the  capital  he  was
heartily  cheered,  and  congress,  by  joint  resolution,
directed  that  he  should  be  presented  with  a  suitable
testimonial  for  his  services.  At  the  conclusion  of
his  term  in  congress  in  1819,  he  returned  home,  was
chosen  to  the  legislature,  and  at  once  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  in  place  of  John  J.  Crittenden,  resigned.
Being  re-elected,  he  served  until  3  March,  1829.  He
was  then  again  chosen  to  the  21st,  22d,  23d,  and  24th
congresses,  being  a  member  of  the  house  from  7
Dec,  1829,  till  3  March,  1837.  He  was  a  candidate
for  vice-president  of  the  United  States  on  the
ticket  with  Martin  Van  Buren,  and,  no  choice  hav-
ing been  made  by  the  electoral  college,  he  was
chosen  by  the  senate.  At  the  close  of  his  official
term  he  retired  to  his  home,  having  given  thirty
years  of  his  life  continuously  to  the  service  of  his
country.  He  was  afterward  sent  again  to  the  legis-
lature, and  was  a  member  of  that  body  at  the  time
of  his  death.  In  1814  he  was  appointed  Indian
commissioner.  He  was  the  author  of  the  law  abol-
ishing imprisonment  for  debt  in  Kentucky,  and
while  in  congress  made  himself  the  especial  friend
of  the  old  soldiers  of  the  Revolution  and  the  in-
valids of  the  war  of  1812  by  his  efforts  to  secure
pensions  for  them. — Another  brother,  John  T.,
clergyman,  b.  in  Great  Crossings,  Scott  co.,  Ky.,  5
Oct.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Mo.,  17  Dec,  1856,
chose  the  profession  of  law,  and  began  practice.
He  volunteered  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  was  an  ac-
tive participant  in  the  northwestern  campaign,
serving  as  aide  to  Gen.  Harrison.  On  returning
home  after  the  war,  he  was  five  times  elected  to
the  legislature  and  twice  to  congress,  serving
in  1821-'5.  In  the  "old  and  new  court  contest,"
in  1826,  he  was  appointed  and  served  for  nine
months  as  judge  of  the  new  court  of  appeals.  In
the  midst  of  his  successful  political  career  he  imit-
ed  with  the  Christian  denomination,  which  was
then  assuming  great  power  in  Kentucky,  under
the  teachings  of  Alexander  Campbell  and  other
leaders,  and  he  gave  the  remaining  years  of  his  life
to  service  as  an  evangelist.  No  man  did  more  to
build  up  educational  and  benevolent  auxiliaries  to
his  church,  and  to  organize  and  foster  its  mission
work.  His  style  of  preaching  was  hortatory  and
pathetic,  rather  than  logical,  and  was  attended
with  success.  He  gave  liberally  of  his  own  means
to  the  interest  of  the  cause  which  lay  so  near  his
heart,  and,  being  possessed  of  a  moderate  estate,


received  no  reward  for  his  labor. — Richard  Men-
tor's nephew,  Madison  Conyers,  lawyer,  b.  near
Georgetown,  Ky.,  21  Sept.,  1806;  d.  in  Lexington,
Ky.,  7  Dec,  1886,  was  the  second  son  of  William
Johnson.  He  graduated  with  the  first  honors  at
Transylvania  university  in  1823,  in  1825  was  gradu-
ated in  the  law  department  of  Transylvania,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  the  active  practice
of  the  law,  in  which  he  attained  eminence.  Mr.
Johnson  served  for  several  years  in  the  Kentucky
legislature.  In  1850  he  was  chosen  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  adopt  and  draw  up  the  Kentucky
code  of  practice,  and  in  1853  and  1857  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature.  From  1858  till  his  death
he  was  president  of  the  Northern  bank  of  Ken-
tucky, and  had  been  one  of  its  directors  since  1837.
He  was  for  many  years  connected  with  the  board
of  trustees  of  Transylvania  university,  and  in  1865,
when  that  college  was  changed  to  the  Kentucky
university,  he  became  president  of  its  law  depart-
ment. He  was  eminent  as  a  financier,  and  the  3
per  cent.  U.  S.  bonds,  by  which  millions  of  dollars
were  saved  to  the  National  government,  were  is-
sued by  Sec  Windom  at  his  suggestion.

JOHNSON,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Robinson  coun-
ty, N.  C,  in  1811.  He  was  graduated  at  the  State
university  in  1832,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  began  practice  at  Columbus,  Ga.  He
was  a  representative  in  congress  from  1851  till
1853,  and  was  appointed  provisional  governor  of
Georgia  in  1865.  He  was  collector  of  customs  at
Savannah  in  1866-'9,  and  was  appointed  judge  of
the  circuit  court  of  Georgia  in  1870.

JOHNSON,  James  A.,  musician,  b.  in  England
in  1820 ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  in  1883.  He  came
with  his  parents  to  this  country  while  quite  young,
and  in  1846  was  choir-master  of  Holy  Communion
church  in  New  York,  and  also  favorably  known  as
a  tenor  solo-singer  in  oratorio  music  He  com-
piled a  "  Tune  Book  "  (1848),  and  composed  a  vol-
ume of  "  Offertory  Sentences  "  (1851).

JOHNSON,  John  Barent,  clergyman,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  3  March  1769 ;  d.  there,  29  Aug.,
1803.  He  was  of  the  family  of  Jansen,  the  first
settlers  of  Brooklyn.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1792,  and  was  a  minister  of  the  Dutch  church
at  Albany  from  1796  till  1802,  and  at  Brooklyn  in
1802.  He  was  an  accomplished  scholar,  an  excel-
lent pastor,  and  a  graceful  and  eloquent  preacher.
— His  eldest  son,  William  Lupton,  clergyman,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  15  Sept.,  1800  ;  d.  in  Jamaica,
N.  Y.,  4  Aug.,  1870,  received  his  earlv  training  un-
der the  blind  school-master,  Joseph  Nelson,  of  New
York,  and  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1819.
Taking  orders,  he  became  successively  rector  of  St.
Michael's  church,  Trenton,  N.  J.,  in  1823,  and  in
1830  of  Grace  church,  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  where  he
remained  until  his  death.  He  was  a  thorough
classical  scholar,  and  well  versed  in  English  litera-
ture. He  wrote  much  for  literary  and  theological
periodicals,  and  published  many  sermons  and  ad-
dresses. A  nearly  complete  set  of  the  "  Rector's
Offering,"  his  annual  pastoral  letter  to  his  con-
gregation, is  in  the  library  of  Columbia  college. —
The  second  son,  Samuel  Roosevelt,  clergvman,
b.  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Amenia,  N.  Y.,  13  Aug.,  1873,  was
also  prepared  for  college  by  Nelson,  and  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1820,  receiving  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  that  college  in  1849.  He  was  rector  of  St.
James's  church,  Hyde  Park,  N.  Y.,  from  1824  till
1834,  when  he  removed  to  St.  George's  church,
Flushing.  In  1835  he  accompanied  Bishop  Kem-
per on  his  journey  through  the  northwest,  and  in
1837  he  settled  at  Lafayette,  Ind.,  where  St.  John's
church  was  built  through  his  exertions  and  partly


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


445


at  his  expense.  The  bishopric  of  Indiana  was  of-
fered to  him,  but  was  declined.  In  1847  he  became
rector  of  St.  John's  church,  Brooklyn.  In  1850
he  was  chosen  professor  of  systematic  divinity  in
the  General  theological  seminary  in  New  York  city.
He  retained  this  post  until  1870,  when  he  re-
signed, and  shortly  afterward  retired  to  Amenia,
where  he  officiated  as  rector  of  St.  Thomas's  church
until  his  death.  He  was  a  man  of  fine  natural
abilities,  improved  by  constant  reading  and  study.

JOHNSON,  John  Mercer,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Liverpool,  England,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Northum-
berland, New  Brunswick,  9  Nov.,  1868.  He  came
with  his  father  to  New  Brunswick  at  an  early  age,
was  educated  in  the  Northumberland  county  gram-
mar-school, and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.  He
was  soon  afterward  elected  a  member  of  the  Pro-
vincial legislature,  made  postmaster-general  in
1847,  and  then  speaker  of  the  house,  attorney-gen-
eral, and  in  1854  solicitor-general.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  conference  that  met  in  Quebec  in  1864,
and  of  the  London  conference,  which  settled  the
details  of  the  confederation  act.  When  the  Union
was  accomplished  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Dominion  parliament  for  Northumberland.

JOHNSON,  John  Milton,  phvsician,  b.  in
Smithland,  Livingston  co.,  Ky.,  15  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.
in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  18  May,  1886.  His  ancestor,
Thomas,  came  to  this  country  in  1700.  After  re-
ceiving an  education  from  his  father  and  from  a
physician  of  Madisonville,  Ky.,  he  began  the  prac-
tice of  medicine  in  1833.  His  success  in  treating
an  epidemic  in  western  Kentucky  that  was  known
as  the  "  milk  sickness,"  between  1840  and  1845,
brought  him  into  notice,  and  his  notes  upon  this
disease  and  its  causes  were  republished  in  the  Lon-
don "  Lancet "  and  other  medical  journals.  In
1861  he  entered  the  Confederate  army,  and  in  1862
was  surgeon  of  the  post  at  Atlanta,  Ga.  After-
ward he  was  medical  director  for  Gen.  Hardee's
division,  and  served  in  all  of  Gen.  Bragg's  en-
gagements. After  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he
settled  in  Atlanta,  where  he  practised  his  pro-
fession until  his  death.  He  was  president  of  the
Atlanta  academy  of  medicine  in  1875,  and  from
1868  till  1872  taught  physiology  and  pathological
anatomy  in  Atlanta  medical  college.  He  has  pub-
lished numerous  medical  papers. — His  brother,
Richard  W.,  soldier,  b.  near  Smithland,  Living-
ston co.,  Ky.,  7  Feb.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849,  and  assigned  to
the  6th  infantry.  He  soon  joined  the  1st  infantry,
and  in  March,  1855,  was  transferred  to  the  cavalry,
in  which  he  was  quartermaster  until  December,
1856,  when  he  was  made  captain  and  served  against
the  Indians  on  the  Texan  frontier.  He  became
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  Kentuckv  cavalry  (Na-
tional) on  28  Aug.,  1861,  and  on  11  Oct.,  1861,  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and  assigned
to  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Buell's  army,  engaging  in  the
movement  to  Pittsburg  Landing,  Tenn.,  and  also
serving  in  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and  Kentucky.  He
was  present  at  the  siege  of  Corinth  on  28  May,
1862,  and  routed  a  Confederate  force  in  his  front.
In  July,  1862,  he  commanded  a  division  of  the
Army  of  the  Ohio,  in  the  Tennessee  campaign.  He
was  taken  prisoner  at  Gallatin,  Tenn.,  on  21  Aug.,
by  a  greatly  superior  force  under  Morgan,  and
after  his  exchange  in  December  was  placed  in
command  of  the  12th  division  of  the  Army  of  the
Cumberland.  He  was  at  Stone  River,  Chicka-
mauga,  and  Missionary  Ridge,  and  in  the  At-
lanta campaign,  being  engaged  in  all  the  battles
in  the  line  of  march  from  Nashville  to  New  Hope
Church, near Atlanta,  where he was severely


wounded,  28  May,  1864.  He  subsequently  com-
manded a  division  of  cavalry  at  the  battle  of  Nash-
ville, was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,
for  gallant  and  meritorious  services,  13  March,
1865,  and  also  major-general  for  his  services  in  the
field  during  the  war.  He  remained  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  George  H.  Thomas,  as  provost-marshal  and
judge-advocate  of  the  military  division  of  the  Ten-
nessee, serving  till  1866,  when  he  was  mustered  out
of  volunteer  service.  He  was  retired  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general  on  12  Oct.,  1867.  He  was  mili-
tary professor  in  the  University  of  Missouri  in
1868-9,  and  in  the  University  of  Minnesota  in
1869-'70.  In  1*881  he  was  the  Democratic  nominee
for  governor  of  Minnesota.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"  Life  of  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas  "  (Philadelphia,
1881),  and  "A  Soldier's  Reminiscences"  (1886).

JOHNSON,  John  Smoke  (Sakayenkwaraghton,
or  '•  The  Disappearing  Mist "),  Mohawk  chief,  b.  in
the  Mohawk  village,  Canada  West,  2  Dec.  1792  ;  d.
there,  26  Aug.,  1886.  His  middle  name  refers  to
the  English  translation  of  his  Indian  title.  He  was
the  leader  of  the  Iroquois  contingent,  on  the  Brit-
ish side,  during  the  war  of  1812,  and  at  its  close
the  Six  Nations  and  their  allies  bestowed  on  him
the  office  of  premier  or  "  speaker  of  the  grand  In-
dian council."  He  was  a  man  of  singular  force
and  purity  of  character,  a  gallant  warrior,  and
gifted  orator. — His  son.  George  Henry  Martin
(Onwanonsyshon),  Mohawk  chief,  b.  in  Grand  River
reserve,  near  Brantford,  Canada,  7  Oct.,  1816 ;  d.
there,  19  Feb.,  1884,  went  to  school  in  Brantford,
and  became  a  member  of  the  family  of  Rev.  Adam
Elliot,  aiding  him  in  the  translation  of  sermons.
In  1840  he  was  appointed  interpreter  for  the  Eng-
lish church  mission  on  the  reserve.  While  thus
engaged  he  became  a  chief,  and  was  also  appointed
government  interpreter  for  the  Six  Nations.  Sub-
sequently he  was  made  warden  of  the  reserve,  and
did  much  to  free  it  from  the  law-breakers  and
liquor- vendors.  In  1865,  and  again  in  1873,  he
was  assaulted  and  beaten,  and  he  bore  the  marks
of  these  attacks  until  his  death.  He  erected  on
his  farm  a  house  that  obtained  for  him  the  Indian
]  name  of  Onwanonsyshon  ("  He  who  has  the  great
mansion").  One  of  his  aims  was  to  direct  the  agri-
I  cultural  industry  of  his  tribe,  and  he  established
!  an  agricultural  societv  on  the  reserve.

JOHNSON,  Joseph,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in
Orange  county,  N.  Y,  19  Dec,  1785 ;  d.  in  Bridge-
port, W.  Va.,  27  Feb..  1877.  In  1800  he  removed
to  Bridgeport,  W.  Va.,  where  he  worked  on  a
farm  and  educated  himself.  He  served  in  the  war
of  1812  as  captain  of  a  volunteer  company  of  rifle-
men, was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serv-
ing from  1823  till  1827,  again  in  1833  for  the  un-
expired term  of  Philip  Doddridge,  and  also  in
1835-'41  and  1845-7.  In  1844  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  National  Democratic  convention.  From
1852  till  1856  he  was  governor  of  Virginia.  He  was
a  supporter  of  the  Confederacy  in  1861-'5. — His
nephew,  Waldo  Porter,  senator,  b.  in  Harrison
county,  Va.,  16  Sept.,  1817;  d.  in  Osceola,  Saint
Clair  co.,  Mo.,  14  Aug.,  1885,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  Osceola  in
1843.  In  1846  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Mexi-
can war,  and  while  on  the  plains  was  honorably
discharged  to  serve  in  the  Missouri  legislature  to
which  he  had  been  elected.  He  became  prosecut-
ing attorney  and  judge  of  his  judicial  district,  and
was  elected"  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,  serv-
ing from  4  July,  1861  till  10  Jan.,  1862,  when  he
was  expelled,  because  he  had  joined  the  Confed-
erate army.  During  the  special  session  of  July,
1861,  he  offered  the  resolution  for  a  peace  conven-


446


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


tion  to  meet  in  Louisville,  Ky.  He  was  wounded
at  Pea  Ridge,  and  became  lieutenant-colonel,  tak-
ing part  in  the  first  Corinth  engagement.  After-
ward, while  he  was  on  special  service,  he  was  ap-
pointed by  Gov.  Reynolds  to  the  Confederate  senate
to  fill  a  vacancy.  After  the  close  of  the  civil  war
he  went  to  Hamilton,  Canada,  where  he  remained
until  his  return  to  Osceola.  In  1875  he  was  presi-
dent of  the  State  constitutional  convention.

JOHNSON,  Joseph  Taber,  physician,  b.  in
Lowell,  Mass.,  30  June,  1845.  He  was  educated  in
Rochester  academy,  Mass.,  and  at  Columbian  col-
lege, D.  C,  from  which  he  received  his  degree  of
M.  A.  in  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  the  George-
town medical  college  in  1865,  and  at  the  Bellevue
hospital  medical  college  in  1867,  when  he  settled
in  Washington,  D.  C.  In  1870  he  visited  Europe,
and  took  the  degree  in  obstetric  operations  in  the
University  of  Vienna.  In  1868  he  was  professor
of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women  and  children
at  Howard  university,  Washington,  which  post
he  resigned  in  1872.  In  1869  he  was  obstetrical
physician  to  Freedman's  hospital,  where  he  re-
mained three  years,  and  in  1869-70  was  physician
to  the  colored  orphan  house.  In  1871  he  was
elected  one  of  the  physicians  to  the  St.  John's
sisterhood  hospital  for  children.  He  was  elected
lecturer  on  obstetrics  in  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Georgetown  in  1874,  full  pro-
fessor of  the  same  in  1876,  and  is  now  (1887)  presi-
dent of  this  department.  He  is  a  member  of
numerous  medical  societies,  and  has  edited  vols.
x.  and  xi.  of  the  "  Transactions  of  the  American
Gynecological  Society  "  (1886-'7).

JOHNSON,  Lawrence,  type-founder,  b.  in
Hull,  England,  23  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  26  April,  1860.  After  serving  an  apprentice-
ship of  seven  years  in  the  printing-office  of  John
Childs  and  Son,  in  Bungay,  Suffolk  co.,  England,
he  induced  his  parents  to  emigrate  with  him  to
the  United  States,  where  they  arrived  in  1819,
and  purchased  a  farm  in  Cayuga  county,  N.  Y.
He  afterward  went  to  New  York  city,  where
he  entered  a  printing-office  as  a  compositor.  In
1820  his  attention  was  directed  to  stereotyping,
and  after  obtaining  some  knowledge  of  it  in  the
employ  of  Messrs.  B.  and  J.  Collins  in  New  York,
he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  established
a  successful  stereotype-foundry,  and  in  1833  he
purchased  the  Philadelphia  type-foundry,  which,
under  his  management,  became  one  of  the  largest
in  the  country.  One  of  his  last  acts,  in  conjunc-
.  tion  with  other  type-founders  of  Philadelphia,  was
to  procure  from  congress  a  modification  of  the
copyright  law  to  afford  protection  to  engravers,
letter-cutters,  and  designers.

JOHNSON,  Sir  Nathaniel,  governor  of  South
Carolina,  d.  in  1713.  He  had  been  in  the  British
army,  served  as  a  member  of  parliament,  and  be-
tween 1686  and  1689  was  governor  of  Treves,  St.
Christopher,  Montserrat,  and  Antigua.  In  1703-'9
he  was  governor  of  South  Carolina,  and  during  the
French  attack  on  that  colony  in  1706  defeated  the
enemy,  with  the  loss  of  their  commander  and  300
men.  Sir  Nathaniel  introduced  silk-culture  into
the  province  in  1703,  and  is  said  to  have  been  the
pioneer  of  that  industry  there.

JOHNSON,  Oliver,  editor,  b.  in  Peacham,  Vt.,
27  Dec,  1809 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec,  1889.
He  served  in  the  office  of  the  "  Watchman,"  at
Montpelier,  Vt.,  and  in  1831  became  the  editor  of
the  newly  established  "  Christian  Soldier."  From
1865  till  1870  he  was  managing  editor  of  the  "  In-
dependent," after  which  he  became  the  editor  of  the
"  Weekly  Tribune,"  which  post  he  resigned  in  1872


to  become  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Union."  He
was  active  in  the  cause  of  anti-slavery  as  lecturer
and  editor,  and  was  one  of  the  twelve  that  or-
ganized the  New  England  anti-slavery  society  in
1832.  He  published  "  William  Lloyd  Garrison  and
his  Times,  or  Sketches  of  the  Anti-slavery  Move-
ment in  America  "  (Boston,  1880).  —  His  wife,
Mary  Ann,  b.  in  Westmoreland,  N.  H.,  24  Aug.,
1808;  d.  in  New  York,  8  June,  1872,  was  assistant
matron  in  the  female  state-prison  at  Sing  Sing,
N.  Y.,  and  promoted  the  reforms  introduced  at
that  period.  Subsequently  she  lectured  on  anatomy
and  physiology  to  women.

JOHNSON,  Ovid  Frazer,  lawyer,  b.  near
Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  in  1807 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  in  February,  1854.  He  studied  law  with
John  N.  Conyngham,  and,  after  being  admitted  to
the  bar,  began  practice  in  Wilkesbarre.  In  1833-
'45  he  was  attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania.  He
attained  distinction  as  a  political  writer,  and  was
the  author  of  the  political  satires  entitled  the
"  Governor's  Letters,"  which  were  published  dur-
ing the  administration  of  Gov.  Joseph  Ritner.

JOHNSON,  Philip  Carrigain,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Maine,  21  Nov.,  1828 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H..
28  Jan.,  1887.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1846,  and
was  present  at  the  bombardment  of  Vera  Cruz  and
Tuspan  during  the  Mexican  war.  In  1847-'8  he
served  in  the  frigate  "  Ohio,"  of  the  Pacific  squad-
ron, and  spent  the  next  four  years  at  the  naval
school  and  with  the  Brazil  squadron.  In  1854-'9
he  was  attached  to  the  coast  survey.  He  became
a  lieutenant  in  1855,  from  1859  till  1861  was  at-
tached to  the  "  San  Jacinto,"  then  cruising  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  and  from  1861  till  1863  command-
ed the  "  Tennessee "  of  the  Western  Gulf  squad-
ron, being  present  at  the  bombardment  and  pas-
sage of  Fort  Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip.  He
became  a  lieutenant-commander  in  1862,  and  in
1864  was  attached  to  the  "  Katahdin,"  of  the
Western  Gulf  squadron.  In  1865-'6  he  was  sta-
tioned in  the  naval  academy,  and  two  years  after-
ward he  served  on  the  "  Sacramento."  He  be-
came a  commander  in  1867,  and  from  1868  till
1870  was  fleet-captain  of  the  South  Pacific  squad-
ron. He  was  made  captain  in  1874,  and  served
until  1876  on  the  South  Pacific  station,  command-
ing the  "  Omaha  "  and  the  "  Richmond."  In  1877-
'81  he  was  stationed  at  the  Mare  island  navy-yard,
and  was  then  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  train-
ing-ship "  New  Hampshire."  He  subsequently
served  as  chief  signal  officer  of  the  navy,  and  in
1884  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  commodore  and
placed  in  command  of  Portsmouth  navy-yard  He
was  promoted  to  rear-admiral  26  Jan.,  1887.

JOHNSON,  Reverdy,  statesman,  b.  in  Annapor
lis,  Md.,  21  May.  1796 ;  d.  there,  10  Feb.,  1876.
He  was  educated  at  St.  John's  college,  studied  law
with  his  father,  John  Johnson,  chancellor  of  the
state,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1815.  He  be-
gan to  practise  in  Upper  Marlboro',  Prince  George
county,  was  appointed  deputy  attorney-general  for
that  judicial  district,  and  in  1817  removed  to  Bal-
timore, where  he  practised  with  success.  In  1821
he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  for  a  term  of  five
years,  and  soon  distinguished  himself  for  his  intel-
ligent, bold,  and  comprehensive  discussion  of  the
question  of  state  and  Federal  policy  that  was  agitat-
ing the  country.  He  was  re-elected  for  the  suc-
ceeding term,  but  resigned  at  the  end  of  the  second
year  to  become  attorney-general  in  President  Tay-
lor's cabinet.  In  1845  he  was  sent  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  Whig,  serving  till  1849.  One  of  the
most  striking  characteristics  of  Mr.  Johnson's  pub-
lic life  was  his  occasional  disregard  of  party  dicta-


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


447


tion.  A  memorable  instance  of  this  independent
action  was  his  hearty  support  of  the  Mexican  war
measures  of  Polk's  administration,  in  spite  of  the
violent  opposition  of  the  Whigs.  On  the  accession
of  President  Fillmore,  Mr.  Johnson  resigned,  and
for  more  than  twenty  years  afterward  he  was  ex-
clusively engaged
in  his  profession-
al duties,  appear-
ing during  that
time  in  the  trial
of  celebrated  cases
in  almost  every
part  of  the  coun-
try, from  New
England  to  Cali-
fornia. In  1854
he  was  employed
by  some  English
claimants to ar-

Ene a case in
ondon  before  an
y£ f.  Anglo  -  American

^~xSZ~y  'rr\^*-~^- — commission.  Dur-
ing his  residence
of  several  months  in  England  he  was  received
with  marked  attention  by  the  barristers  and
judges  of  that  country,  and  left  a  reputation  be-
hind him  which  had  not  been  forgotten  when,
fourteen  years  afterward,  he  went  as  minister
to  the  court  of  St.  James.  Whether  in  or  out  of
office,  Mr.  Johnson  was  invariably  outspoken  in  his
opinions  of  all  public  matters.  His  decided  oppo-
sition to  the  proscriptive  doctrines  of  the  "  Know-
Nothing  "  party  led  him,  together  with  many  of  the
Whig  leaders  in  Maryland,  to  unite  with  the  Demo-
crats in  1856  and  in  the  subsequent  support  of
Buchanan's  administration.  In  the  presidential
contest  of  1860  Mr.  Johnson  joined  the  Douglas
wing  of  the  party,  and  was  active  in  his  efforts  to
secure  its  success.  He  was  a  member  of  the  peace
congress  in  Washington  in  1861  and  in  1862.
Throughout  the  civil  war  he  supported  the  Na-
tional cause,  and  sustained  the  measures  of  the  ad-
ministration. When  peace  was  restored  he  urged
the  readmission  of  the  southern  states  without  de-
lay. He  voted  for  the  first  reconstruction  bill,  sup-
ported that  measure  when  it  was  vetoed  by  Presi-
dent Johnson,  and  opposed  the  second  bill.  Dur-
ing his  term  he  was  engaged  by  the  government  as
an  umpire  in  adjusting  questions  that  had  arisen
in  New  Orleans  during  the  civil  war.  In  1868  he
resigned  his  seat  in  the  senate,  having  been  ap-
pointed by  President  Johnson  to  succeed  Charles
Francis  Adams  as  minister  to  England,  where  he
negotiated  the  "  Johnson-Clarendon "  treaty  for
the  settlement  of  the  Alabama  claims,  which  was
rejected  by  the  senate.  In  his  negotiations  with
Lord  Clarendon  he  procured  a  perfect  recognition
of  everything  that  our  government  claimed  in  the
international  controversies  growing  out  of  the  civil
war.  The  failure  of  the  senate  to  ratify  the  John-
son-Clarendon treaty  was  due  to  party  jealousy,
and  nothing  more  than  was  embraced  in  the  terms
of  Mr.  Johnson's  protocol  was  afterward  obtained
from  Great  Britain.  Mr.  Johnson's  popularity
among  Englishmen  was  proverbial,  and  his  recall
by  President  Grant,  in  1869,  and  the  nomination
of  his  Republican  successor  became  a  party  neces-
sity. Although  seventy-three  years  of  age  when
he  returned  from  England,  he  resumed  his  law
practice  with  his  early  eagerness.  In  1872  he  sup-
ported Horace  Greeley  for  president.  He  was  con-
stantly employed  in  court  and  office  practice  un-
til his  death,  which  was  caused  by  apoplexy,  and


which  took  place  at  the  executive  mansion  in  An-
napolis, where  he  had  been  the  guest  of  the  gov-
ernor, and  was  awaiting  the  call  of  a  case  in  the
court  of  appeals.  In  conjunction  with  Mr.  Thomas
Harris  he  reported  the  decisions  of  the  Maryland
court  of  appeals,  known  as  "Harris's  and  John-
son's Reports  "  (7  vols.,  1820-'7).

JOHNSON,  Robert,  governor  of  South  Caro-
lina, b.  in  1682 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  3  May,
1735.  He  was  the  son  of  Gen.  Sir  Nathaniel
Johnson,  governor  of  South  Carolina  from  1702
till  1709,  who  left  his  son  a  considerable  estate.
On  30  April.  1717,  he  was  commissioned  governor
by  Lord  Carteret,  at  a  time  when  the  disaffection
of  the  colony  toward  the  lords  proprietors  was
rapidly  developing  into  rebellion.  One  of  his  first
orders  was  to  equip  a  ship  to  act  against  the  pirates
that  were  then  infesting  the  coast,  and  he  com-
manded in  person  in  a  victorious  engagement  with
them  off  the  bar  of  Charleston.  The  struggle  be-
tween the  lords  proprietors  and  the  commons  house
of  assembly  culminated  in  the  convention  of  1719,
of  which  Arthur  Middleton  was  president.  This
convention  established  a  revolutionary  govern-
ment, and  requested  Robert  Johnson  to  assume
the  executive  in  the  name  of  the  king,  which  he
declined  to  do.  asserting  the  rights  of  the  lords
proprietors.  The  convention  thereupon  elected
James  Moore,  and  asserted  their  power  by  military
force.  In  1731  Johnson  was  appointed  royal  gov-
ernor, and  came  from  England  to  take  possession
of  this  office.  Gov.  Johnson  aided  Gen.  Ogle-
thorpe and  the  first  settlers  of  Georgia  by  giving
them  food  and  escort,  and  during  his  term  the  set-
tlement of  Purrysbury,  by  the  Swiss  under  Col.
Peter  Purry,  was  made.  The  general  assembly
erected  a  monument  to  his  memory  in  St.  Philip's
church,  Charleston.

JOHNSON,  Robert  Ward,  senator,  b.  in  Ken-
tucky in  1814;  d.  in  Arkansas  about  1879.  He  re-
ceived an  English  education,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  removed  to  Pine  Bluffs,  Ark.,
where  he  practised  his  profession.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from  1847
till  1853,  when  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator.  He  was
chairman  of  the  committee  on  printing,  and  a  mem-
ber of  those  on  military  affairs  and  on  public  lands.
He  withdrew  in  1861  when  Arkansas  passed  an
ordinance  of  secession,  was  elected  to  the  Provis-
ional Confederate  congress,  and  in  1862  elected  to
the  Confederate  senate,  in  which  he  was  an  active
member  until  the  close  of  the  civil  war,  after  which
he  practised  law  in  Washington,  D.  C.

JOHNSON,  Rossiter,  author,  b.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  27  Jan.,  1840.  His  father,  Reuben  Johnson
(1791-1876),  was  one  of  the  small  company  that,
with  three  old  guns,  drove  off  the  British  fleet  that
bombarded  Stonington,  Conn.,  in  1814.  He  was
educated  at  Williams,  and  was  for  many  years  a
teacher  in  Rochester.  The  son  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Rochester  in  1863,  delivering  the
poem  on  class-day.  In  1864-'8  he  was  connected
with  Robert  Carter  (q.  v.)  in  editing  the  Rochester
"  Democrat,"  a  Republican  newspaper,  and  in
1869-'72  was  editor  of  the  Concord,  N.  H..  "  States-
man." In  1873-'7  he  was  associated  with  Messrs.
Ripley  and  Dana  in  editing  the  "  American  Cyclo-
paedia," and  in  1879-80  with  Sydney  Howard  Gay
in  the  preparation  of  the  last  two  volumes  of  his
"  History  of  the  United  States."  In  1883  he  be-
came editor  of  the  "  Annual  Cyclopaedia."  He  de-
vised and  edited  the  series  of  *  Little  Classics  "  (16
vols.,  Boston,  1874-'5 ;  two  additional  vols.,  1880 ;
25th  ed.,  1887),  and  has  also  edited  "  Works  of  the
British  Poets,  with  Biographical  Sketches  "  (3  vols.,


448


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


New  York,  1876) ;  "  Famous  Single  and  Fugitive
Poems  "  (1877) :  "  Play-Day  Poems  "  (1878) ;  and,
with  Charles  A.  Dana,  "  Fifty  Perfect  Poems "
(1882).  In  1876  he  tried  the  experiment  of  making
an  abbreviated  edition  of  some  of  the  greater  novels
of  the  English  language  (4  vols.,  16  mo.,  New  York).
Mr.  Johnson  has  written,  besides  numerous  con-
tributions to  periodicals,  "  Phaeton  Rogers,  a  Novel
of  Boy  Life,"  first  published  as  a  serial  in  "  St.
Nicholas"  (New  York,  1881);  "A  History  of  the
War  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain
in  1812-'15 "  (1882) ;  "  A  History  of  the  French
War,  ending  in  the  Conquest  of  Canada  "  (1882) ;
"  Idler  and  Poet,"  a  small  volume  of  verses,  of
which  the  most  popular  is  the  hot-weather  poem
"  Ninety-nine  in  the  Shade  "  (Boston,  1883) ;  and
"  A  Short  History  of  the  War  of  Secession,"  first
published  serially  in  the  New  York  "  Examiner,"
(1888).— His  wife,  Helen  Kendrick,  author,  a
daughter  of  Asahel  C.  Kendrick  (q.  v.),  was  edu-
cated at  the  Oread  institute,  Worcester,  Mass.,  and
was  married  in  1869.  In  1886  she  founded  in  New
York  the  Meridian,  a  woman's  club,  which  meets
once  a  month,  at  mid-day,  for  the  discussion  of  so-
cial, economical,  and  literary  topics.  She  has  con-
tributed to  periodicals,  is  the  author  of  "  The  Rod-
dy Books  "  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1874-'6)  and  "  Ra-
leigh Westgate  "  (1889),  and  has  edited  "  Tears  for
the  Little  Ones,  Poems  and  Passages  inspired  by
the  Loss  of  Children  "  (Boston,  1878) ;  "  Our  Famil-
iar Songs,  and  Those  who  made  Them  "  (New  York,
1881);  "Poems  and  Songs  for  Young  People"  (1884);
and  "  The  Nutshell  Series  "  (6  small  vols.,  1885).—
His  brother,  Alexander  Byron,  educator,  was
graduated  at  Oberlin  in  1853,  and  has  since  been
a  teacher  at  Avondale,  Ohio.  In  1875  he  was
president  of  the  Ohio  teachers'  association,  in
1881-'3  was  a  member  of  the  State  board  of  ex-
aminers, and  for  several  years  he  has  been  a  lec-
turer at  institutes  in  western  states. — His  sister,
Evangeline  Maria,  was  graduated  at  Roches-
ter free  academy,  and  in  1877  married  Joseph
O'Connor,  a  journalist  and  poet.  She  has  trans-
lated "  Fire  and  Flame,"  from  the  German  of  Levin
Schiicking  (New  York,  1876),  and  has  prepared
"  An  Analytical  Index  to  the  Works  of  Nathaniel
Hawthorne  "  (Boston,  1882),  and  "  An  Index  to  the
Works  of  Shakspere"  (New  York  and  London,
1887).  She  has  contributed  numerous  poems  to
periodicals,  the  best-known  of  which  is  that  en-
titled "  Daughters  of  Toil."

JOHNSON,  Rowland,  reformer,  b.  in  German-
town,  Pa.,  24  May,  1816 ;  d.  in  West  Orange,  N.  J.,
25  Sept.,  1886.  His  parents  were  members  of  the
Society  of  Friends,  and  in  early  life  he  was  a
preacher  of  that  denomination.  In  1850  he  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  became  a  broker  and
commission-merchant  in  that  city.  He  was  among
the  earliest  supporters  of  the  abolition  movement,
and  at  one  time  was  the  leader  of  the  anti-slavery
party  in  New  York.  He  was  also  one  of  the  first
members  of  the  Union  league  club,  and  was  ac-
tive in  charitable  organizations.

JOHNSON,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Guilford,
Conn.,  14  Oct.,  1696  ;  d.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  6  Jan.,
1772.  His  great-grandfather,  Robert,  came  from
Kingston-upon-Hull,  England,  to  New  Haven,
about  1637.  Samuel  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1714,
and  in  1716,  when  the  college  was  removed  from
Saybrook  to  New  Haven,  he  became  one  of  its  tu-
tors. He  resigned  in  1719,  having  meanwhile  studied
theology,  and  in  March,  1720,  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  in  West  Haven.  During
his  residence  at  New  Haven  several  circumstances
occurred  to  give  him  a  predilection  for  episcopacy,


and  he  would  have  preferred  Episcopal  to  Congre-
gational ordination,  but  deemed  it  prudent  to  con-
form to  the  prevailing  ecclesiastical  usages  of  the
country.  In  1722  he  met  Mr.  Pigot,  an  Episco-
palian clergyman,  who  was  settled  at  Stratford,
and  introduced  him  to  his  college  friends.  A  series
of  meetings  that  followed  resulted  in  the  conver-
sion of  President  Timothy  Cutler,  Tutor  Daniel
Brown,  and  himself  to  episcopacy,  and  he  sailed
with  his  friends  for  England,  where  all  three
were  ordained.  On  his  return  to  Connecticut,
Mr.  Johnson  was  assigned  to  the  mission  at  Strat-
ford. Soon  after  the  arrival  of  Dean  Berkeley
in  this  country,  Mr.  Johnson  made  his  acquaint-
ance, and  began  a  correspondence  with  him  which
continued  throughout  life.  When  Berkeley  was
about  to  return  to  Europe,  Mr.  Johnson  suggested
to  him  the  gifts  to  Yale  that  he  afterward  made.
(See  Berkeley,  George.)  Mr.  Johnson  had  not
been  long  settled  at  Stratford  when  he  felt  called
upon  to  engage  with  his  pen  in  the  defence  of  epis-
copacy. In  1725  he  was  brought  into  a  contro-
versy with  Rev.  Jonathan  Dickinson,  of  Elizabeth-
town,  N.  J.,  and  afterward  with  the  Rev.  Thomas
Foxcroft,  of  Boston.  In  1732  a  similar  contro-
versy began  between  him  and  Rev.  John  Graham,  of
Woodbury,  Conn.,  which  did  not  end  until  1736.
During  the  revival  in  connection  with  Whitefield's
labors,  he  published  a  pamphlet  for  the  times,  con-
taining his  views  on  the  divine  sovereignty  (Bos-
ton, 1745),  which  was  replied  to  by  Mr.  Dickinson,
and  later,  to  counteract  what  he  deemed  the  dan-
gerous views  that  were  then  spreading,  he  issued
a  work  on  moral  philosophy,  entitled  "  A  System
of  Morality  "  (1746).  In  1744  his  congregation  had
so  increased  that  it  was  considered  necessary  to
find  a  new  place  of  worship.  In  1752  Benjamin
Franklin  published  in  Philadelphia  an  enlarged
edition  of  Dr.  Johnson's  "System  of  Morality,"
under  the  title  of  "Elementa  Philosophica,"  for
the  use  of  the  college  that  was  about  to  be  estab-
lished in  that  city,  and  the  author  was  urged  to
become  the  president  of  the  institution,  but  de-
clined. In  the  following  year  several  residents  of
New  York,  chiefly  Episcopalians,  invited  him  to
remove  to  that  city  preparatory  to  becoming  presi-
dent of  a  college  (King's,  afterward  Columbia),
for  which  an  act  of  assembly  had  been  obtained.
This  invitation  he  accepted,  and  began  his  la-
bors on  17  July,  1754,  with  a  class  of  ten  pupils,
of  whom  only  seven  were  graduated.  Under  his
rule  the  institution  was  guided  through  its  early
troubles,  subscriptions  were  obtained  for  its  endow-
ment, and  its  policy  and  course  of  study  regulated.
He  continued  to  hold  office  until  early  in  1763,
when  he  resigned  on  account  of  family  troubles
and  his  advanced  age.  He  then  returned  to  Strat-
ford to  reside  with  his  son,  and  the  following  year
was  again  appointed  to  the  charge  of  his  old  parish,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  Dr.  Johnson
received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  both  Oxford  and
Cambridge  in  1723,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  the
former  in  1743.  His  published  works,  besides  those
already  mentioned,  include  "  A  Letter  from  a  Min-
ister of  the  Church  of  England  to  his  Dissenting
Parishioners  "  (New  York,  1733) ;  "  A  Second  Let-
ter" (Boston,  1734);  "A  Third  Letter"  (1737);  "A
Sermon  Concerning  the  Obligations  we  are  under
to  Love  and  Delight  in  the  Public  Worship  of
God"  (1746);  "A  Demonstration  of  the  Reason-
ableness, Usefulness,  and  Great  Duty  of  Prayer "
(New  York,  1760) ;  "  A  Sermon  on  the  Beauty  of
Holiness  in  the  Worship  of  the  Church  of  England  "
(1761);  and  "An  English  and  Hebrew  Grammar"
(London,  1767 ;  2d  ed.,  1771). See  his  "  Life,"  by


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


449


^T^^^-<


Rev.  Dr.  Thomas  B.  Chandler  (1805 ;  London,
1824),  and  "Life  and  Correspondence,"  by  Rev.
E.  Edwards  Beardsley,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1874).
— His  son,  William  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Strat-
ford, Conn.,  7  Oct.,  1727 ;  d.  there,  14  Nov.,  1819,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1744,  studied  law,  and,
when  admitted  to  the  bar,  took  high  rank  in  his
profession.  In  1761,  and  again  during  two  ses-
sions in  1765,  he  rep-
resented Stratford
in  the  general  as-
sembly, and  in  the
latter  year  was  sent
as  a  delegate  to  the
Stamp-act  congress
in  New  York.  In
May,  1766,  he  was
chosen  to  the  upper
house,  or  governor's
council,  and  at  the
ensuing  October  ses-
sion of  the  assembly
was  appointed  a  spe-
cial agent  at  the
court  of  Great  Brit-
ain, to  present  the
defence  of  the  colony  with  regard  to  its  title  to  the
territory  that  was  occupied  by  the  remnant  of  the
Mohegan  tribe  of  Indians.  He  accepted  the  mis-
sion, but  so  many  were  the  delays  interposed  by
his  opponents  that  he  was  unable  to  return  to  this
country  until  the  autumn  of  1771.  In  the  follow-
ing year,  after  resuming  his  seat  in  the  council,  he
was  appointed  one  of  the  judges  of  the  superior
court  of  the  colony,  but  retained  the  office  for  only
a  few  months.  After  the  battle  of  Lexington  he
and  another  colonist  were  deputed  to  wait  on  Gen.
Gage,  with  a  letter  from  the  governor  of  Connecti-
cut, the  object  of  which  was  to  stav  hostilities  and
to  inquire  if  means  could  not  be  adopted  to  secure
peace ;  but  the  embassy  was  unsuccessful.  He  re-
tired from  the  governor's  council  before  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence,  and,  not  being  able  con-
scientiously to  join  in  a  war  against  England,  lived
in  retirement  in  Stratford  until  the  conclusion  of
peace.  He  then  resumed  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession, and  from  November,  1784,  till  May,  1787,
served  as  a  member  of  the.  Continental  congress.
In  the  latter  year  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of
the  Connecticut  delegation  to  the  convention  for
the  formation  of  a  Federal  constitution,  and  was
chairman  of  the  committee  of  five  appointed
to  revise  the  wording  of  the  instrument  and  ar-
range its  articles.  Among  other  suggestions  he
proposed  the  organization  of  the  senate  as  a  sepa-
rate body.  In  the  same  year  he  resumed  his  place
in  the  upper  house  of  the  Connecticut  assembly,
and  he  held  it  until  1789,  when  he  was  elected  the
first  U.  S.  senator  from  that  state.  He  rendered
important  service  in  drawing  up  the  bill  for  the
judiciary  system,  but  resigned  in  March,  1791,  in
order  to  devote  his  entire  time  to  the  discharge  of
the  duties  of  president  of  Columbia  college,  to
which  office  he  had  been  elected  in  May,  1787.  Re-
signing this  office  also,  in  1800,  on  account  of  fail-
ing health,  he  retired  to  Stratford,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  When  in  England  he
made  the  acquaintance  of  many  eminent  men,  in-
cluding Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  whose  correspondent
he  became  on  his  return  to  the  United  States.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  Oxford  in
1776,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Y'ale  in  1788.  He
was  the  earliest  graduate  of  the  latter  college  to
receive  an  honorary  degree  in  laws,  as  his  father
had  been  the  first  to  receive  a  similar  degree  in
vol.  in. — 29


divinity.  Dr.  Johnson  added  to  superior  mental
endowments  a  fine  personal  presence  and  a  musical
voice.  His  oratory  was  deemed  by  his  contempo-
raries as  well-nigh  perfect.  Forty-three  of  his  let-
ters, written  during  his  sojourn  in  Great  Britain,
have  been  published  by  the  Massachusetts  historical
society  in  the  "  Trumbull  Papers."  See  a  "  Sketch  "
by  John  T.  Irving  (1830),  and  "  Life  and  Times  of
W.  S.  Johnson,"  bv  Rev.  E.  Edwards  Beardsley,
D.D.  (Boston,  1876).  —  William  Samuel's  great-
grandson,  Woolsey,  physician,  b.  in  New  York
city.  8  Feb.,  1842  ;  d.  there,  21  June,  1887,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1860,  and  studied  medi-
cine for  a  year  at  the  Albany  medical  school,  and
subsequently  at  the  New  York  college  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1863.  He  then  spent  three  years  in  the  further
study  of  his  profession  in  Paris,  London,  Berlin,
and  Vienna,  and  on  his  return  began  to  practise  in
New  York  city.  He  was  surgeon  of  the  Eye  and
ear  infirmary,  and  consulting  physician  at  the  New
York  hospital.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  by
Mayor  Grace  health-commissioner  of  the  city  of.
New  York,  his  term  expiring  1  May,  1887.  Dur-
ing this  period  Dr.  Johnson  did  effective  work.

JOHNSON,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass..  10  Oct.,  1822:  d.  in  North  Andover,  Miss.,
19  Feb ,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1842,  and  at  the  divinity-school  in  Cambridge  in
1846.  He  entered  the  ministry  without  ordina-
tion, and  his  first  charge  was  the  Unitarian  church
in  Harrison  square.  Dorchester,  where  he  remained
one  year.  His  political  preaching  and  anti-slavery
sentiments  gave  offence,  and  his  engagement  was
not  renewed.  About  1851-'2  he  became  pastor  of
a  free  church  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  where  he  remained
until  1870,  lecturing  often  upon  anti-slavery  topics.
About  1852-'3  he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  in
Salem,  which  was  the  germ  of  his  subsequent
works.  He  compiled  with  Rev.  Samuel  Longfel-
low "  Hymns  for  Public  and  Private  Devotion "
(Boston,  1846) :  and  was  the  author  of  "  Oriental
Religions,"  comprising  "  India "  (Boston,  1872),
"  China  "  (1877),  and  "  Persia  "  (1885).  See  a  me-
moir of  him  by  Samuel  Longfellow  (Boston,  1883).

JOHNSON,  Samuel  Frost,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  9  Nov.,  1835.  He  began  the  study  of
art  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  and  continued  it  in  the
antique  and  life  schools  of  the  National  academy
of  design  in  New  York,  in  the  Art  academy  of
Diisseldorf  in  1859-61, and  afterward  in  the  Acad-
emy of  Saint  Luke  at  Antwerp,  and  the  Ecole  des
beaux-arts  in  Paris.  In  1865-'9  he  was  a  pupil  of
Edward  Frere  at  Ecouen.  After  painting  for  some
time  in  London  he  returned  to  New  York,  and  was
a  professor  in  the  art-schools  of  the  Metropolitan
museum  in  1883-'5,  also  teaching  science  and  art
classes  at  St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  in  1884-'5.
His  representations  of  still-life,  and  his  studies  of
heads,  mostly  taken  abroad,  have  been  highly
praised.  His  works  include  "Les  Pommes,"  shown
at  the  Paris  salon  of  1869 ;  "  Good  Night "  (1876) ;
"  Love  Me,  Love  Me  Not " ;  "  Does  Your  Mother
Know  You're  Out  ?  " ;  "  Stitch  in  Time  " ;  "  Young
Ornithologist  "  (1879) ;  "  After  Rain  "  (1880)  ;
••  Moorland  Landscape  "  (1881) ;  a  portrait  of  Car-
dinal McCloskey,  and  one  of  Lady  Helen  Black-
wood, daughter  of  Lord  Dufferin,  the  color  effects
in  which  have  been  highly  praised.  He  is  now
(1887)  engaged  in  painting  a  large  altar-piece,  rep-
resenting "  The  Last  Supper,"  on  the  walls  of  St.
Cecilia's  church,  New  York  city.

JOHNSON,  Samuel  William,  chemist,  b.  in
Kingsborough,  N.  Y„  3  July,  1830.  He  studied  at
the  Yale  (now  Sheffield)  scientific  school,  and  then


450


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


at  the  universities  of  Leipsic  and  Munich  in  Ger-
many. In  1856  he  was  appointed  professor  of
theoretical  and  agricultural  chemistry  in  the  Shef-
field scientific  school,  and  he  has  since  held  that
chair.  He  early  became  associated  with  the  work
conducted  under  the  auspices  of  the  Connecticut
state  agricultural  society,  and  later  was  chemist  of
the  Connecticut  state  board  of  agriculture,  con-
tributing to  both  of  these  organizations  numerous
papers  and  reports  on  fertilizers  and  kindred  sub-
jects, with  analyses.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  was  elected  president  of  the  Ameri-
can chemical  society  in  1878,  also  receiving  in  1866
an  election  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences,
and  in  1875  was  chairman  of  the  chemical  section
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science.  As  an  authority  on  matters  pertaining
to  the  application  of  chemistry  to  agriculture,  Prof.
Johnson  stands  deservedly  high.  In  addition  to
many  papers  that  he  has  furnished  to  scientific
journals  and  agricultural  reports — among  which
are  the  "  Examination  of  Two  Sugars  (Panocite  and
•Pinite)  from  California "  (1856) ;  "  Soil  Analyses :
Notice  of  the  Agricultural  Chemistry  of  the  Geo-
logical Surveys  of  Kentucky  and  Arkansas  "  (1861) ;
"On  Native  Crystallized  Terpin "  (1867);  "On
Nitrification  "  (1869) ;  and  "  On  the  Use  of  Potas-
sium Dichromate  in  Ultimate  Organic  Analysis"
(1874) — he  is  the  author  of  "  Peat,  and  its  Uses  as
a  Fertilizer  and  Fuel "  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  How
Crops  Grow"  (1868;  London,  1869;  German  ed.,
Braunschweig,  1871 ;  Russian  ed.,  St.  Petersburg,
1873);  "How  Crops  Feed"  (1870;  German  ed.,
Braunschweig,  1872) ;  and  also  translator  and  edi-
tor of  Fresenius's  "Manual  of  Qualitative  Anal-
ysis" (1864);  and  his  "Manual  of  Quantitative
Analysis  "  (1869).

JOHNSON,  Sarah  Barclay,  author,  b.  in  Albe-
marle county,  Va.,  in  1837;  d.  in  Greenwich,
Conn.,  21  April,  1885.  Her  father,  Dr.  James  T.
Barclay,  was  for  some  time  a  missionary  in  Jerusa-
lem, and  wrote  a  description  of  that  city  entitled
"The  City  of  the  Great  King"  (Philadelphia,
1857).  His  daughter  accompanied  him  on  this
mission,  and  drew  most  of  the  illustrations  in  his
book.  In  1856  she  married  J.  Augustus  Johnson,
then  U.  S.  consul-general  in  Syria,  and  returned
with  him  to  that  country,  where  she  lived  many
years.  She  afterward  resided  with  her  husband  in
New  York  city,  and  after  1883  in  Greenwich,
Conn.  She  was  shot,  together  with  her  daughter,
by  her  son,  who  took  his  own  life  immediately
afterward.  His  act  was  regarded  as  the  result  of  a
fit  of  insanity.  Mrs.  Johnson  published  "  The  Hadji
in  Syria,"  which  attained  popularity  (Philadelphia,
1858).  Her  son,  Barclay  (1862-85),  had  been  re-
cently graduated  at  the  head  of  his  class  at  Yale,
and  was  a  young  man  of  much  promise.  He  had
contributed  to  periodicals,  and  published  an  ad-
dress on  education  (1884).

JOHNSON,  Theodore  Taylor,  merchant,  b.  in
Lebanon,  N.  J.,  in  1818.  He  was  engaged  in  com-
merce in  Philadelphia  from  1843  till  1860,  and  in
1847  his  firm  were  the  largest  shippers  of  bread-
stuffs  from  that  port  to  Great  Britain.  In  1849  he
visited  Jamaica,  Central  America,  and  Mexico,  and
was  the  bearer  of  government  despatches  to  Com.
Jones,  commander  of  the  fleet  on  the  California
coast.  In  1862  he  travelled  extensively  through
South  America.  He  published  "  California  and
Oregon,  or  Sights  in  the  Gold  Region  and  Scenes
by  the  Way  "  (New  York,  1849).

JOHNSON,  Thomas,  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Leon-
ard's, Calvert  co.,  Md.,  4  Nov.,  1732 ;  d.  at  Rose  Hill,
Frederick  co.,  Md.,  25  Oct.,  1819. His  grandfather,


Thomas  Johnson,  emigrated  to  Maryland  in  1689-
'90.  The  grandson  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  the  general  court.  He  represented
Anne  Arundel  county  in  the  house  of  delegates  of
the  province  from  17*62  till  1773,  and  was  the  lead-
ing spirit  in  all  the  measures  and  discussions  in
opposition  to  the  stamp-tax.  On  6  Dec,  1765,  he
prepared  and  reported  the  instructions  to  Charles
Garth,  agent  of  the  province  in  London,  that  the
agent  should  exert  himself  in  opposition  to  any
scheme  to  tax  the  province,  and  on  15  Oct.,  1773,
he  was  elected  one  of  the  committee  of  correspond-
ence. In  June,  1774,  he  was  member  of  the  con-
vention of  county  committees  which  met  at  An-
napolis and  elected  deputies  for  the  province  to  at-
tend a  general  congress  of  representatives  from  all
the  colonies  "  to  effect  one  general  plan  of  conduct
operating  on  the  commercial  connection  of  the
colonies  with  the  mother  country  for  the  relief  of
Boston  and  the  preservation  of  American  liberty."
On  15  June,  1775,  as  deputy  from  Maryland  in  the
congress  at  Philadelphia,  he  nominated  George
Washington  to  be  commander-in-chief  of  the  army.
During  1775  he  was  also  a  member  of  the  commit-
tee of  safety  and  of  the  provincial  convention.  On
5  Jan.,  1776,  he  was  elected  senior  brigadier-gen-
eral of  the  military  forces  of  the  province.  He
prepared  and  reported  a  scheme  for  the  emission  of
bills  of  credit  to  defray  the  expenses  of  defending
the  province,  and  was  in  charge  of  all  measures
and  means  for  the  public  defence.  On  21  May,
1776,  he  was  re-elected  to  congress,  but  remained
in  the  provincial  convention  organizing  the  prov-
ince for  resistance.  On  4  July  the  convention  re-
elected him  to  congress,  resolving  that  it  was  more
important  to  have  his  services  in  congress  than  at
home,  and  on  10  Nov.  he  was  again  elected  to  the
Continental  congress.  On  14  Feb.,  1777,  he  was
elected  the  first  governor  of  Maryland,  and  he  was
re-elected  in  1778  and  1779.  In  October,  1780,  he
was  again  elected  deputy  to  the  Provincial  con-
gress, and  in  December  of  that  year  was  elected  a
member  of  the  house  of  delegates,  where,  on  21
Jan.,  1781,  he  introduced  a  bill  to  confiscate  all
British  property  in  Maryland.  On  the  29th  he
procured  a  message  to  be  sent  by  the  house  to  the
senate,  pressing  for  instructions  to  be  sent  to  the
Maryland  deputies  to  sign  the  articles  of  confed-
eration. Mainly  owing  to  Johnson's  efforts  these
instructions  were  given,  and  John  Hansen  and
Daniel  Carroll  signed  the  articles  on  1  March,  1781.
Up  to  that  time  Maryland  had  refused  to  join  the
confederation  until  Virginia  should  agree  to  re-
lease all  lands  west  of  the  Ohio  river.  Gov.  John-
son was  member  of  the  house  of  delegates  in  Octo-
ber, 1781,  of  the  Continental  congress  in  1781-87,
and  in  1787  introduced  a  resolution  to  sell  the
western  lands.  He  was  member  of  the  Maryland
convention  of  1789  to  ratify  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  was  an  ardent  supporter  of  it.
On  the  organization  of  the  judiciary  under  the  new
government,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  district
judges,  which  office  he  declined,  and  on  20  April,
1790,  he  was  appointed  chief  judge  of  the  general
court  of  Maryland,  but  resigned  on  7  Nov.,  1791,
on  being  appointed  an  associate  justice  of  the  U.
S.  supreme  court.  On  the  resignation  of  John
Rutledge  as  chief  justice,  Washington  insisted  on
Judge  Johnson's  taking  that  place,  but  he  declined.
He  resigned  on  4  March,  1793,  and  on  24  Aug.,
1795,  was  tendered  the  portfolio  of  secretary  of
state,  which  he  declined.  He  was  appointed,  with
Dr.  Stuart  and  Daniel  Carroll,  commissioner  to  lay
out  the  city  of  Washington.  In  1774  he  became
engaged  with  Washington  in  the  scheme  for  the


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


451


improvement  of  the  navigation  of  the  Potomac  so
as  to  open  communication  with  the  western  lands.
After  the  Revolution  the  plan  was  prosecuted  by
the  formation  of  the  Potomac  company  by  the  leg-
islature of  Maryland  through  Johnson's  influence,
and  by  the  general  assembly  of  Virginia  on  the
personal  application  of  Washington.  He  was  one
of  the  committee  appointed  by  congress  in  Octo-
ber, 1774,  to  draft  an  address  to  the  king,  and  was
influential  in  July,  1776,  in  inducing  the  provincial
convention  of  Maryland  to  declare  independence
of  Great  Britain  and  to  authorize  their  deputies  in
congress  to  join  in  the  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence of  the  thirteen  united  colonies.  When  Wash-
ington was  in  retreat  through  the  Jerseys  in  1776-'7,
he  sent  an  urgent  appeal  to  Johnson  to  re-enforce
him,  saying  that  he  had  not  men  enough  to  fight
the  enemy,  and  too  few  to  run  away  with,  and
Johnson  embodied  and  organized  1,800  militia  in
the  western  counties  and  led  them  in  person  to  the
relief  of  Washington.  —  His  brother,  Benjamin,
b.  26  July,  1727,  was  a  major  in  the  Maryland
forces. — Another  brother,  James,  b.  30  Sept.,  1736,
was  a  colonel. — John,  b.  29  Aug.,  1745,  was  a  sur-
geon.— Roger,  b.  15  March,  1749,  was  a  major  of
the  military  force  of  the  province. — Joshua,  b.  25
June,  1744,  removed  to  England  and  became  a
merchant.  At  the  beginning  of  hostilities  he  went
to  Nantes,  France,  where  he  acted  as  the  agent  of
Maryland  during  the  war,  and  was  the  first  consul
of  the  United  States  at  London,  1785-99.  His
daughter,  Louisa  Catherine,  married  John  Quincy
Adams  in  London  in  1796. — Baker,  another  broth-
er, b.  30  Sept.,  1749,  was  a  deputy  from  Frederick
county,  Md.,  in  the  revolutionary  conventions  of
1774,  1775,  and  1776,  was  colonel  of  the  4th  Mary-
land regiment,  and  commanded  it  at  the  battle  of
the  Brandvwine  and  at  Germantown.

JOHNSON,  Virginia  Wales,  author,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  28  Dec,  1849.  She  has  travelled
in  Europe  since  1870,  and  now  (1887)  resides  in
Florence.  Her  publications  include  "  Kettle  Club
Series  "  (Boston,  1870) ;  "  Travels  of  an  American
Owl"  (Philadelphia,  1870);  "Joseph,  the  Jew"
(New  York,  1873) ;  "A  Sack  of  Gold  "  (1874) ;  "  The
Catskill  Fairies  "  (1875) :  "  The  Calderwood  Secret "
(1875);  "Miss  Nancy's  Pilgrimage"  (1877);  "A
Foreign  Marriage  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Neptune  Vase  "
(1881) ;  "  The  English  Daisy  Miller  "  (1882) ;  "  The
Fainalls  of  Tipton  "  (1885) ;  "  Tulip  Place  "  (1886) ;
and  "  The  House  of  the  Musician  *  (1887).

JOHNSON,  Walter  Rogers,  chemist,  b.  in
Leominster,  Mass.,  21  June,  1794;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  26  April,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1819,  taught  in  Framingham  and  Sa-
lem. Mass.,  and  in  1821  became  principal  of  the
academy  in  Germantown,  Pa.  In  1826,  when  the
high-school  was  established  in  Philadelphia,  under
the  auspices  of  the  Franklin  institute,  he  was  given
the  chair  of  mechanics  and  philosophy,  and  at  the
same  time  delivered  a  public  course  of  lectures  on
those  subjects,  which  were  largely  attended.  In
1836  he  began  a  series  of  geological  investigations,
with  special  reference  to  the  coal-formations  and
iron-ores  of  Pennsylvania,  and  a  year  later  was  given
charge  of  the  department  of  magnetism,  electricity,
and  astronomy  on  the  U.  S.  exploring  expedition,
but  soon  resigned  this  office,  owing  to  changes  in
the  original  plan.  From  1839  till  1843  he  held  the
professorship  of  physics  and  chemistry  in  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1843  he  was  appointed  by  congress  to  investi-
gate the  character  of  the  different  varieties  of  coal,
with  reference  to  their  absolute  and  relative  values
for  generating  steam  and  heat  and  producing  il-


luminating gas,  and  he  published  a  report  on  that
subject  during  the  following  year.  Subsequently
he  made  scientific  researches  for  the  navy  depart-
ment, and  in  1845  was  appointed  by  the  city
authorities  of  Boston  to  examine  the  sources  from
which  pure  water  might  be  brought  to  the  city.  In
1848  he  became  connected  with  the  Smithsonian
institution  in  Washington,  and  in  1851  he  was
sent  to  the  World's  fair  in  London.  Prof.  John-
son was  active  in  the  organization  of  the  Associa-
tion of  American  geologists  and  naturalists,  and
when  it  gave  place  to  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science  he  was  its  first  secre-
tary. His  publications  include  "Natural  Philoso-
phy," originally  entitled  "Scientific  Class-Book,
No.  1 "  (Philadelphia,  1835) ;  "  Chemistrv,"  origi-
nally entitled  "  Scientific  Class-Book,  No.  2  "  (1835) ;
"  Notes  on  the  Use  of  Anthracite  in  the  Manufac-
ture of  Coal  "  (Boston,  1841) ;  Knapp's  "  Chemical
Technology,"  translated  (Philadelphia,  1848) ;  Weis-
bach's  " Mechanics," translated  (1849);  and  "Coal
Trade  of  British  America  "  (Washington,  1850).

JOHNSON,  Sir  William,  bart.,  British  soldier,
b.  in  Smithtown,  County  Meath,  Ireland,  in  1715 ;
d.  in  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,"ll  July,  1774.  He  was  a
younger  son  of  Christopher  Johnson,  an  Irish  gen-
tleman of  good  family.  William  was  educated  for
a  mercantile  life,  but  his  career  was  entirely  changed
by  the  refusal  of  his
parents  to  permit  him
to  marry  a  lady  with
whom  he  had  fallen
in  love.  His  uncle,
Admiral  Sir  Peter
Warren,  had  married
a  daughter  of  Stephen
De  Lancey,  of  New
York,  and  received
with  her  a  large  land-
ed estate  in  that  colo-
ny, which  he  increased
by  purchase,  chiefly
in  the  valley  of  the
Mohawk,  and  at  this
juncture  he  offered
his  nephew  the  man-
agement of  his  entire
property  in  New  York  if  he  would  undertake  its
improvement  and  settlement.  Johnson  accepted,
and  in  1738  established  himself  on  a  tract  of
land  on  the  south  side  of  Mohawk  river,  about
twenty-four  miles  west  of  Schenectady,  which  Sir
Peter  had  called  "  Warrensburgh."  He  began  to
colonize  this  tract,  and  also  embarked  in  trade
with  the  Indians,  whom  he  always  treated  with
perfect  honesty  and  justice.  This  course,  added  to
an  easy  but  dignified  and  affable  manner,  and  an
intimacy  with  them  which  he  cultivated  by  ac-
commodating himself  to  their  manners  and  some-
times even  to  their  dress,  soon  won  for  him  their
entire  confidence  and  gave  him  an  influence  over
them  greater  than  that  ever  possessed  by  any  other
white  man.  He  became  a  master  of  their  lan-
guage, and  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  their
peculiar  habits,  beliefs,  and  customs.  The  Mo-
hawks adopted  him,  chose  him  a  sachem,  and
named  him  "  Wariaghejaghe,"  or  "  Warraghiaghy,"
meaning  "  he  who  has  charge  of  affairs."  In  1744,
on  the  resignation  of  the  Albany  Indian  commis-
sioners, Gov.  George  Clinton  appointed  Johnson
colonel  of  the  Six  Nations.  In  1746  he  was  made
commissary  of  New  York  for  Indian  affairs,  and
was  active  against  the  French.  In  February,  1748,
he  was  placed  in  command  of  all  the  New  York
colonial  forces  for  the  defence  of  the  frontier,  and


452


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


prepared  a  plan  of  campaign;  but  the  peace  of
Aix-lii-Chapelle  stopped  all  operations.  In  April,
1750,  he  was  appointed  by  the  king  a  member  of
the  governor's  council.  The  revival  of  the  Albany
board  of  Indian  commissioners  in  1753  led  to  a
quarrel  between  the  colonists  and  the  Indians,  and
the  council  and  assembly  of  the  province  urged
Col.  Johnson  to  effect  a  reconciliation.  The  gov-
ernor granted  him  a  special  commission,  5  July,
1753,  and  he  went  to  Onondaga,  where  he  held  a
council  and  succeeded  in  settling  the  difficulty,
but  declined  having  anything  further  to  do  with
Indian  affairs.  He  lived  then  at  Fort  Johnson,  a
large  stone  dwelling  that  he  had  erected  on  the
north  side  of  the  Mohawk,  directly  opposite  War-
rensburgh,  and  which  he  had  fortified  in  1743,
shortly  before  the  beginning  of  the  war  with  the
French.  It  is  still  standing  in  good  preservation,
about  three  miles  west  of  the  present  village  of
Amsterdam.  In  1754  he  attended,  as  one  of  the
delegates  from  New  York,  the  congress  of  Albany
and  the  great  council  that  was  held  with  the  Indi-
ans on  that  occasion,  at  which  they  strongly  urged
his  reappointment  as  their  superintendent.  At  the
council  of  Alexandria,  14  April,  1755,  he  was  sent
for  by  Gen.  Braddock,  and  commissioned  by  him
"sole  superintendent  of  the  affairs  of  the  Six
United  Nations,  their  allies  and  dependants."  He
was  also,  according  to  the  determination  of  that
council,  created  a  major-general,  and  appointed
commander-in-chief  of  the  provincial  forces  for
the  expedition  against  Crown  Point.  At  the  head
of  these  forces,  in  September,  1755,  Johnson  utter-
ly defeated  Baron  Dieskau  at  Lake  George.  He
was  wounded  in  the  hip  early  in  the  action,  but  re-
mained on  the  field  of  battle.  This  victory  saved
the  colony  from  the  ravages  of  the  French,  pre-
vented any  attack  on  Oswego,  and  went  far  to
counteract  Braddock's  disastrous  defeat  on  the
Monongahela.  Gen.  Johnson  received  the  thanks
of  parliament  for  this  victory,  was  voted  £5,000,
and  on  27  Nov.,  1755,  was  created  a  baronet  of
Great  Britain.  It  was  on  his  arrival  at  Lake  St.
Sacrement  on  this  occasion,  and  a  few  days  before
this  battle,  that  he  gave  to  that  lake  the  name  of
Lake  George,  "  not  only,"  in  his  own  words,  "  in
honor  of  his  majesty,  but  to  assert  his  undoubted
dominion  here."  In  March,  1756,  he  was  commis-
sioned by  George  II.  "  colonel,  agent,  and  sole  su-
perintendent of  the  affairs  of  the  Six  Nations  and
other  northern  Indians,"  with  a  salary  of  £600,
which  was  paid  by  Great  Britain.  He  held  this
office  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  In  1756  and  1757  he
was  engaged  with  his  Indians  in  the  abortive  at-
tempts of  the  British  commanders  to  relieve  Oswe-
go and  Fort  William  Henry;  and  in  1758  he  was
present  with  Abercrombie  at  the  repulse  of  Ticon-
deroga.  In  Gen.  Prideaux's  expedition  against
Fort  Niagara  in  1759,  Sir  William  Johnson  was
second  in  command,  and  on  the  death  of  Prideaux
by  the  explosion  of  a  gun  before  that  fort,  he  suc-
ceeded to  the  command  in  chief.  He  continued
the  siege  with  great  vigor,  routed  the  French  force
under  Aubry  that  had  been  sent  to  its  relief,  and
then  summoned  the  garrison,  which  surrendered  at
discretion.  In  the  following  year,  1760,  he  led  the
Indians  in  the  Canadian  expedition  of  Amherst,
and  was  present  at  the  capitulation  of  Montreal
and  the  surrender  of  Canada,  which  ended  forever
the  French  power  in  America.  The  king  granted
to  Sir  William  for  his  services  a  tract  of  100,000
acres  of  land  north  of  the  Mohawk,  which  was
long  known  as  Kingsland  or  the  Royal  Grant.
His  influence  alone  prevented  the  Six  Nations  as  a
whole  from  joining  Pontiac  in  the  war  of  1763,


though  he  could  not  prevent  some  acts  of  hostility
by  the  Senecas.  In  1764  Sir  William  built  "John-
son Hall "  (which  is  shown  in  the  accompanying
illustration),  a  large  wooden  edifice  still  standing
near  the  village  of  Johnstown,  a  few  miles  north


of  "  Fort  Johnson."  This  village,  called  after  his
own  name,  had  already  been  laid  out  by  him,  and
the  building  of  stores,  an  inn,  a  court-house,  and
an  Episcopal  church,  all  chiefly  at  his  own  ex-
pense, soon  followed.  Numerous  settlers  were
brought  in,  the  surrounding  country  was  improved,
and  in  three  years  Johnstown  became  a  thriving
village  and  in  1772  the  shire  town  of  Tryon  county.
Sir  William  gave  great  attention  to  agriculture,
and  was  the  first  that  introduced  sheep  and  blood-
horses  into  the  valley  of  the  Mohawk.  He  lived
in  the  style  of  an  English  baron,  exercising  the
most  unbounded  hospitality.  As  head  of  the  In-
dian department  he  concluded  the  great  treaty  of
Fort  Stanwix  in  1768,  and  his  death  actually  re-
sulted from  over-exertion  in  addressing  an  Indian
council  on  a  very  warm  day.  In  1739  he  married
Catharine  Wisenburgh,  daughter  of  a  German  set-
tler on  the  Mohawk,  who  died  young,  leaving  him
with  three  children,  a  son,  John,  who  was  knighted
in  1765,  and  two  daughters,  Anne  and  Mary,  who
married  respectively  Col.  Daniel  Claus  and  Col.
Guy  Johnson.  Sir  William  never  married  again.
He  had  for  some  years  afterward  many  mistresses,
both  Indian  and  white,  and  one  of  his  earlier  ones,
a  German,  has  been  the  probable  cause,  from  being
confounded  with  his  wife,  of  the  erroneous  state-
ment that  has  been  made  that  none  of  his  children
were  legitimate.  Mary,  or  as  she  is  generally
called  "  Molly,"  Brant,  the  sister  of  Thayendanegea,
or  Joseph  Brant,  the  Mohawk  sachem,  whom  later
he  took  to  his  house,  and  with  whom  he  lived  hap-
pily till  his  death,  has  sometimes  been  termed  his
wife ;  but  they  were  never  married.  He  had  eight
children  by  her,  whom  he  provided  for  by  his  will,
in  which  he  calls  them  his  "natural  children."
The  church  under  which  he  was  buried  was  burned
in  1836  and  rebuilt,  but  not  exactly  on  the  old  site.
In  1862  the  vault  was  discovered  with  its  top  broken
in.  His  remains  were  removed,  the  vault  repaired,
and  were  then  reinterred  therein  on  7  July,  1862,
Bishop  Horatio  Potter,  of  New  York,  officiating.
Sir  William  was  the  author  of  a  valuable  paper  en-
titled "The  Language,  Customs,  and  Manners  of
the  Six  Nations,"  written  to  Arthur  Lee,  secretary
of  the  Philosophical  society  of  Philadelphia,  and
published  in  their  "  Transactions  "  for  November,
1772.  His  Aroluminous  correspondence  with  the
British  and  the  colonial  governments,  published  in
the  colonial  and  documentary  histories  of  New
York,  are  extremely  well  written  and  absolutely
necessary  to  a  correct  understanding  of  the  history
of  New  York  and  of  America  in  general.  His  life
has  been  written  by  William  L.  Stone  (2  vols.,  Al-
bany, 1865). — Sir  William's  son,  Sir  John,  bart.,
b.  in  "  Mount  Johnson,"  on  Mohawk  river,  5  Nov.,
1742;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  4  Jan.,  1830,  was
educated  under  his  father's  direction  by  clergymen


JOHNSON


JOHNSON


453


of  the  Dutch  church  and  Church  of  England,
chiefly  at  Albany  and  in  the  city  of  New  York.
He  was  not  so  popular  as  his  father,  being  less  so-
cial and  less  acquainted  with  human  nature.  As  a
youth  he  spent  some  time  in  England,  during
which  he  was  knighted  by  George  III.  as  a  compli-
ment to  his  father.  Hence  both  bore  titles  at  the
same  time.  He  accompanied  his  father  on  several
of  his  expeditions,  and  saw  in  his  youth  consider-
able militia  service.  Soon  after  the  close  of  the
French  war  he  was  sent  at  the  head  of  a  body  of
militia  and  Indians  to  arrest  Capt.  Bull,  who  had
been  charged  with  stirring  up  war  among  the  In-
dian tribes,  in  which  enterprise  he  was  successful.
At  his  father's  death,  in  1774,  he  succeeded  him  in
bis  baronetcy  and  estates,  as  well  as  in  his  post  of
major-general  of  militia,  to  the  latter  of  which  he
was  appointed  in  November,  1774.  In  the  spring
of  1776,  learning  that  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler  was
about  to  seize  his  person,  he  fled  with  about  300  of
his  Scotch  Tory  tenants  through  the  woods  into
Canada,  reaching  Montreal  only  after  the  severest
hardships.  He  did  not,  however,  as  has  been
charged,  violate  his  parole  by  this  flight,  as  a  letter
from  Gen.  Schuyler  to  himself,  in  Peter  Force's
"Archives,"  discharging  him  from  his  parole
proves  conclusively.  On  arriving  in  Canada  he
was  commissioned  colonel,  raised  two  battalions
known  as  the  "  Queen's  royal  greens,"  and  in  Au-

gist,  1777,  at  their  head,  under  command  of  Col.
arry  St.  Leger,  took  part  in  the  latter's  invest-
ment of  Fort  Stanwix,  now  Rome,  N.  Y.  A  de-
tachment of  his  corps  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Oriskany,  on  6  Aug.,  1777,  a  few  miles  east  of  that
fort,  with  Gen.  Nicholas  Herkimer  (q.  v.),  who  was
approaching  with  the  design  of  raising  that  siege.
The  siege  was  afterward  resumed,  but  on  the  ap-
proach of  Arnold  to  the  relief  of  the  fort,  on  22
Aug.,  St.  Leger  and  Johnson  fled  in  haste  and  con-
fusion to  Canada,  and  their  Indian  allies,  fearing
to  meet  Arnold,  deserted  them.  In  May,  1780,  he
desolated  Cherry  valley  with  fire  and  tomahawk.
and  in  October  of  the  same  year,  with  Brant  and
Cornplanter,  he  made  a  raid  into  the  Mohawk  val-
ley. At  Fox's  Mills  they  fought  Gen.  Henry  K.
Van  Rensselaer,  both  sides  retreating  by  different
ways  at  the  close  of  the  action.  At  the  end  of  the
Revolution,  Sir  John,  whose  estate  had  been  con-
fiscated by  the  New  York  act  of  attainder,  retired
to  Canada,  receiving  from  the  crown  the  appoint-
ment of  superintendent-general  of  Indian  affairs  in
British  North  America.  He  went  to  England  in
1784,  residing  during  his  stay  at  a  country-seat  at
Twickenham,  but  returned  the  following  year  and
made  his  home  in  Canada.  He  was  the  last  pro-
vincial grand  master  of  the  Masonic  order  for  the
colony  of  New  York,  and  was  a  member  of  the
provincial  council  of  Canada,  but  was  never  gov-
ernor of  that  province  as  has  been  stated.  He  mar-
ried, 30  June,  1773,  Mary,  daughter  of  John  Watts,
of  New  York,  of  whose  loveliness  Mrs.  Grant,  of
Laggan,  has  left  us  a  charming  pen-portrait  in  her
"  Memoirs  of  an  American  Lady  "  (Albany,  1876).
By  her  he  had  eight  sons  and  three  daughters.  His
last  child,  an  unmarried  daughter,  died  in  London,
England,  1  Jan.,  1868.  Of  the  sons,  seven  were  in
the  British  army  and  one  served  for  a  time  in  the
British  navy.  His  eldest  son,  William,  a  colonel
in  the  British  regular  army,  married  Susan,  daugh-
ter of  Col.  Stephen  de  Lancey,  of  New  York.  In
appearance  Sir  John  was  imposing,  well  propor-
tioned, and  muscular.  His  complexion  was  fair,
his  eyes  dark  blue  and  penetrating.  He  was  par-
ticularly fond  of  children,  a  characteristic  that
seems  at  variance  with  the  shocking  cruelties  that


were  perpetrated  with  his  alleged  consent  by  his
Indian  followers  at  the  Cherry  valley  massacre.
He  was  succeeded  in  his  title  by  his  son,  Sir  Adam
Gordon,  who,  dying  in  1843  childless,  was  in  turn
succeeded  in  the  title  by  his  nephew.  Sir  William
George,  the  present  baronet  (1887),  who  resides  at
Mount  Johnson,  near  Montreal. — Sir  William's
nephew,  Guy,  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs,  b.
in  County  Meath,  Ireland,  in  1740;  d.  in  London,
England*  5  March,  1788.  Upon  the  refusal  of  Sir
John  Johnson  to  accept  the  succession  to  his
father's  dignities  and  offices  in  connection  with  the
Indians,  they  were  conferred  upon  his  cousin,  Guy,
who  exercised  them  from  Sir  William's  death  and
throughout  the  Revolutionary  war,  a  circumstance
which  has  caused  the  careers  of  the  two  cousins
frequently  to  be  confounded.  He  married  his
cousin,  Mary,  a  daughter  of  Sir  William,  and  dur-
ing the  latter's  life  was  his  deputy  superintendent
of  Indian  affairs.  He  served  against  the  French
in  1757,  and  again  in  1759,  when  he  commanded  a
company  of  rangers  under  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst.
He  built  for  his  residence  a  substantial  stone  man-
sion, which  is  still  standing  near  Amsterdam,  N.
Y.,  and  known  as  "  Guy  park."  At  the  beginning
of  the  public  excitement  in  1775  the  park  was
abandoned  by  its  owner,  who,  accompanied  by  his
family  and  a  few  faithful  Indians,  fled  by  way  of
Oswego  to  Montreal,  whence  he  embarked  for  Eng-
land. Returning  the  following  year,  he  remained
several  months  in  New  York,  during  which  he  was
one  of  the  British  officers  who  managed  the  John
street  theatre  in  that  city.  In  1778  he  was  with
Brant  in  his  raids  upon  the  Mohawk  valley.  In
October,  1779,  he  was  attainted  and  his  estates
confiscated  by  the  New  York  colonial  assembly.

JOHNSON,  William,  law-reporter,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  about  1770 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in
July,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1788,
studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  From
1806  till  1823  he  served  as  reporter  of  the  supreme
court  of  New  York,  and  from  1814  till  1823  he  held
the  same  relation  to  the  New  York  court  of  chan-
cery. Judge  Story  says :  "  No  lawyer  can  ever  ex-
press a  better  wish  for  his  country's  jurisprudence
than  that  it  may  possess  such  a  chancellor  [Kent]
and  such  a  reporter  "  [Johnson].  Judge  Kent  dedi-
cated his  '•Commentaries"  to  him,  and  Judge
William  A.  Duer  wrote  in  1857:  "Johnson  was  a
man  of  pure  and  elevated  character,  an  able  lawyer,
a  classical  scholar,  a  gentleman,  and  a  Christian."
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Hamilton
college  in  1819,  and  from  Princeton  in  1820.  He
published  a  translation  of  D.  A.  Azuni's  "  Sistema
Universale  dei  principii  del  diritto  maritimo  dell'
Europa "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1806) ;  and  also
issued  "  New  York  Supreme  Court  Reports,  1799-
1803"  (3  vols..  1808-'12);  "New  York  Chancery
Reports,  1814-'23,"  and  "Digest  of  Cases  in  the
Supreme  Court  of  New  York"  (2  vols.,  Albany,
1825 ;  3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1838).

JOHNSON,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  27  Dec.  1771;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  11
Aug.,  1834.  His  father,  William  Johnson,  was  of
an  English  family  which  settled  in  Holland  after
the  revolution  in  1660,  assumed  the  name  of  Jan-
sen,  and  emigrated  to  New  Amsterdam.  By  re-
suming its  English  name,  on  the  cession  of  the
colony  to  the  Duke  of  York,  the  family  lost  the
benefit  of  the  grant  to  Jansen,  within  the  limits
of  which  a  part  of  the  city  of  New  York  is  now
built.  William  removed  to  Charleston,  and  Gen.
Christopher  Gadsden  said  he  first  set  the  ball  of
revolution  rolling  in  South  Carolina.  He  repre-
sented the  city  in  the  general  assembly  of  the


454


JOHNSON


JOHNSTON


state  until  age  obliged  him  to  retire.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1790  with  the  highest
honors  of  his  class,  studied  law  in  the  office  of
Charles  Cotesworth  Pinckney,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1793.  He  was  elected  to  represent
Charleston  in  the  legislatures  of  1794-'6  and
1796-'8,  and  after  his  last  election  was  chosen
speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives.  At  this
session  the  court  of  common  pleas  was  organ-
ized, and  William  Johnson,  Louis  Trezevant,  and
Ephraim  Ramsey  were  made  judges.  On  6  March,
1804,  he  was  appointed  an  associate  justice  of  the
U.  S.  supreme  court.  He  was  an  ardent  supporter
of  the  constitutional  principles  advocated  by
Thomas  Jefferson.  In  May,  1808,  the  collector  of
the  port  of  Charleston,  acting  under  the  authority
of  the  embargo  act  and  the  instructions  of  the
president  of  the  United  States  through  the  secre-
tary of  the  treasury,  which  prohibited  vessels  from
carrying  goods  from  American  ports,  refused  clear-
ances to  five  ships.  The  question  of  the  right  of
the  president  to  give  such  an  order  was  submitted
by  consent  to  Justice  Johnson,  on  a  motion  for  a
mandamus  to  the  collector,  directing  him  to  issue
such  clearances.  Justice  Johnson  decided  that  the
order  was  without  warrant  in  law  and  ordered  the
mandamus  to  issue,  and  the  vessels  named  were
cleared.  Mr.  Jefferson  referred  all  the  proceedings
of  the  circuit  court  of  South  Carolina  in  the  man-
damus proceedings  to  Cesar  A.  Rodney,  U.  S.  at-
torney-general, who  prepared  an  elaborate  discus-
sion, attacking  the  conduct  of  Justice  Johnson,
and  insisting  that  the  executive  department  must
of  necessity  be  independent  of  the  judicial,  and
that  the  decision  of  the  South  Carolina,  court  if
submitted  to  would  make  the  latter  department
subordinate  to  the  former.  Justice  Johnson  replied
by  a  vigorous  discussion  in  the  public  press.  Dur-
ing his  judicial  career  he  constantly  resisted  the
extension  of  the  admiralty  jurisdiction,  then  being
pressed  by  Mr.  Justice  Story  and  some  of  his  asso-
ciates upon  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court.  When
the  nullification  agitation  arose  in  South  Carolina
in  1831-'3,  Justice  Johnson  found  himself  arrayed
against  the  great  body  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Be-
lieving that  his  judicial  position  required  complete
neutrality,  he  absented  himself  from  the  state,  and
during  the  summer  of  1833  resided  in  western
Pennsylvania.  Princeton'  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1818.  He  edited  "  The  Life  and  Corre-
spondence of  Major-General  Nathanael  Greene,"
with  annotations  (2  vols.,  Charleston,  1822). — His
brother,  Joseph,  phvsician,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
15  June,  1776 ;  d.  there,  6  Oct.,  1862,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Charleston  college  in  1793,  and  received
his  medical  degree  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1797.  He  began  to  practise  medicine  in
Charleston,  and  in  1807  was  made  president  of  the
Medical  societv  of  South  Carolina.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  U.*  S.  branch  bank  from  1818  till  1825,
and  mavor  of  Charleston  in  1826.  He  was  an  ac-
tive leader  in  the  nullification  controversy,  and  an
efficient  worker  in  the  literary  and  philosophical
societies.  For  many  years  he  was  commissioner  of
the  public  schools,  was  president  of  the  Appren-
tices library  association  from  its  establishment  in
1826,  for  more  than  sixty  years  a  member  of  the
South  Carolina  society,  and  for  twenty  years  its  pre-
siding officer.  He  published,  besides  many  trea-
tises, essays,  and  orations,  "  Traditions  and  Remi-
niscences of  the  Revolution  "  (Charleston,  1851).

JOHNSON,  William  Bnllien,  clergyman,  b.  in
Sir  John  Island,  S.  C,  13  June,  1782;  d".  in  Green-
ville, S.  C,  10  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Eutaw,  officiated  at  Co-


lumbia, S.  C,  and  Savannah.  Ga.,  and  in  1822  was
principal  of  a  female  academy  in  Greenville.  He
taught  there  and  at  Edgeville  and  Anderson  for
many  vears,  but  finally  returned  to  Greenville,
where  he  was  pastor  until  his  death.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Bible  revision  society,  forty  years
president  of  the  Georgia  Baptist  convention,  and
three  years  president  of  the  General  Baptist  con-
vention of  the  United  States.  Brown  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1833.  He  contributed
largely  to  current  religious  literature,  published
"  Infant  Baptism  Argued  from  Analogy,"  "  The
Church's  Argument  for  Christianity,"  "Exami-
nation of  Snodgrass  on  Apostolic  Succession,"
"  Examination  of  Confirmation  Examined,"  and  a
"  Memoir  of  Rev.  Nathan  P.  Knapp,"  and  edited
"  Knapp's  Select  Sermons."

JOHNSTON,  Albert  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  in
Washington,  Mason  co.,  Ky.,  3  Feb.,  1803 ;  d.  near
Pittsburg  Landing,  Tenn.,  6  April,  1862.  He  was
the  youngest  son  of  Dr.  John  Johnston,  a  country
physician,  a  native
of  Salisbury,  Conn.
Albert  Sidney  was
graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, eighth  in  his
class,  in  1826,  and
was  assigned  to  the
2d  infantry,  in
which  he  served
as  adjutant  until
his  resignation,  24
April,  1834.  In
1829  he  married
Henrietta  Preston,
who  died  in  Au-
gust, 1835.  During
the  Black  Hawk
war  in  1832  Lieut.
Johnston  was  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Henry  Atkin-
son. His  journals  furnish  an  original  and  accu-
rate account  of  that  campaign.  After  his  wife's
death  he  was  a  farmer  for  a  short  time  near  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  but  in  August,  1836,  joined  the  Texas
patriots,  devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  that
state,  and  by  his  personal  qualities,  physical  and
mental,  soon  attained  notice.  He  was  specially
admired  for  his  fine  horsemanship,  and  his  feats  of
daring,  one  of  which  was  the  killing  of  a  puma  with
his  clubbed  rifle.  He  had  entered  the  ranks  as  a
private,  but  rapidly  rose  through  all  the  grades  to
the  command  of  the  army.  He  was  not  allowed  to
assume  this,  however,  until  he  had  encountered
his  competitor,  Gen.  Felix  Huston,  in  a  duel,  in
which  he  received  a  dangerous  wound.  In  1838
President  Mirabeau  B.  Lamar  made  him  secretary
of  war,  in  which  office  he  provided  for  the  defence
of  the  border  against  Mexican  invasion,  and  in
1839  conducted  a  campaign  against  the  intruding
U.  S.  Indians  in  northern  Texas,  and  in  two  bat-
tles, at  the  Salines  of  the  Neches,  expelled  them
from  the  country.  In  1843  he  married  Miss  Eliza
Griffin,  and  engaged  in  planting  in  Brazoria  county,
Texas :  but  when  the  Mexican  war  began  he  joined
the  army,  under  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor,  on  the  Rio
Grande.  His  regiment,  the  1st  Texas  rifles,  was  soon
disbanded,  but  he  continued  in  service,  and  was
inspector-general  of  Butler's  division  at  the  battle
of  Monterey.  All  his  superiors  recommended  him
as  a  brigadier-general,  but  he  was  set  aside  by  the
president  for  political  reasons,  and  retired  to  his
farm.  Gen.  Taylor  said  he  was  "  the  best  soldier
he  ever  commanded."  Gen.  Johnston  remained
on  his  plantation  in poverty  and  neglect  until,


JOHNSTON


JOHNSTON


455


without  solicitation,  he  was  appointed  a  paymaster
in  the  U.  S.  army  by  President  Taylor  in  1849.  He
served  as  paymaster  for  more  than  five  years,  mak-
ing six  tours,  and  travelling  more  than  4,000  miles
annually  on  the  Indian  frontier  of  Texas.  In  1855
President  Pierce  appointed  him  colonel  of  the  2d
(now  5th)  cavalry,  a  new  regiment,  which  he  or-
ganized. Robert  E.  Lee  was  lieutenant-colonel,
and  George  H.  Thomas  and  William  J.  Hardee
were  the  majors.  Gen.  Scott  called  Gen.  Johnston's
appointment  "a god-send  to  the  army  and  the
country."  He  remained  in  command  of  his  regi-
ment and  the  Department  of  Texas  until  ordered,
in  1857,  to  the  command  of  the  expedition  to  re-
store order  among  the  Mormons  in  Utah,  who
were  in  open  revolt  against  the  National  govern-
ment. In  his  conduct  of  affairs  there  he  won
great  reputation  for  energy  and  wisdom.  By  a
forced  march  of  920  miles  in  twenty-seven  days,
over  bad  roads,  he  reached  his  little  array  of  1,100
men,  to  find  it  lost  in  the  defiles  of  the  Rocky
mountains,  with  the  snow  a  foot  deep  and  the
thermometer  16°  below  zero,  their  supplies  cut  off
by  the  hostile  Mormons,  their  starving  teams  their
sole  food,  and  sage-brush  their  only  fuel.  By  an
extraordinary  display  of  vigor  and  prudence  he
got  the  army  safely  into  winter-quarters,  and  be-
fore spring  had  virtually  put  an  end  to  the  rebel-
lion without  actual  collision,  solely  by  the  exercise
of  moral  force.  Col.  Johnston  was  bre vetted
brigadier-general,  and  was  retained  in  command  in
Utah  until  29  Feb.,  1860.  He  spent  1860  in  Ken-
tucky until  21  Dec,  when  he  sailed  for  California,
to  take  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific.
Gen.  Johnston  witnessed  the  culmination  of  "  the
irrepressible  conflict "  in  secession,  and  the  pros-
pect of  war,  with  unalloyed  grief.  He  was  a  Union
man  from  both  principle  and  interest,  and  the
highest  posts  in  the  United  States  army  were
within  easy  reach  of  his  ambition.  He  believed
the  south  had  a  grievance,  but  did  not  believe  se-
cession was  the  remedy.  Still,  his  heart  was  with
his  state,  and  he  resigned  his  commission,  9  April.
1861,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  secession  of  Texas.
Regarding  his  command  as  a  sacred  trust,  he  con-
cealed his  resignation  until  he  could  be  relieved.
He  remained  in  California  until  June.  After  a
rapid  march  through  the  deserts  of  Arizona  and
Texas,  he  reached  Richmond  about  1  Sept.,  and
was  appointed  at  once  to  the  command  of  all  the
country  west  of  the  Atlantic  states  and  north  of
the  Gulf  states.  When  he  arrived  at  Nashville,
14  Sept.,  1861,  he  found  only  21.000  available
troops  east  of  the  Mississippi.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk
had  11,000  at  Columbus,  Ky.,  Gen.  Felix  K.
Zollicoffer  had  about  4,000  raw  levies  at  Cumber-
land gap,  and  there  were  4,000  armed  men  in
camps  of  instruction  in  middle  Tennessee.  Ten-
nessee was  open  to  an  advance  by  the  National
forces,  and,  for  both  military  and  political  reasons.
Gen.  Johnston  resolved  on  a  bold  course,  and  oc-
cupied Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  with  his  4,000  avail-
able troops,  under  Gen.  Simon  B.  Buckner.  This
place  he  strongly  fortified,  and  vainly  appealed  to
the  Confederate  government  and  state  govern-
ments for  troops  and  arms.  He  was  enabled  to  hold
the  National  army  in  check  until  January,  1862,
during  which  time  a  single  engagement  of  note
occurred,  the  battle  of  Belmont,  in  which  Gen.
Grant  suffered  a  reverse  by  the  Confederates  under
Gens.  Polk  and  Pillow.  On  19  Jan..  Gen.  Critten-
den, commanding  the  small  army  defending  east
Tennessee,  contrary  to  his  instructions,  attacked
the  National  forces,  under  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas,
at  Fishing  creek. His  repulse  was  converted  into  a


route,  and  Johnston's  right  flank  was  thus  turned.
Gen.  Johnston  wrote  to  his  government  :  "  To
suppose,  with  the  facilities  of  movement  by  water
which  the  well-filled  rivers  of  the  Ohio,  Cumber-
land, and  Tennessee  give  for  active  operations,  that
they  [the  National  forces]  will  suspend  them  in
Tennessee  and  Kentucky  during  the  winter  months,
is  a  delusion.  All  the  resources  of  the  Confederacy
are  now  needed  for  the  defence  of  Tennessee."  As
he  had  to  take  the  risk  somewhere,  and  these  were
positions  less  immediately  vital  than  Bowling
Green  and  Columbus,  he  took  it  there.  On  6  Feb.,
1862,  Gen.  Grant  and  Flag-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote
moved  upon  Fort  Henry  on  the  Tennessee,  and,
after  a  few  hours'  fighting,  the  fort  was  surren-
dered. The  Confederate  troops,  about  4,000,  re-
tired to  Fort  Donelson.  The  Tennessee  river  was
now  open  for  the  National  navy  and  armies  to
Gen.  Johnston's  left  flank  and  rear,  and  he  began
a  retreat,  intending  to  cover  Nashville  and  the  line
of  the  Cumberland  if  possible,  and  if  not,  then  to
fall  back  behind  the  line  of  the  Tennessee.  He  de-
termined to  defend  Nashville  at  Donelson,  and
placed  17,000  troops  there  under  Gens.  Floyd,
Pillow,  and  Buckner.  to  meet  Grant's  impending
attack.  For  himself  he  reserved  the  more  difficult
task  of  covering  Nashville.  He  was  cheered  on
the  arrival  of  the  rear  of  his  army  at  Nashville  on
15  Feb.  by  a  telegram  from  his  generals  at  Donel-
son announcing  a  brilliant  victory,  but  before
daylight  next  morning  he  was  informed  that  the
fort  would  be  surrendered.  (See  Grant.  Ulysses
S.)  Amid  the  utmost  popular  demoralization  and
rage,  a  blind  fury  directed  against  himself,  Gen.
Johnston  preserved  his  equanimity  and  fell  back
to  Murf  reesboro.  where  he  reorganized  his  troops.
He  had  given  Gen.  Beauregard  the  command  of
west  Tennessee  when  Fort  Henry  fell,  with  large
discretionary  power,  and  had  advised  him  of  his
plan  to  unite  their  forces  when  possible.  He  now
sent  his  stores  and  munitions  by  the  railroad,  and
marched  to  Decatur,  Ala.,  and  thence  moved  by
rail  to  Corinth,  Miss.  This  was  the  key  of  the  de-
fence of  the  railroad  system  in  the  Mississippi
valley,  and  the  Confederate  government  re-enforced
him  with  Bragg's  army  from  Pensacola,  10,000
strong,  and  5.000  men  from  Louisiana,  so  that  on  24
March  he  had  concentrated  50,000  men  at  Corinth,
40,000  of  whom  were  effectives.  It  was  Gen.
Johnston's  purpose  to  attack  Grant's  forces  in  de-
tail. He  was  delayed  some  time  reorganizing
Beauregard's  forces,  but  held  himself  ready  to
attack  as  soon  as  he  should  hear  of  Buell's  ap-
proach. This  intelligence  reached  him  late  at
night  on  2  April,  and  he  began  his  march  next  day,
hoping  to  assail  Grant  unprepared.  Heavy  rains
delayed  the  march  of  his  troops  over  twenty  miles
of  bad  roads,  through  a  wooded  and  unknown
country,  so  that,  instead  of  being  in  position  to  at-
tack on  Friday  afternoon,  a  full  day  was  lost,  and
his  troops  were  not  up  until  the  afternoon  of  the
5th.  Then,  in  an  informal  council  of  war,  his
second  in  command,  Gen.  Beauregard,  strenuously
protested  against  an  attack,  and  urged  a  retreat  to
Corinth.  Gen.  Johnston  listened,  and  replied:
"  Gentlemen,  we  will  attack  at  daylight."  Turn-
ing to  his  staff  officer,  he  said :  "  1  would  fight
them  if  they  were  a  million."  Gen.  Beauregard
twice  renewed  his  protests,  but  Gen.  Johnston,
on  Sunday  morning,  as  he  was  mounting  his  horse
to  ride  forward,  gave  this  final  reply :  "  The  battle
has  opened.  It  is  now  too  late  to  change  our  dis-
positions." Gen.  Johnston  said  to  a  soldier  friend
early  in  the  battle :  "  We  must  this  day  conquer  or
perish  "  ;  and  to  all  about  him :  "  To-night  we  will


456


JOHNSTON


JOHNSTON


water  our  horses  in  the  Tennessee  river."  His  plan
was  to  mass  his  force  against  the  National  left.
turn  it,  and  crowd  it  into  the  angle  of  Snake  creek
and  the  Tennessee  river,  where  it  must  surrender,
and  as  long  as  he  lived  the  battle  was  fought  ex-
actly as  he  planned.  The  struggle  began  before
dawn  on  Sunday,  6  April.  The  Confederates  at-
tacked in  three  lines  of  battle  under  Gens.  Hardee,
Bragg,  Polk,  and  Breckinridge.  The  National  army
was  surprised,  and  Prentiss  s  division  was  broken
and  driven  back.  It  rallied  on  its  supports,  and  a
tremendous  conflict  ensued.  The  struggle  lasted
all  day,  and  at  half-past  two  o'clock,  in  leading  the
final  charge,  which  crushed  the  left  wing  of  the
National  army.  Gen.  Johnston  received  a  mortal
wound.  His  death  was  concealed,  and  his  body
borne  from  the  field.  (For  the  subseqtient  con-
duct of  this  battle,  see  articles  Beauregard  and
Grant.)  Gen.  Johnston's  body  was  first  carried  to
New  Orleans,  and  was  finally  buried  at  Austin,  Tex.
See  his  life,  by  his  son  (New  York,  1878).— His  son,
William  Preston,  educator,  b.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,
5  Jan.,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1852.  He
became  a  colonel  in  the  Confederate  army  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  served  on  the  staff
of  Jefferson  Davis.  After  the  war  he  was  a  pro-
fessor in  Washington  and  Lee  university  till  No-
vember, 1880,  when  he  became  president  of  the
Louisiana  state  university.  On  the  foundation  of
Tulane  university  in  New  Orleans  in  1884,  he  be-
came its  first  president.  Besides  fugitive  pieces
and  addresses,  he  has  published  a  "  Life  of  Gen.
Albert  Sidney  Johnston"  (New  York,  1878).—
Albert  Sidney's  half-brother,  Josiah  Stoddard,
b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  24  Nov.,  1784;  d.  on  Red
river,  La.,  19  May,  1833.  He  was  taken  by  his
father  to  Washington,  Mason  co.,  Ky.,  in  1788,  and

when  he  was  twelve
years  old  was  sent
to  New  Haven,
Conn.,  to  school.
He  was  graduated
at  Transylvania
university  in  1805,
studied  law  in  the
office  of  George
Nicholas,  and  he
emigrated  to  the
territory  of  Louis-
iana, then  late-
ly acquired  from
the  French,  set-
tling at  Alexan-
dria, Rapides  par-
ish, a  frontier  vil-
lage. He  won  rapid
success  at  the  bar,  was  elected  to  the  territorial
legislature,  and  remained  a  member  until  Louisiana
became  a  state  in  1852.  He  held  the  post  of  dis-
trict judge  from  1812  till  1821,  and  also  raised  a
regiment  of  volunteers  late  in  the  war  with  Great
Britain,  but  it  saw  no  active  service.  In  1820  he
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Clay  Democrat,  and  in
1823  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  to  fill  a  vacancy.  He  was
re-elected  in  1825,  and  in  1831  was  again  chosen  by
a  legislature  that  was  politically  opposed  to  him.
He  was  killed  by  the  explosion  of  the  steamboat
"Lion"  on  Red  river.  In  the  senate  he  was  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  commerce,  and  a  member
of  the  committee  on  finance.  He  gave  an  independ-
ent support  to  the  administration  of  John  Quincy
Adams,  and  was  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Gen.
Winfield  Scott,  but  his  closest  personal  and  political
association  was  with  Henry  Clay,  for  whom  he  acted
as  second  in  the  duel  with  John  Randolph. He


*/■ Jr  JeT^rr^*  J*-*~~


opposed  nullification,  and  favored  a  closely  guarded
protective  tariff.  His  study  of  constitutional  and
international  law  was  close,  and  he  strenuous!}
advocated  a  mitigation  of  the  laws  of  maritime
war,  and  that  the  neutral  flag  should  protect  the
goods  on  board,  without  regard  to  ownership,  and
that  contraband  of  war  should  be  limited  to  the
fewest  articles  possible.  He  was  the  author  of  an
able  report  on  the  British  colonial  trade  question,
and  of  several  pamphlets,  including  one  on  the
effect  of  the  repeal  of  the  duty  on  sugar.— Albert
Sidney's  nephew,  Josiah  Stoddard,  journalist,
son  of  John  Harris  Johnston,  b.  in  Rapides  parish,
La.,  10  Feb.,  1833,  became  an  orphan  early,  and
was  brought  up  in  Kentucky.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1853,  and  was  a  planter  in  Louisiana
before  the  civil  war.  During  the  war  he  served  o*j
the  staffs  of  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg  and  Gen.  Simon
B.  Buckner,  and  as  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  John  C.
Breckinridge,  and  shared  in  over  twenty  battles.
He  was  with  the  party  that  escorted  Jefferson
Davis  in  his  flight  from  Richmond,  Va.,  to  Char-
lotte, N.  C.  After  the  war  he  was  editor  of  the
"  Kentucky  Yeoman,"  at  Frankfort.  Ky.,  for  nearly
twenty  years.  During  the  most  of  this  time  he
has  also  been  secretary  or  chairman  of  the  Demo-
cratic state  central  committee,  and  has  been  noted
for  the  moderation  and  tact  of  his  party  rulings.
He  was  adjutant-general  of  Kentucky  in  1870-'l,
and  held  the  office  of  secretary  of  state  for  the
commonwealth  for  nearly  ten  years.  In  1870  he  be-
came president  of  the  Kentucky  press  association.

JOHNSTON,  Alexander,  author,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  29  April,  1849 ;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
20  July,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in
1870,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1876,  and  taught  in  Rutgers  college  grammar-
school  till  1879,  when  he  became  principal  of  the
Norwalk  Latin-school.  For  six  years  he  was  pro-
fessor of  jurisprudence  and  political  economy  in
Princeton.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1886.  He  published  "  History  of  American
Politics"  (New  York,  1879);  "The  Genesis  of  a
New  England  State,"  Connecticut  (Johns  Hopkins
University  Series,  1884);  "Representative  Ameri-
can Orations,  with  an  Outline  of  American  Politi-
cal History"  (1885);  "History  of  the  United  States
for  Schools  "  (1886) ;  "  History  of  Connecticut "
("  American  Commonwealth  "  Series,  Boston,
1887) ;  and  articles  on  the  United  States  in  a  sup-
plement to  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica."

JOHNSTON,  Amos  Randall,  jurist,  b.  in
Maury  county,  Tenn.,  28  Sept.,  1810 :  d.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  25  June,  1879.  He  began  life  in  the
town  of  Henry,  Tenn.,  as  a  printer,  afterward  es-
tablished a  newspaper  with  Gen.  Felix  R.  Zollicof-
fer,  and  at  an  early  age  became  known  as  a  politi-
cal writer.  Removing  to  Mississippi  in  1830,  he
settled  in  Clinton,  represented  Hinds  county  in  the
legislature  as  a  Whig  in  1836,  and  was  county-clerk
from  1837  till  his  election  as  probate  judge  in  1845.
In  1851  he  was  Union  delegate  to  the  State  consti-
tutional convention,  to  determine  the  course  of
Mississippi  regarding  the  compromise  measures  of
1850.  He  opposed  secession,  and  canvassed  the
state  in  favor  of  the  preservation  of  the  Union  in
1859-'60,  and  declined  the  nomination  of  his  party
to  congress  and  to  the  governorship.  He  took  no
active  part  in  the  civil  war,  but  was  engaged  in
the  practice  of  his  profession.  In  1865  he  was  a
member  of  the  convention  that  repealed  the  ordi-
nance of  secession,  and  in  1875  served  in  the  state
senate  as  a  conservative  Democrat.

JOHNSTON,  Christopher,  physician,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  27  Sept.,  1822. He  studied  at  St.


JOHNSTON


JOHNSTON


457


Man's  college,  Cincinnati,  St.  Mary's  college,
Baltimore,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Maryland,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1844.  He  then  settled  in  Baltimore,  giving
special  attention  to  microscopy,  histology,  and
pathology,  in  1858  became  lecturer  on  micro-
scopic anatomy  in  the  Baltimore  college  of  den-
tal surgery,  in  1864  professor  of  anatomy  and
physiology  in  the  University  of  Maryland,  in  1866
was  professor  of  general,  descriptive,  and  surgical
anatomy,  and  in  1870  filled  the  chair  of  surgery,
becoming  professor  emeritus  in  1880.  His  facility
as  an  artist  enabled  him  to  illustrate  his  lectures
with  water-colors  and  descriptive  drawings.  He
is  a  member  of  many  scientific  and  professional
societies,  and  has  been  president  of  the  Medical
and  chirurgical  faculty  of  Maryland,  of  the  Balti-
more medical  association,  and  of  the  Clinical  so-
ciety of  Baltimore.  He  is  now  (1887)  president  of
the  Maryland  academy  of  science,  and  a  constant
contributor  to  professional  literature.

JOHNSTON,  David  Claypoole,  artist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  March,  1797 ;  d.  in  Dorches-
ter, Mass.,  8  Nov.,  1865.  He  studied  engraving
with  Francis  Kearney,  of  Philadelphia,  and  be-
came an  engraver  of  original  caricatures,  which
found  ready  sale ;  but  the  originals  were  so  readily
recognized  that  they  became  loud  in  their  com-
plaints and  threats,  and  the  print-  and  book-sellers,
fearing  libel  suits,  declined  to  invest  their  money
in  his  prints,  or  to  expose  them  for  sale.  Johnston
then  adopted  the  stage,  appearing  for  the  first  time
at  the  Walnut  street  theatre  on  10  March,  1821,
as  Henry  in  "  Speed  the  Plow."  In  1825  he  went
to  Boston  and  entered  on  an  engagement  at  the
Boston  theatre.  At  the  close  of  the  first  season
he  retired  from  the  stage  and  set  up  an  engraver's
office  in  that  city.  In  1830  he  began  the  publica-
tion of  "  Scraps,"  an  annual  of  five  plates,  each
containing  nine  or  ten  separate  humorous  sketches.
His  work  brought  him  both  fame  and  monev.

JOHNSTON,  Gabriel,  governor  of  North  Caro-
lina, b.  in  Scotland  in  1699 ;  d.  in  Chowan  county.
N.  C.,  in  August,  1752.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  St.  Andrews,  Scotland,  and  studied
medicine,  but  is  supposed  not  to  have  practised.
For  several  years  he  was  professor  of  oriental  lan-
guages at  St.  Andrews.  Removing  to  London,  he
became  distinguished  as  a  man  of  letters  and  lib-
eral views,  and  was  engaged  with  Lord  Henry  Bo-
lingbroke  in  writing  for  the  ;'  Craftsman,"  a  politi-
cal and  literary  magazine.  Emigrating  to  the
United  States  about  1730  and  settling  in  North
Carolina,  through  the  influence  of  the  Earl  of  Wil-
mington he  was  appointed  governor  of  that  colony.
His  administration  was  successful,  the  province
greatly  increasing  in  wealth,  population,  and  gen-
eral prosperity  under  his  rule,  which  continued
from  his  appointment  till  his  death. — His  nephew,
Samuel,  senator,  b.  in  Dundee,  Scotland,  15  Dec,
1733  ;  d.  near  Edenton,  N.  C,  18  Aug..  1816.  came
to  this  country  in  1736  with  his  father,  John,  who
settled  in  North  Carolina,  and  acquired  large  es-
tates there.  Samuel  was  educated  for  the  bar,  and
in  1767-'72  was  clerk  of  the  superior  court  of
Chowan  county,  N.  C,  and  at  the  same  time  a  naval
officer  under  the  crown.  He  soon  became  known
as  a  politician  and  lawyer,  was  an  ardent  patriot,  a
member  of  the  assembly  in  1769,  where  he  was
placed  on  its  standing  committee  of  inquiry  and
correspondence,  an  active  member  of  the  first  two
Provincial  congresses,  and  presided  over  the  third
and  fourth.  In  August,  1775,  he  was  elected  chair-
man of  the  provincial  council,  and  virtually  be-
came governor  of  the  state. He  was  chosen  treas-


urer of  the  northern  district  of  North  Carolina  in
September  of  that  year,  was  a  member  of  the  Con-
tinental congress  of  1781-2,  and  in  1788  elected
governor  of  the  state,  presiding  over  the  conven-
tion that  failed  to  ratify  the  Federal  constitution,
which  he  supported  with  all  his  influence.  In  the
following  year  he  also  presided  over  the  conven-
tion that  adopted  the  constitution.  In  1789-'93
he  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  as  a  Federal-
ist, and  in  February,  1800,  was  appointed  judge  of
the  superior  court,  resigning  in  1803.

JOHNSTON,  Harriet  Lane,  b.  in  Mercersburg,
Pa.,  in  1833.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Elliott  T.
Lane  and  his  wife,  June  Buchanan,  who,  dying,
left  her  to  the  care  of  her  maternal  uncle.  James
Buchanan.  She  was
educated  at  the  Ro-
man Catholic  con-
vent in  Georgetown,
D.  C,  and,  on  the
appointment  of  Mr.
Buchanan  to  the
English  mission  in
1853,  accompanied
him  to  London,
where  she  dispensed
the  hospitalities  of
the  embassy.  Dur-
ing his  term  as  pres-
ident she was mis-  j  y /PS/? .

tress  of  the  Wrhite Jh£?  QJ^  J^L**^
house, over which  /

she  presided  with  grace  and  dignity,  receiving,
among  other  distinguished  guests,  the  Prince  of
Wales  and  his  party.  In  1866  she  married  Henry
Elliott  Johnston,  of  Maryland,  and  since  that  event
has  resided  in  Baltimore  and  at  Wheatland,  sur-
viving her  husband  and  their  two  sons.

JOHNSTON,  Hugh,  clergyman,  b.  in  South-
wold.  Ontario,  Canada,  5  Jan.,  1840.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Toronto,  and.  aftei'
studying  for  the  ministry,  was  graduated  at  Vic-
toria college,  Coburg.  in  1864.  In  the  following
year  he  was  ordained  to  the  Methodist  ministry,
was  appointed  first  to  Toronto,  in  1866  to  Mon-
treal, west,  charge,  and.  after  officiating  successively
m  Windsor.  Ont..  a  second  time  in  Toronto,  and
in  Hamilton,  he  became  in  1878  pastor  of  the  St.
James  street  church  in  Montreal,  and  in  1882  of
the  Carlton  street  church  of  Toronto.  He  is  a  con-
stant contributor  to  the  religious  press,  and  is  the
author  of  "  Toward  the  Sunrise  "  (Toronto,  1882),
and  "Shall  we  or  shall  we  Not?"  (1882).

JOHNSTON,  John,  Indian  agent,  b.  in  Bally-
shannon,  Ireland,  in  March,  1775;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  19  April.  1861.  His  parents  emigrated
in  1786  to  Cumberland  county,  Pa.  John  served
with  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  in  his  campaign  against
the  northwestern  Indians  in  Ohio  in  1792- '3,  was
clerk  in  the  war  department  and  agent  for  Indian
affairs  thirty-one  years.  For  eleven  years  he  was
a  canal-commissioner  for  Ohio,  and  he  served
throughout  the  war  of  1812  as  paymaster  and
quartermaster.  In  1841-'2  he  was  commissioner
to  treat  with  the  Ohio  Indians  for  their  removal.
He  was  president  of  the  Historical  and  philosophi-
cal society  of  Ohio.  His  "  Account  of  the  Indian
Tribes  of  Ohio  "  appears  in  the  5th  volume  of  the
"  American  Antiquarian  Society's  Collections."

JOHNSTON,  John,  artist,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
in  1752;  d.  there,  27  Jan.,  1818.  He  served  with
credit  in  the  Revolution,  and  afterward  settled
in  Boston,  where  he  painted  many  portraits  of
public  men  of  Massachusetts.  Although  deficient
in  drawing,  Johnston  possessed  talent.


458


JOHNSTON


JOHNSTON


JOHNSTON,  John,  pioneer,  b.  near  Giant's
Causeway,  Ireland,  in  1763;  d.  in  Sault  Sainte
Marie,  Mich.,  in  1834.  He  emigrated  to  the
United  States  in  1789,  and,  after  many  adven-
tures in  the  northwest  and  Canada,  settled  about
1794  in  Sault  Sainte  Marie,  Mich.,  where  he  was  a
frontier  merchant  for  more  than  forty  years,  and
established  a  small  centre  of  civilization  in  the
midst  of  the  savages.  His  wife,  an  Indian  woman,
was  noted  for  her  hospitality  and  upright  charac-
ter, and  is  described  by  Gen.  Lewis  Cass  as  "  the
friend  and  benefactor  of  the  Americans."  The
eldest  daughter  of  this  marriage  was  sent  to  Eu-
rope to  be  educated,  and  afterward  married  Henry
R.  Schoolcraft,  the  historian  of  the  Indians.  In
the  war  of  1812  Johnston  lost  his  property  through
the  ravages  of  the  American  soldiers,  but,  revisit-
ing Ireland,  he  sold  his  estate,  returned  to  Sault
Sainte  Marie,  and  re-established  his  business.  He
did  much  to  preserve  Indian  traditions.

JOHNSTON,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Bristol,  Me.,
23  Aug.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Clifton,  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,
2  Dec,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in
1832,  and  began  to  teach  in  Oneida  conference
seminary,  Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,  becoming  its  principal
in  1835.  During  the  latter  year  he  was  elected
lecturer  on  natural  science  and  assistant  professor
of  mathematics  in  Wesleyan  university.  He  was
made  full  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  1837,
and  continued  in  the  occupancy  of  that  chair  until
1873,  when  he  was  made  professor  emeritus.  In
1850  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  McKen-
dree  college,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  Philadel-
phia academy  of  sciences,  and  the  American  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science.  Besides
scientific  papers  contributed  to  the  "American
Journal  of  Science  "  and  other  periodicals,  he  pub-
lished "  A  Manual  of  Chemistry  "  (Middletown,
1840 ;  6th  ed.,  1856) ;  "A  Manual  of  Natural  Phi-
losophy "  (Philadelphia,  1846  ;  revised  ed.,  1851) ;
"  Primer  of  Natural  Philosophy  "  (1858) ;  and  "  A
History  of  the  Towns  of  Bristol  and  Bremen  in  the
State  of  Maine  "  (Albany.  1873).

JOHNSTON,  John  Taylor,  capitalist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  8  April,  1820.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1839,
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843,  and  in  1848  became
president  of  the  Central  railroad  of  New  Jersey,
which  office  he  still  (1887)  holds.  His  valuable
collection  of  paintings  was  sold  at  auction  in
New  York  city,  in  December,  1876.  Mr.  Johnston
is  president  of  the  council  of  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York,  and  of  the  Metropolitan
museum  of  art  in  that  city.

JOHNSTON,  Peter,  jurist,  b.  in  Osborne's
Landing,  Ya.,  6  Jan.,  1763 ;  d.  near  Abingdon,
Washington  co.,  Va.,  8  Dec,  1841.  His  father,
Peter  Johnston,  came  to  this  country  from  Scot-
land in  1727  and  settled  on  James  river,  Va.  Sub-
sequently he  removed  to  Prince  Edward  county,
and  gave  to  the  trustees  of  Hampden  Sidney  college
the  land  on  which  that  institution  was  afterward
erected.  The  son  was  sent  to  college  to  prepare
for  the  church,  but,  preferring  to  enlist  in  the
Revolutionary  army,  he  joined  Lee's  legion  at  the
age  of  sixteen,  without  the  knowledge  of  his  father.
He  led  the  forlorn  hope  at  the  storming  of  Fort
Watson,  and  was  publicly  thanked,  in  the  presence
of  the  army,  for  his  conduct.  After  the  war  he
studied  law,  and  resided  near  the  town  of  Farm-
ville,  Va.  He  represented  Prince  Edward  county
in  the  general  assembly  of  Virginia,  and  was  speak-
er of  that  body  at  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the
resolutions  of  1798-9.  In  1809  he  removed  to
Washington  county,  Va.,  having  been  elected  judge


<7.£.£>^u^£%


of  a  new  judicial  circuit,  and  resided  there  till  Iris
death.  He  married  Mary  Wood,  a  niece  of  Pat  rick
Henry. — His  son,  Joseph  Eggleston,  soldier,  b.
in  Longwood,  near  Farmville,  Va.,  3  Feb.,  1807;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  21  March,  1891,  was  grad-
uated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1829,  and
was  commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  4th  ar-
tillery. He  served  in  garrison  at  Fort  Columbus,
N.  Y.,  in  1830-'l,  at  Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  in  1831-'2,
was  in  the  Black  Hawk  expedition  in  1832,  in  gar-
rison at  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1832-'3,  at
Fort  Monroe  in
1833-'4,  at  Fort  Mad-
ison, N.  C,  in  1834,
and  on  topographi-
cal duty  in  1834-'5.
He  was  made  1st
lieutenant,  4th  artil-
lery, 31  July,  1836,
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Winfield  Scott  in  the
Seminole  war  in
1836-'8,  and  resigned
on  31  May,  1837.  He
was  a  civil  engineer
in  1837-8,  and  was
appointed  1st  lieu-
tenant in  the  corps  of  topographical  engineers,
7  July,  1838,  and  brevetted  captain  for  gallantry
in  the  war  with  the  Florida  Indians.  On  one  oc-
casion, having  been  sent  under  the  escort  of  a
party  of  infantry  and  sailors  to  make  a  survey  or
reconnoissance  of  a  region  around  a  lake,  and  hav-
ing crossed  the  lake  in  boats,  the  party  fell  into
an  ambuscade,  and  nearly  all  its  officers  were
killed  or  disabled  at  the  first  fire.  The  men  were
thrown  into  confusion,  but  Lieut.  Johnston  took
command,  subdued  what  was  fast  becoming  a
panic,  and  conducted  the  retreat  for  seven  miles.
A  ball  struck  him  above  the  forehead,  and  ranged
backward,  grazing  the  skull  the  whole  distance.
The  troops  repelled  the  enemy,  and  carried  off
their  wounded  in  safety  to  the  boats.  The  uniform
worn  by  Lieut.  Johnston  on  this  occasion  was  long
preserved  by  a  friend  as  a  curiosity,  being  per-
forated by  six  bullets.  He  was  in  charge  of  the
Black  river  improvement,  New  York,  in  1838-'9,
of  the  Sault  Ste.  Marie  in  1840,  the  boundary  be-
tween Texas  and  the  United  States  in  1841,  the
harbors  on  Lake  Erie  in  1841,  and  the  topographi-
cal bureau  at  Washington  in  1841-2.  He  served
in  the  Florida  war  of  1842-'3,  and  as  acting  assist-
ant adjutant-general  in  1842-3,  on  the  survey  of
the  boundary  between  the  United  States  and  the
British  provinces  in  1843-4,  on  the  coast  survey  in
1.844-'6,  and  became  captain  in  the  corps  of  topo-
graphical engineers,  21  Sept.,  1846.  In  the  war  with
Mexico  he  participated  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz
and  the  battles  of  Cerro  Gordo,  Contreras,  Churu-
busco,  Molino  del  Rey,  Chapultepec,  and  the  as-
sault on  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  was  brevetted  ma-
jor, lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel,  12  April,  1847,
for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  on  reconnoi-
tring duty  at  Cerro  Gordo.  He  was  severely
wounded  at  Cerro  Gordo,  and  again  at  Chapulte-
pec, 13  Sept.,  1847,  where  he  led  a  detachment  of
the  storming  party,  and  Gen.  Scott  reported  that
he  was  the  first  to  plant  a  regimental  color  on  the
ramparts  of  the  fortress.  He  was  mustered  out  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  volunteers,  28  Aug.,  1848,  but
was  reinstated  by  act  of  congress  with  his  original
rank  as  captain  of  topographical  engineers,  to  date
from  21  Sept.,  1846.  He  served  as  chief  of  topo-
graphical engineers  of  the  Department  of  Texas  in


JOHNSTON


JOHNSTON


459


1852-'3,  was  in  charge  of  western  river  improve-
ments in  1853-'5,  and  was  acting  inspector-general
on  the  Utah  expedition  of  1858.  On  28  June,  1860,
he  was  commissioned  quartermaster-general  of  the
U.  S.  army,  which  post  he  resigned  on  22  April,
1861.  to  enter  the  Confederate  service.

He  was  commissioned  major-general  of  volun-
teers in  the  Army  of  Virginia,  and  with  Gen.
Robert  E.  Lee  organized  the  volunteers  of  that
state,  who  were  pouring  into  Richmond.  On  being
summoned  to  Montgomery,  the  capital  of  the  Con-
federate states,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  four
brigadier-generals  then  commissioned,  and  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  Harper's  Ferry.  Gen.
Robert  Patterson,  at  the  head  of  a  National  force,
was  then  approaching  from  the  north  of  the  Po-
tomac, and  Gen.  Johnston  withdrew  from  the  cul-
de-sac  at  Harper's  Ferry  and  took  position  at
Winchester  with  his  army,  which  was  called  the
Army  of  the  Shenandoah.  When  Gen.  Beaure-
gard was  attacked  at  Manassas  by  the  National
army  under  Gen.  McDowell,  18  July,  1861,  John-
ston, covering  his  movement  with  Stuart's  cavalry,
left  Patterson  in  the  valley  and  rapidly  marched
to  the  assistance  of  Beauregard.  On  reaching  the
field  he  left  Beauregard,  whom  he  ranked,  in  tac-
tical command  of  the  field,  and  assumed  re-
sponsibilitv  and  charge  of  the  battle  then  about
to  be  fought.  (See  Beauregard.)  Gen.  Johnston
remained  in  command  of  the  consolidated  forces
until  the  spring  of  1862,  when,  finding  McClellan
about  to  advance,  he  withdrew  to  the  Rappahan-
nock, whence  he  moved  to  meet  McClellan.  He
was  wounded  at  Seven  Pines,  31  May,  1862,  and
incapacitated  for  duty  until  the  following  autumn.
On  16  May,  1861,  the  brigadier-generals  Johnston,
Cooper,  and  Lee  were  created  generals  by  act  of
the  Confederate  congress  in  the  order  named.
On  31  Aug.,  1861,  Johnston  was  appointed  one
of  the  five  full  generals  authorized  by  this  act,
who  were  commissioned  in  the  following  order :
Samuel  Cooper,  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  Robert
E.  Lee,  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  and  G.  T.  Beauregard.
This  assignment  of  rank  was  directly  contrary  to
the  act  of  the  Confederate  congress,  which  re-
quired that  when  officers  resigned  from  the  17.  S.
army  the  rank  of  such  officers,  when  commissioned
in  the  army  of  the  Confederate  states,  should  be
determined  by  their  former  commissions  in  the  U.  S.
army.  The  order  of  rank  thus  established  by  law
was  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  brigadier-general :  Samuel
Cooper,  colonel ;  Albert  S.  Johnston,  colonel ;  Rob-
ert E.  Lee,  lieutenant-colonel ;  Pierre  G.  T.  Beau-
regard, captain.  Gen.  Johnston  protested  against
this  illegal  action,  and  his  protest  is  believed  to
have  been  the  beginning  and  cause  of  Mr.  Davis's
hostility,  which  was  exhibited  throughout  the  war.
When  Gen.  Johnston  was  ordered  to  the  peninsula
to  oppose  McClellan,  he  asked  to  be  re-enforced
with  the  troops  from  the  sea-coast,  to  enable  him  to
crush  McClellan ;  but  this  was  not  done.  On  24
March,  1863,  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  southwest,  including  the  troops  of  Gens.  Bragg,
Kirby  Smith,  and  Pemberton.  He  at  once  ad-
dressed a  letter  to  the  secretary  of  war,  Mr.  Ran-
dolph, and  urged  that  Gen.  Holmes's  army,  55.000
strong,  then  at  Little  Rock,  should  be  ordered  to
him,  to  enable  him  to  defeat  Grant.  Sec.  Ran-
dolph had  actually  issued  such  an  order  before
Johnston's  communication  was  received,  but  Mr.
Davis  countermanded  it.  and  Randolph  resigned.
In  May,  1863,  Gen.  Grant  crossed  the  Mississippi
to  attack  Vicksburg  in  the  rear,  and  Gen.  Johnston
was  ordered  to  take  command  of  all  the  Confeder-
ate forces  in  Mississippi. Going  there  at  once,  he


endeavored  to  withdraw  Pemberton  from  Vicks-
burg and  re-enforce  him  from  Bragg's  army,  but
failed  by  reason  of  Pemberton's  disobedience  of  or-
ders, and  Vicksburg  was  taken  by  Grant.  On  18
Dec,  1863,  he  was  transferred  to  the  command  of
the  Army  of  Tennessee,  with  headquarters  at  Dal-
ton,  Ga.  During  the  winter  of  1863-'4  he  was  oc-
cupied in  restoring  and  reorganizing  this  force,
which  had  been  broken  by  the  defeat  of  Mission-
ary Ridge.  By  May,  1864,  he  had  collected  43,000
men  of  all  arms  (exclusive  of  officers,  musicians,
teamsters,  etc.),  and  a  week  later  he  was  re-en-
forced by  Gen.  Polk's  corps.  (For  an  account  of
the  campaign  that  followed.  Johnston's  army
slowly  retreating  toward  Atlanta,  followed  closely
by  Sherman's,  see  Sherman,  William  Tecumseh.)
On  17  July,  1864,  the  Richmond  authorities,  dis-
satisfied with  Johnston's  movements,  relieved  him
of  the  command,  and  directed  him  to  turn  it  over
to  Gen.  John  B.  Hood.

On  23  Feb.,  1865,  Gen.  Johnston  was  ordered  by
Gen.  Lee,  then  commander-in-chief  of  all  the  ar-
mies of  the  Confederate  states,  to  assume  com-
mand of  the  Army  of  Tennessee,  and  all  troops  in
South  Carolina.  Georgia,  and  Florida.  "  to  concen-
trate all  available  forces  and  drive  back  Sherman."
The  available  forces  were  5.000  men  of  the  Army
of  Tennessee,  near  Charlotte,  N.  C,  and  11,000
scattered  from  Charleston  through  South  Carolina.
Sherman  had  60,000  men.  An  inspection  of  the
railroad  depots  in  North  Carolina  showed  that
there  were  then  collected  in  them  four  and  one
half  months'  provisions  for  60,000  men  ;  but  these
Johnston  was  ordered  not  to  touch,  as  they  were
for  the  use  of  Lee's  army,  so  that  the  difficulty  of
collecting  provisions  was  added  to  the  other  diffi-
culties of  his  position.  Gen.  Johnston  urged  Gen.
Lee  to  withdraw  from  Richmond,  unite  with  him,
and  beat  Sherman  before  Grant  could  join  him ;
but  Lee  replied  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to
leave  Virginia.  Collecting  such  troops  as  could  be
got  together,  Johnston  threw  himself  before  Sher-
man, and  on  19-21  March  attacked  the  head  of  his
column  at  Bentonville,  south  of  Goldsboro,  and
captured  four  pieces  of  artillery  and  900  prison-
ers. Then  Johnston  retired  before  Sherman  to
Raleigh,  and  thence  toward  Greensboro.  In  the
mean  time  Richmond  had  been  evacuated,  and  on
9  April,  Lee  surrendered  the  Army  of  Northern
Virginia  to  Grant.  Johnston  thereupon  assumed
the  responsibility  of  advising  Mr.  Davis,  whom  he
found  at  Greensboro,  that,  the  war  having  been
decided  against  them,  it  was  their  duty  to  end
it,  arguing  that  further  continuation  of  war  would
be  murder.  Mr.  Davis  agreed  that  he  should
make  terms  with  Sherman,  and,  on  18  April,  1865,
Johnston  and  Sherman  entered  into  a  military
convention,  by  which  it  was  stipulated  that  the
Confederate  armies  should  be  disbanded  and  con-
ducted to  their  state  capitals,  to  deposit  their  arms
and  public  property  in  the  state  arsenals;  the
soldiers  to  execute  an  agreement  to  abstain  from
acts  of  war,  and  to  abide  the  action  of  the  state
and  National  authorities ;  that  the  several  state
governments  should  be  recognized  by  the  executive
of  the  United  States  upon  their  officers  and  legis-
latures taking  the  oath  prescribed  by  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States ;  the  people  and  inhabi-
tants of  the  states  to  be  guaranteed  all  their  rights
under  the  Federal  and  state  constitutions;  gen-
eral amnesty  for  all  acts  in  the  late  war ;  war  to
cease  and  peace  to  be  restored.  This  agreement
was  rejected  by  the  National  government,  and,
on  26  April,  Gens.  Johnston  and  Sherman  signed
another, surrendering  the Confederate  army  on


460


JOnXSTON


JOHNSTONE


the  terms  of  the  agreement  between  Grant  and
Lee.  After  the  war  Gen.  Johnston  was  president
of  a  railroad  in  Arkansas,  president  of  the  Na-
tional express  company  in  Virginia,  agent  for  the
London,  Liverpool,  and  Globe  insurance  company,
and  for  the  New  York  life  insurance  company  in
Savannah,  Ga.  In  1877  he  was  elected  to  repre-
sent the  Richmond  district  of  Virginia  in  con-
gress, and  later  was  commissioner  of  railroads
of  the  United  States,  appointed  by  President
Cleveland.  The  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the
strategy  and  policy  of  the  war  between  Mr.  Davis
and  Gen.  Johnston  exhibited  itself  at  an  early  date,
and  from  it  may  be  deduced  many  of  the  disasters
that  befell  the  Confederate  arms  and  the  final  fall
of  the  Confederate  states.  Mr.  Davis  was  con-
vinced that  the  whole  territory  of  the  seceded
states  ought  to  be  protected  from  invasion  by  the
National  forces.  Hence  the  sea-coast  was  fortified
and  garrisoned  as  far  as  possible,  and  lines  along
the  frontier  were  held.  Gen.  Johnston,  on  the
other  hand,  was  fixed  in  the  opinion,  and  persistent
in  urging  it,  that  there  should  be  no  defence  of
positions  or  of  lines;  that  if  any  part  of  the  coun-
try was  given  up  to  invasion  by  withdrawal  of
troops  provided  for  its  defence,  so  as  to  re-enforce
armies  in  the  field,  the  destruction  or  repulse  of
the  invading  army  would  recover  the  terri-
tory so  abandoned.  Early  in  the  war  Gen.  John-
ston advised  the  concentration  of  his  Army  of  the
Shenandoah  with  Beauregard's  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, for  the  purpose  of  fighting  McDowell.  This
was  attempted  when  it  was  too  late,  and  only  part
of  Johnston's  army  was  engaged  in  the  first  battle
of  Bull  Run.  When  McClellan  transferred  his
operations  to  the  peninsula,  Johnston  insisted  on
abandoning  Yorktown  so  as  to  draw  McClellan
further  into  the  interior,  re-enforcing  the  Confed-
erates with  the  troops  from  the  sea-coast  of  Geor-
gia, South  Carolina,  and  North  Carolina,  thus
giving  him  an  equality,  if  not  a  preponderance,  of
force  over  McClellan ;  but  Mr.  Davis  refused  to
do  this,  although  it  was  partly  done  after  Johnston
was  wounded  at  Seven  Pines.  When  Grant's
army  was  scattered  from  Mississippi  to  Memphis,
Johnston  argued  that  Gen.  Bragg  should  be  re-en-
forced from  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Mobile,
and  fall  upon  Grant  and  beat  him  in  detachments.
And  he  opposed  Bragg's  march  into  Kentucky  as
leading  to  no  decisive  result.  Gen.  Johnston  was
wounded  in  the  Indian  war  in  Florida,  in  the
Mexican  war,  and  in  the  civil  war — ten  times  in  all.
Early  in  life  he  married  Lydia  McLane,  daughter
of  Louis  McLane  (q.  v.).  She  died  in  1886  with-
out issue.  He  published  a  "  Narrative  of  Military
Operations  directed  during  the  Late  War  between
the  States  "  (New  York,  1874). — Peter's  grandson,
John  Warfleld,  senator,  b.  in  Abingdon,  Va.,  9
Sept.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  27  Feb.,  1889,  was  edu-
cated at  the  College  of  South  Carolina,  and  studied
law  at  the  University  of  Virginia.  In  1839  he  be-
came judge  of  the  10th  judicial  district  of  Virginia.
He  was  state  senator  in  1847-'8,  and  president  of  the
Northwestern  bank  at  Jeffersonville  in  1850-'9.
He  was  elected  in  1870  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a
Conservative,  and  by  re-elections  served  till  1883.
JOHNSTON,  Richard  Malcolm,  author,  b.  in
Hancock  county,  Ga.,  8  March,  1822.  He  was
graduated  at  Mercer  university,  Ga.,  in  1841,  and,
after  teaching  a  year,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
the  northern  circuit  of  the  state,  declining  a  judge-
ship in  1857  to  accept  the  chair  of  literature  in  the
University  of  Georgia,  where  he  remained  till  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  Retiring  to  his  coun-
try home  near  Sparta,  Ga.,  he  then  opened  a  board-


ing-school for  boys,  which  in  1867  he  removed  to
Baltimore  county',  Md.,  where  he  still  (1887)  resides,
His  first  stories,  a  series  of  character  sketches  of  the
rural  districts  of  Georgia,  written  after  the  war,
were  published  under  the  title  of  "  Dukesborough
Tales"  in  the  old  "Southern  Magazine,"  ami  af-
terward collected  in  book-form  (New  York,  1883).
His  other  writings,  besides  constant  contributions
to  magazines,  are  "  A  History  of  English  Litera-
ture," in  conjunction  with  William  Hand  Brown
(Baltimore,  1879) ;  "  Biography  of  Alexander  H.
Stephens " (Philadelphia,  1883):  "Old  Mark  Lnng-
ston"  (1884);  and  "Two  Gray  Tourists"  (1885);
and  a  collection  of  his  stories  (1887).

JOHNSTON,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Shelby,
Orleans  co..  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  1835.  His  father  was'a
farmer  and  a  weaver  of  fine  linens ;  his  mother  was
also  a  weaver.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he  invented  a
corn-  and  bean-planter  and  a  bean-harvester.  The
most  successful  machines  now  in  use  in  this  line
are  built  in  many  respects  like  those  first  made  by
him.  In  1856  he  applied  his  first  self- rake  to  the
Ketchum  reaper ;  its  success  attracted  wide  atten-
tion, and  its  manufacture  was  begun  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y..  in  1858.  In  1864  Mr.  Johnston  established
a  factory  at  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1868  bought
one  at  Brockport,  N.  Y.,  and  organized  the  John-
ston harvester  company.  In  1875  he  resigned
from  active  interest  in  the  company,  and  since
that  time  his  business  has  been  confined  to  invent-
ing. The  Johnston  self-rake  caused  a  revolution
in  the  harvesting  of  grain  throughout  the  world.
In  1879  ninety-five  per  cent,  of  all  the  reapers  made
used  the  inventions  of  Mr.  Johnston.  He  has  just
completed  (1887)  a  new  self-rake  binder.

JOHNSTON,  William  Freame,  governor  of
Pennsylvania,  b.  in  Greensburg,  Westmoreland  co.,
Pa.,  29  Nov.,  1808  ;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  25  Oct.,
1872.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829,  and,
removing  to  Armstrong  county,  became  district
attorney.  He  also  represented  his  county  several
terms  in  the  legislature,  and  originated  the  bill  to
issue  relief-notes.  In  1847  he  was  elected  state
senator  and  president  of  that  body.  On  the  resig-
nation of  Francis  R.  Shunk  in  July  following,  he
became  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  October,
1849,  was  elected  for  the  full  term.  As  an  anti-
slavery  Whig,  he  took  strong  grounds  against  the
fugitive-slave  law.  On  retiring  from  office  in  1852,
he  became  president  of  the  Alleghany  Valley  rail-
road. During  the  civil  war  he  took  an  active  part
in  organizing  troops,  as  chairman  of  the  executive
committee  of  public  safety,  superintended  the  con-
struction of  the  defences  at  Pittsburg,  and,  in  con-
nection with  John  Harper,  became  financially  re-
sponsible for  a  large  amount  of  ammunition  that
was  sent  to  West  Virginia.  He  was  appointed  col-
lector of  the  port  of  Philadelphia  by  President
Johnson,  but  was  not  confirmed.

JOHNSTONE,  George,  British  diplomatist,  b.  in
Dumfries,  Scotland  ;  d.  8.  Jan.,  1787.  He  was  the
third  son  of  Sir  James  Johnstone,  bart.,  of  Wester-
hall,  Dumfriesshire,  entered  the  navy,  was  made
master  and  commander  in  1760,  post-captain  in
1762,  and  in  1763  became  governor  of  West  Flori-
da. After  his  return  to  England  he  represented
Cockermouth  and  Appleby  in  parliament.  In  1778
he  was  a  commissioner  sent  with  Lord  Carlisle  to
the  United  States  to  treat  with  congress.  In  1779
he  made  a  violent  attack  on  Lord  Howe  for  his
conduct  of  the  American  war.  He  gained  much
public  notice  by  his  zeal  in  the  affairs  of  the  East
India  company,  and  by  his  violent  attacks  on  Lord
Clive.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Thoughts  on  Our
Acquisitions  in  the  East"  (1777).


JOHNSTONE


JONES


461


JOHNSTONE,  Job,  jurist,  b.  in  Fairfield
county,  S.  C.  7  June.  1793;  d.  in  Newberry,  S.  C,
15  April,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Caro-
lina college  in  1810,  studied  medicine,  and  was
licensed  to  practise ;  but,  abandoning  that  profes-
sion for  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818,  and
entered  into  partnership  with  John  B.  O'Neal  in
Newberry,  S.  C.  He  was  clerk  of  the  state  senate
in  1826-'30,  and  at  the  latter  date  was  elected
chancellor,  his  colleague  being  Henry  W.  De  Saus-
sure.  Mr.  Johnstone  did  much  to  reform  the  then
imperfect  practice  of  the  court  in  South  Carolina,
and  it  was  said  that  during  the  twTenty-one  years  of
his  administration  no  suitor  ever  lost  either  his
rights  or  his  estate  through  the  mal-administration
of  the  chancellor.  He  held  office  till  1859,  when
he  became  associate  justice  of  the  court  of  appeals.
His  decisions  are  in  Hill's  "  Chancery  Reports,"
Strobhart's  "  Equity,"  Cheves's  "  Equity,  and
McCord's  "  Chancery  Reports."

JOUONNOT,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Bethel,
Vt.,  3  March,  1823 ;  d.  in  Tarpon  Springs,  Fla.,  18
June,  1888.  He  completed  his  education  in  1848.
In  1850  he  began  to  teach,  and  from  1861  till  1866
he  had  charge  of  the  schools  at  Joliet,  111.,  and  in
1872-'5  was  president  of  the  State  normal  school
at  Warrensburg,  Mo.  He  was  a  member  of  the
institute  faculty  of  New  York  state  for  many
years  preceding.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Prin-
ciples and  Practice  of  Teaching  "  (New  York,  1878):
"A  Geographical  Reader"  (1882);  "Glimpses  of
the  Animate  World  "  (1883) ;  "  Book  of  Cats  and
Dogs  and  Other  Friends  "  (1884) ;  "  How  We  Live  "
(1884);  "Friends  in  Feathers  and  Fur"  (1885);
"The  Sentence  and  Word  Book"  (1885);  "Some
Curious  Flyers,  Creepers, and  Swimmers"  (1887);
and  historical  series  of  reading-books  (7  vols.,  1887).

JOLLIET,  or  JOLIET.  Lonis,  discoverer,  b.  in
Quebec,  21  Sept.,  1645  ;  d.  in  Canada  in  May,  1700.
He  was  educated  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  Quebec,
and  received  minor  orders  in  1662,  but  in  1667
abandoned  his  intention  of  becoming  a  priest,  and
went  to  the  west  for  a  time.  In  1672,  Talon,  the
intendant,  and  Frontenac.  the  governor,  of  New
France,  determined  to  make  an  effort  to  discover
the  Mississippi,  which  was  then  supposed  to  empty
into  the  Sea  of  California.  By  the  advice  of  Talon.
Frontenac  charged  Jolliet  with  this  enterprise,  as
being,  he  said,  "  a  man  very  experienced  in  these
kinds  of  discoveries,  and  who  had  been  already  very
near  this  river."  All  the  aid  the  provincial  govern-
ment could  afford  consisted  of  a  single  assistant
and  a  bark  canoe.  To  obtain  further  assistance  in
his  project  he  went  to  a  Jesuit  mission,  and  there
met  Father  James  Marquette,  who  had  long  been
desirous  of  visiting  the  country  of  the  Illinois.  In
concert  with  Marquette  and  five  other  Frenchmen,
Jolliet  arrived  in  Mackinaw,  8  Dec,  1672.  The  sav-
ages at  this  port  supplied  them  with  information
that  enabled  them  to  draw  a  map  of  their  proposed
route,  which  was  afterward  revised  by  Marquette,
and  in  this  form  was  published  in  Shea's  "  Discov-
ery and  Exploration  of  the  Mississippi  Vallev  "
(New  York,  1852).  With  the  aid  of  this  map  the
explorers  descended  Wisconsin  and  Illinois  rivers
and  entered  the  Mississippi,  17  June.  1673.  On  the
25th  they  visited  the  first  Illinois  village,  and  they
then  descended  the  river  until  they  came  to  a  vil-
lage of  the  Arkansas  Indians  in  33°  40'  north  lati-
tude. They  set  out  on  their  return  for  the  colony
on  17  July,  having  ascertained  beyond  a  doubt  that
the  Mississippi  empties  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.
Making  their  way  northward  against  strong  cur-
rents, they  reached  the  mission  of  St.  Francis
Xavier  on  Lac  des  Puants  (Lake  Winnipeg)  toward


the  end  of  September.  Here  Jolliet  spent  the  win-
ter, and  in  the  spring  of  1674  he  returned  to  Que-
bec after  losing  his  valuable  maps  and  papers  by
the  upsetting  of  his  canoe  in  Lachine  rapids.  He
at  once  made  the  governor  of  the  colony  and  Father
Dalton,  superior-general  of  the  Jesuits  of  Canada,
fully  acquainted  with  the  discoveries  that  he  had
made,  drawing  a  map  from  memory,  which  is  now
in  the  Archives  de  la  marine,  Paris.  After  his  re-
turn to  Quebec,  Jolliet  married  Clara  Francis  Bis-
sot.  He  tried  to  urge  the  French  government  to
cultivate  the  rich  lands  of  the  Mississippi  valley
and  develop  its  mineral  resources,  but  his  plan  for
colonizing  the  territory  he  had  discovered  was  for
the  time  rejected.  About  1680  he  was  granted  the
island  of  Anticosti.  and  built  a  fort  there,  but  it
was  destroyed  by  the  English  in  1690.  and  his  wife
taken  prisoner.  Jolliet  afterward  explored  Labra-
dor, and  was  appointed  royal  hydrographer  in  1693.
On  30  April,  1697,  he  was  granted  the  seigniory  of
Joliet,  south  of  Quebec,  which  is  still  in  possession
of  his  descendants.  The  question  as  to  whether
the  honor  of  first  exploring  the  Mississippi  belongs
to  Marquette.  Jolliet,  or  La  Salle  (q.  v.)  has  long
been  a  subject  of  controversy.  See  "  Memoire  de
Nicolas  Perrot,"  vol.  iii.  of  the  "  Bibliotheca  Ameri-
cana "  (Paris  and  Leipsic,  1864);  Parkman's  "La
Salle  "  (1869) :  Pierre  Margrv's  "  Memoires  et  docu-
ments." which  supports  the  claim  of  La  Salle  (6
vols..  Paris.  1876-'86) ;  John  G.  Shea's  "  Bursting
of  Pierre  Margrv's  La  Salle  Bubble  "  (New  York,
1879) :  and  Winsor's  "  Narrative  and  Critical  His-
tory of  America  "  (Boston.  1884-'7),  which  contains
a  bibliography  of  the  subject.

JOLY,  Henry  Gustave.  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  France,  5  Dec..  1829.  He  was  educated  at  Paris,
and  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in
March,  1855.  He  represented  Lotbiniere  in  the
Canada  assembly  from  1861  till  the  union,  when
he  was  elected  by  acclamation  for  both  the  Domin-
ion parliament  and  the  Quebec  legislature.  He
continued  to  sit  in  both  houses  until  1874,  when  he
retired  from  parliament  and  confined  himself  en-
tirely to  the  provincial  legislature.  He  was  re-
elected for  Lotbiniere  in  the  latter  in  1875,  1878,
and  in  1881.  He  declined  a  senatorshin  in  1874
and  again  in  1877.  and  a  portfolio  in  the  Dominion
cabinet  as  minister  of  agricidture  in  the  latter  year.
On  the  dismissal  of  the  De  Boucherville  cabinet  by
Lieut.-Gov.  Letellier  de  St.  Just,  in  March.  1878,
Mr.  Joly  was  called  upon  to  form  a  new  ministry,
which  he  accomplished,  assuming,  as  premier,  the
portfolio  of  public  works.  He  resigned  with  his
colleagues.  30  Oct..  1879.  and  was  leader  of  the  op-
position from  1879  till  1883.  He  is  president  of  the
reform  association  of  the  national  party  of  Quebec,
and  of  the  Quebec  and  Gosforford  railway.

JONAS,  Benjamin  Franklin,  senator,  b.  in
Williamstown.  Grant  co.,  Ky..  19  July,  1834.  He
removed  with  his  father  to  Adams  county,  111.,  at
an  early  age,  and  was  educated  there.  He  went  to
reside  in  New  Orleans  in  1853.  and  was  graduated
at  the  law  department  of  the  University  of  Louisi-
ana in  1855.  He  served  in  the  Confederate  army,
first  as  a  private  and  afterward  as  acting  adjutant
of  artillery  in  Hood's  corps  of  the  Army  of  Ten-
nessee. He  was  a  representative  in  the  legislature
in  1865,  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  con-
vention of  1868,  and  was  elected  a  state  senator  in
1872.  He  was  elected  city  attorney  of  New  Or-
leans in  1874.  and  1876  ;  was  again  "in  the  legisla-
ture in  1876-'7,  and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from
Louisiana  from  4  March,  1879.

JONES,  Alexander,  author,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina about  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  Aug.,


462


JONES


JONES


1863.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  in  Philadel-
phia, and  began  practice  in  Mississippi,  where  he
became  interested  in  the  culture  of  cotton,  and
made  several  improvements  in  the  cotton-gin,
which  were  subsequently  adopted  throughout  the
south.  In  1840  the  East  India  company  offered
Dr.  Jones  $5,000  a  year  and  his  expenses  to  go  to
India  and  develop  the  production  of  cotton  in  that
country,  and,  although  he  declined  the  offer  for
patriotic  reasons  after  reaching  London,  he  gave
evidence  before  a  British  parliamentary  committee
on  the  cultivation  of  cotton  in  the  United  States.
On  his  return  from  England  he  became  a  resident
of  New  York  city,  where  he  was  a  correspondent
of  several  English  and  American  newspapers,  and
wrote  for  the  "  Journal  of  Commerce "  over  the
signature  of  "  Sandy  Hook."  In  1850  he  became
the  agent  of  the  Associated  press,  and  invented  a
comprehensive  system  of  ciphers,  which  was  the  first
used  by  the  association.  Soon  afterward  he  became
commercial  reporter  of  the  "  New  York  Herald,"
which  place  he  retained  till  his  death.  Besides
the  inventions  already  mentioned,  Dr.  Jones  de-
vised a  street-sweeping  machine.  He  took  great
interest  in  the  history  and  progress  of  the  Welsh
people,  from  whom  he  was  descended,  and  was
an  active  member  of  St.  David's  society.  He
is  the  author  of  "  Cuba  in  1851 "  (New  York,
1851);  "Historical  Sketch  of  the  Electric  Tele-
graph" (1852);  and  "The  Cymri  of  Seventy-Six,
or  the  Welshmen  of  the  American  Revolution  and
their  Descendants  "  (1855).

JONES,  Alexander  H.,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Asheville,  Buncombe  co.,  N.  C,  21  July,  1822.
He  was  well  educated,  was  a  farmer  during  the
early  part  of  his  life,  subsequently  a  merchant
at  Asheville,  and  was  for  a  time  an  editor.  He
adhered  to  the  National  government  in  the  civil
war,  early  in  the  summer  of  1863  fled  into  the
Union  lines,  and  was  commissioned  by  Gren.  Burn-
side  to  raise  a  regiment  of  loyal  North  Carolinians.
While  so  employed  he  was  captured  in  East  Ten-
nessee by  Confederate  troops,  imprisoned  at  Ashe-
ville, at  Camp  Vance,  Camp  Holmes,  and  in  Libby
Erison,  and  was  drafted  into  the  Confederate  army,
ut  made  his  escape  in  November,  1864,  without
performing  any  service.  After  the  surrender  of
Gen.  Lee  he  returned,  was  elected  to  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1865,  and  afterward
to  congress  as  a  Republican ;  but  there  being  no
established  civil  government  in  the  state,  he  was
not  received.  He  was  elected  to  the  two  ensuing
congresses,  and  served  from  20  July,  1868,  till  3
March,  1871.  He  was  a  candidate  for  the  42d
congress,  but  was  defeated.

JONES,  Alfred,  engraver,  b.  in  Liverpool,  Eng-
land, in  1819.  He  came  to  the  United  States  when
young,  and  received  the  first  prize  at  the  National
academy  of  design  in  New  York,  in  1839,  for  a
drawing  that  he  had  made  from  Thorwaldsen's
"  Mercury."  He  first  came  into  public  notice  by
his  engravings  of  "  The  Proposal,"  by  Asher  B.
Durand,  and  "  The  Parmer's  Nooning,"  after  Will-
iam S.  Mount,  and  his  work  was  in  request  for  il-
lustrated publications.  He  went  to  Europe  in
1846,  and,  after  studying  in  life-schools  there,  was
elected  a  member  of  the  National  academy,  New
York,  in  1851.  He  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  best
engravers  in  the  United  States.  He  has  for  many
years  been  connected  with  the  American  bank-note
company,  New  York,  as  an  engraver.  Among  his
steel  plates  are  "  The  Image-Breaker,"  after  Leutze,
portraits  of  Adoniram  Judson,  by  Chester  Hard-
ing, and  William  Cullen  Bryant ;  and  "  The  Cap-
ture of  Major  Andre,"  after  Durand ;  "  Sparking,"


by  Edmonds  ;  "  The  New  Scholar  "  ;  "  Mexican
News  "  ;  and  various  portraits.

JONES,  Alfred  Gilpin,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Weymouth,  Nova  Scotia,  in  September,  1824.
His  grandfather,  Stephen,  a  graduate  of  Harvard,
was  an  officer  in  the  king's  American  dragoons,
and  at  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  war  settled
in  Nova  Scotia,  where  he  died  in  1830.  Alfred  was
educated  at  Weymouth  and  at  Yarmouth  acade-
my, became  a  merchant,  and  represented  Halifax
in  the  Dominion  parliament  from  1867  till  1872,
when  he  was  defeated.  He  was  re-elected  in  1874,
but  resigned  in  January,  1878,  in  consequence  of
an  alleged  breach  of  the  independence  of  parlia-
ment act.  He  became  a  member  of  the  privy  coun-
cil, and  held  the  portfolio  of  minister  of  militia
from  January  till  September,  1878.  He  was  an  un-
successful candidate  at  the  general  elections  of
1878  and  1882,  but  was  re-elected  in  1887  for  the
Dominion  parliament.  He  is  governor  of  Dalhousie
college,  and  was  for  several  years  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  1st  Halifax  brigade  garrison  artillery.

JONES,  Allen,  patriot,  b.  in  Halifax  county,
N.  C,  in  1739 ;  d.  in  Northampton  county,  N.  C,
10  Nov.,  1798.  His  father,  Robin,  was  the  agent
and  attorney  of  Lord  Grenville,  who  was  one  of
the  lord  proprietors  of  North  Carolina.  Allen  was
educated  at  Eton,  England,  and,  returning  to  North
Carolina,  became  known  as  a  patriot  and  an  effi-
cient military  leader.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
state  conventions  that  met  at  New  Berne,  25  Aug.,
1775,  and  at  Halifax,  4  April,  1776,  was  appointed
brigadier-general  by  the  legislature  in  May  of  the
latter  year,  was  a  member  of  the  Continental  con-
gress that  met  in  Philadelphia  in  1779-'80,  and
from  1784  till  1787  represented  Northampton  coun-
ty in  the  North  Carolina  senate.  The  next  year  he
was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  that
assembled  at  Hillsborough,  and  advocated  a  strong
Federal  government  in  opposition  to  his  brother
Willie,  who  was  of  the  state-rights  party. — His
brother,  Willie,  patriot,  b.  in  Halifax,  N.  C,  in
1731 ;  d.  near  Raleigh,  N.  C,  in  1801,  was  also  edu-
cated at  Eton,  became  early  attached  to  the  patriot
cause,  was  president  of  the  North  Carolina  com-
mittee of  safety  in  1775,  and  as  such  was  virtually
the  governor  of  the  state.  He  was  a  member  of
the  first  State  constitutional  convention  in  1776,
was  in  the  house  of  commons  of  North  Carolina  in
1776-'8,  and  succeeded  his  brother  Allen  as  mem-
ber of  the  Continental  congress  in  1780.  He  was
elected  to  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1787,
but  declined  to  serve,  was  a  member  of  the  Consti-
tutional convention  that  met  at  Hillsborough  in
the  next  year,  and  was  largely  instrumental  in  its
rejection  of  the  Federal  constitution. — His  wife,
Mary  Montford,  was  the  daughter  of  Col.  Joseph
Montford,  of  North  Carolina,  and  many  anecdotes
are  related  of  her  wit  and  beauty.  When  the  Brit-
ish army  was  on  its  way  to  Virginia  in  1781,  the
officers  were  for  several  days  quartered  among  the
families  residing  on  Roanoke  river.  Col.  Tarle-
ton,  who  had  been  severely  cut  by  the  sabre  of  Will-
iam Washington,  was  a  resident  of  Mrs.  Jones's
family,  and  when  he  made  to  her  some  slighting
remarks  about  Washington,  saying  among  other
things  that  he  was  an  illiterate  fellow,  hardly  able
to  write  his  name,  Mrs.  Jones  replied :  "  Ah,  colonel,
you  ought  to  know,  for  you  bear  on  your  person
the  proof  that  he  at  least  knows  very  well  how  to
make  his  mark."  It  is  said  that  it  was  in  affection-
ate admiration  of  this  lady  that  John  Paul  Jones,
whose  real  name  was  John  Paul,  added  Jones  to
his  name,  and  under  it,  by  the  recommendation  of
Willie  Jones,  offered  his  services  to  congress.


JONES


JONES


463


JONES,  Amanda  Theodosia,  author,  b.  in  East
Bloomfield,  Ontario  co..  N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1835.  She
was  educated  in  the  public  schools,  began  to  teach
at  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  contributed  her  first
literary  work  in  1854  to  the  "  Ladies'  Repository,"
a  Methodist  magazine.  During  the  civil  war  she
wrote  several  war-songs  that  were  widely  circu-
lated. She  was  associate  editor  of  the  "  Universe,"
a  Chicago  journal,  in  1869,  was  subsequently  con-
lected  with  the  "  Western  Rural,"  and  in  1870  be-
came editor  of  "  The  Bright  Side,"  a  juvenile
reekly.  Since  1873  she  has  partially  given  up
literary  work,  and  engaged  in  inventing.  She  has
aublished  several  volumes  of  verses,  including
■  Ulah,  and  Other  Poems  "  (Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  1860) ;
"Atlantis,  and  Other  Poems"  (1866);  and  "A
Prairie  Idyl,  and  Other  Poems"  (Chicago,  1882).

JONES,  Anson,  president  of  Texas,  b.  in  Great
Barrington,  Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Houston,
Texas,  8  Jan.,  1858.  He  studied  medicine  in  Litch-
field, Conn.,  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1820,  and
after  residing  successively  in  Philadelphia,  New
Orleans,  and  in  South  America,  he  went  to  Texas  and
settled  in  Brazoria  county  in  1833.  As  chairman
of  a  mass-meeting  that  was  held  there  in  Decem-
ber, 1835,  he  drew  up  resolutions  in  favor  of  a
declaration  of  independence,  and  of  a  convention
of  the  people  of  Texas  to  form  a  constitution.  He
afterward  raised  a  military  company,  with  which
he  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  San  Jacinto,  was
judge-advocate-general,  held  several  other  military
commissions  in  1836-'7,  and  in  the  last  year  was  a
member  of  the  Texas  congress.  He  was  minister
from  Texas  to  the  IT.  S.  government  in  1837-'9,

President  of  the  senate  and  ex-officio  viee-presi-
ent  of  the  republic  in  1840,  secretary  of  state  in
1841-'4,  and  president  from  1845  till  the  annexa-
tion of  Texas  to  the  United  States.  His  earnest
opposition to this measure  greatly affected his

gipularity,  and  destroyed  his  political  influence,
is  reason  became  unsettled,  and  in  a  fit  of  insan-
ity he  died  by  his  own  hand.  The  county  of  Jones,
Texas,  and  its  court-house,  Anson,  are  named  in  his
honor.  His  journal,  preceded  by  a  brief  autobi-
ography, was  printed  privately  in  1859.

JONES,  Cat-lit,  pioneer,  b.  in  Virginia  about
1750 ;  d.  in  Columbiana  county,  Ohio,  in  1829.  He
accompanied  Daniel  Boone  to  Kentucky,  was  one
of  the  twelve  settlers  that  rescued  the  daughter  of
Boone,  who  had  been  captured  by  Indians,  and
while  guarding  the  "  corn-patch  "  with  Boone  was
severely  wounded.  After  serving  throughout  the
Revolution,  he  joined  the  Society  of  Friends,  be-
came a  preacher,  and  in  1801  emigrated  to  Ohio.

JONES,  Charles  A.,  poet.  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  about  1815 ;  d.  in  Mill  Creek,  Hamilton  co.,
Ohio,  4  July,  1851.  He  removed  with  his  parents
to  Cincinnati  in  childhood,  and  contributed  to  the
press  at  an  early  age.  His  first  articles,  a  series  of
satirical  lyrics,  appeared  in  the  Cincinnati  "  Ga-
zette," under  the  title  of  "  Aristohaniana."  After
studying  law  he  removed  to  Louisiana,  and  prac-
tised in  New  Orleans.  He  published  "  The  Out-
law "  (Cincinnati,  1835).

JONES,  Charles  Colcock,  clergvman,  b.  in  Lib-
erty county,  Ga.,  20  Dec,  1804 ;  d.  there,  16  March,
1863.  He  was  educated  at  Andover  and  Princeton
theological  seminaries,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1830,  and  in  1831  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Pres-
byterian church  of  Savannah.  Ga.  In  1832  he  re-
turned to  Liberty  county  and  devoted  himself  to
the  education  of  the  negro  race.  He  was  professor
of  church  history  and  polity  in  Columbia  seminary,
S.  C,  in  1835-'8,  returned  to  missionary  work  in
1839,  and  was  again  professor  in  this  institution  in


1847-50.  He  then  removed  to  Philadelphia,  and
was  secretary  of  the  board  of  domestic  missions  of
the  Presbyterian  church  until  failure  of  health
necessitated  his  return  to  Georgia  in  1857.  Besides
many  tracts  and  papers,  he  published  "  Religious
Instruction  for  Negroes  in  the  Southern  States"
(Savannah,  1837) ;  "  Suggestions  on  the  Instruction
of  Negroes  in  the  South  "  (1855) ;  and  a  "  History
of  the  Church  of  God,"  edited  by  his  eldest  son,
Charles  (New  York,  1867).— His  son,  Charles  Col-
cock, lawyer,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  28  Oct.,  1831,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1852,  and  at  the  Har-
vard law-school  in  1855.  Returning  to  Savannah,
Ga.,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  the  next  year,  and
practised  his  profession,  holding  the  office  of
mayor  in  1860-'l.  He  joined  the  Confederate
army  in  1862,  and  served  as  colonel  of  artillery,
surrendering  with  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  in
April,  1865.  Mr.  Jones  removed  to  New  York  city
in  1866,  practised  law  there  ten  years,  and,  return-
ing to  Georgia  in  1876,  settled  in  Augusta.  He
has  devoted  much  time  and  research  to  the  his-
tory of  his  state  and  that  of  the  antiquities  of
southern  Indians,  and  his  archaeological  and  his-
torical collections  are  of  interest  and  value.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York  in  1880,  and  from  Oxford
university,  Ga..  in  1882.  Since  1879  he  has  been
president  of  the  Confederate  survivors'  associa-
tion of  Augusta.  He  has  published,  besides
many  papers  on  historical  and  scientific  subjects,
"Monumental  Remains  of  Georgia"  (Savannah,
1861);  "Historical  Sketch  of  the  Chatham  Ar-
tillery during  the  Confederate  Struggle  for  In-
dependence "  (Albany,  N.  Y.,  1867) ;  "  Historical
Sketch  of  Tomo-chi-ehi,  Mico  of  the  Yamacraws"
(1868) ;  '"  Reminiscences  of  the  Last  Days  of  Gen.
Henry  Lee"  (1870);  "Antiquities  of  the  Southern
Indians"  (New  York,  1873):  "Siege  of  Savannah
in  1779"  (Albanv,  1874);  "Life  of  Commodore
Josiah  Tatnall"  (Savannah,  1878);  "Dead  Towns
of  Georgia"  (1878);  "Hernando  de  Soto  and  his
March  through  Georgia  "  (1880) ;  "  Memoir  of  Jean
Pierre  Purrv"  (Augusta,  Ga.,  1880);  "Historv  of
Georgia"  (2  vols.,  Boston  and  New  York.  1883);
"Life,  Labors,  and  Neglected  Grave  of  Richard
Henry  Wilde  "  (1885) ;  "  Nine  Annual  Addresses
before  the  Confederate  Survivors'  Association  of
Augusta,  Ga."  (1879-87);  and  has  edited,  besides,
his  father's  "History  of  the  Church  of  God";
"Acts  passed  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the
Colony  of  Georgia  from  1755  till  1774"  (Wormsloe,
Ga.,  1881) :  and  "  Journal  of  the  Transactions  of  the
Trustees  of  the  Colony  of  Georgia  by  Rt.  Hon.
John,  Earl  of  Egmont"  (1886). — Another  son,
Joseph,  physician,  b.  in  Liberty  county.  Ga.,  6
Sept.,  1833.  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1853,
and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1855.  He  was  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  Medical  college  of  Savannah,  Ga.,
in  1856-'7,of  natural  philosophy  in  the  University
of  Georgia  in  1858.  of  chemistry  in  the  Medical
college  of  Georgia.  Augusta,  in  1859-*65,  and  also  a
surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army.  In  1866-'8  he
was  professor  of  medicine  in  the  University  of
Nashville,  and  since  1869  has  been  professor  of
chemistry  and  clinical  medicine  in  Tulane  uni-
versitv.  New  Orleans,  La.  He  was  president  of  the
boardof  health  of  the  state  of  Louisiana  in  1880-'4.
and  is  now  (1887)  president  of  the  Louisiana  state
medical  society.  Dr.  Jones  has  devoted  his  life  to
the  investigation  of  the  causes  and  prevention  of
disease  in  civil  and  rmlitary  hospitals,  as  well  as
in  private  practice,  and  while  president  of  the
board  of  health  was  successful  in  excluding  yellow


464


JONES


JONES


fever  from  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi.  Besides
constant  pamphlets  and  addresses  on  scientific  and
medical  subjects,  he  has  published  "Investigations,
Chemical  and  Physiological,  relative  to  Certain
American  Vertebrata"  (Smithsonian  institution
contributions,  1856);  "First  Report  of  the  Cotton
Planters'  Convention  of  Georgia  on  the  Agricul-
tural Resources  of  Georgia"  (Augusta,  1860);
"  Sanitary  Memoirs  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  "
(New  York,  1869) ;  "  Surgical  Memoirs  of  the  War
of  the  Rebellion  "  (1871) ;  "  Hospital  Construction
and  Organization  "  (Baltimore,  1875) ;  "  Explora-
tions of  the  Aboriginal  Remains  of  Tennessee"
(Smithsonian  institution  contributions,  Washing-
ton, 1876);  "Reports  of  the  Board  of  Health  of
Louisiana  "  (New  Orleans,  1884) ;  and  "  Medical  and
Surgical  Memoirs  "  (1887).

JONES,  Charles  W.,  senator,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1834.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  when
he  was  ten  years  of  age,  and  after  working  at  his
trade  as  a  mechanic,  settled  in  Pensacola,  Pla.,
in  1854,  studied  law,  and  two  years  afterward  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  continued  in  practice
during  the  civil  war,  was  a  member  of  the  Balti-
more National  Democratic  convention  in  1872,
and  in  the  same  year  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate
for  congress.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Florida
legislature  in  1874,  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a
conservative  Democrat  in  1875,  and  re-elected  in
1881,  his  term  of  service  expiring  3  March,  1887.

JONES,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  White  Clay
Creek  hundred,  Newcastle  co.,  Del.,  12  May,  1736 ;
d.  in  Chester  county,  Pa.,  5  Feb.,  1820.  His  grand-
father, David,  who  married  Esther  Morgan,  a
daughter  of  Morgan  ap  Rhydderch,  emigrated  from
Cardiganshire,  Wales,  in  1710,  and  settled  at  Welsh
Tract,  Del.  After  attending  Hopewell  academy,
N.  J.,  and  studying  theology  under  his  cousin,
Rev.  Abel  Morgan,  of  Middletown,  N.  J.,  he  en-
tered the  ministry  of  the  Baptist  church.  His
first  regular  charge  was  the  Freehold  Baptist
church,  N.  J.,  of  which  he  was  the  pastor  from
12  Dec,  1766,  until  April,  1775,  when,  becoming
somewhat  obnoxious  to  the  Tories  of  that  region,
he  removed  to  Chester  county,  Pa.,  and  took  charge
of  the  Great  Valley  Baptist  church  for  one  year,
On  27  April,  1776,  he  entered  the  Revolutionary
army  as  chaplain  of  the  3d  and  4th  Pennsylvania
battalions,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1777,  he  became  chaplain
of  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne,  with  whom  he  continued
until  the  end  of  the  war.  He  narrowly  escaped
being  killed  at  the  Paoli  massacre.  Throughout
the  whole  Revolutionary  struggle  he  exercised
great  power,  especially  in  the  region  around  Phila-
delphia, in  stimulating  the  zeal  of  the  patriots  and
in  overawing  the  disaffected.  He  had  pastoral
charge  of  the  Southampton  Baptist  church,  Bucks
county.  Pa.,  from  1786  till  1792,  when  he  returned
to  Chester  county  and  resumed  the  charge  of  the
Great  Valley  Baptist  church,  with  which  he  re-
mained until  his  death,  with  frequent  and  pro-
longed leaves  of  absence.  In  1794,  when  his  old
commander,  Gen.  Wayne,  was  sent  to  the  north-
west, he  accompanied  the  army  as  chaplain,  and
when  the  war  of  1812  began  he  volunteered,  and
served  in  1813— '15.  The  last  occasion  on  which
he  appeared  in  public  was  at  the  dedication  of
the  Paoli  monument,  20  Sept.,  1817,  when  he  de-
livered an  address.  In  the  years  1772  and  1773
he  travelled  to  the  region  of  the  Ohio,  and
published  a  journal  that  he  kept  of  these  two
trips  (Burlington,  1774;  new  ed.,  1865).  He  deliv-
ered an  address  to  the  troops  at  Ticonderoga,  20
Oct.,  1776,  which  was  published  at  the  time.  On
20  July,  1775,  at  Great  Valley  church,  on  the  day


of  the  Continental  fast,  he  preached  a  sermon,
which  was  published  shortly  after  under  the  title
"  Defensive  War  in  a  Just  Cause  Sinless."  He  also
published  "  The  Doctrine  of  the  Laying  on  of
I  lands  "  (Philadelphia,  1786) ;  "  A  True  History  of
Laying  on  of  Hands  upon  Baptized  Believers  as
such  *'  (Burlington,  1805) ;  "  A  Treatise  on  the
Work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  under  the  Gospel  Dis-
pensation "  (1804) ;  and  "  Candid  Reasons  of  Peter
Edwards  examined-"  (Philadelphia,  1811).  Brown
university  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1774. —
His  son,  Horatio  Gates,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tre-
dyffrin  township,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  11  Feb.,  1777 :  d.
in  Roxborough,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12  Dec,  1853,
received  an  academical  education,  studied  theology,
and  was  ordained  in  1802  at  Salem,  N.  J.,  becoming
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  there.  In  1808  he
became  the  first  pastor  of  the  Lower  Merion  Bap-
tist church,  which  continued  under  his  care  for
forty-five  years.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Baptist  board  of  Foreign  missions,  and  presi-
dent of  the  Philadelphia  Baptist  association  from
1829  till  1853,  and  it  was  chiefly  through  his  in-
fluence that  the  latter  body  organized  a  Manual-
labor  school,  which  afterward  became  Haddington
college.  As  long  as  the  college  existed  he  was
president  of  its  board  of  trustees,  and  spared
neither  time  nor  money  in  promoting  its  interests.
In  1812  Brown  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of
M.  A.,  and  in  1851  the  university  at  Lewisburg
(now  Bucknell),  of  which  he  was  then  chancellor,
bestowed  on  him  its  first  degree  of  D.  D.  He
published  a  "  History  of  the  Philadelphia  Bap-
tist Association"  (1832).  —  Horatio  Gates's  son,
John  Richter,  lawyer,  b.  in  Salem,  N.  J.,  2  Oct.,
1803 ;  d.  near  New  Berne,  N.  C,  23  May,  1863,  was
graduated  in  1821  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827.  In  1836
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  of  Philadelphia  county,  which
post  he  held  until  1847.  On  retiring  from  the
bench  he  settled  in  Sullivan  county,  Pa.  In  1861
he  raised  the  58th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  of
which  he  was  commissioned  colonel.  He  met  his
death  while  at  the  head  of  a  reconnoitering  force
at  New  Berne,  N.  C,  just  after  a  long  march  in
which  he  had  captured  a  considerable  force  of  the
enemy  at  Gum  Swamp.  In  this  expedition  he  was
in  command  as  acting  brigadier-general  of  several
regiments.  He  was  a  classical  scholar,  and  carried
with  him  to  the  camp  his  Septuagint  version  of
the  Old  Testament,  which  he  was  accustomed  to
read  daily.  He  was  author  of  "  The  Quaker  Sol-
dier "  (Philadelphia,  1858). — Another  son,  Horatio
Gates,  lawyer,  b.  in  Roxborough,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
9  Jan.,  1822,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1841,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847,
and  entered  on  active  practice  of  the  law,  in  which
he  has  since  continued.  He  was  in  the  state  sen-
ate in  1875-'82,  and  introduced  bills  to  secure  free-
dom from  the  penalties  of  the  Sunday  law  of
1794  for  all  persons  who  observed  the  seventh  day
as  the  Sabbath.  Mr.  Jones  has  devoted  much  time
to  historical  matters.  He  became  a  member  of  the
Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania  in  1848,  was  its
secretary  in  1849-'67,  and  was  then  chosen  one  of
its  vice-presidents,  which  office  he  still  holds.  He
has  been  president  of  the  Welsh  society  of  Phila-
delphia for  twenty-five  years,  is  a  member  of  nu-
merous state  historical  societies,  and  in  1877  was
elected  an  honorary  fellow  of  the  Royal  historical
society  of  Great  Britain.  He  has  also  been  an  ac-
tive member  of  the  Baptist  church,  and  is  president
of  the  Philadelphia  Baptist  association.  He  has
published  "  The  Levering  Family  "  (Phdadelphia,


JONES


JONES


465


1858) ;  "  Ebenezer  Kinnersley  and  his  Discoveries
in  Electricity "  (1858) ;  "  History  of  Roxborough
and  Manayunk  "  (1859) ;  "  Memoir  of  Henry  Bond,
M.  D."  (Boston,  1860) ;  "  Report  of  the  Committee
of  the  Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania,  on  the
Bradford  Bicentenary "  (1863) ;  "  Biographical
Sketch  of  Rev.  David  Jones,  A.  M."  (New  York,
1865) ;  "  History  of  Pennepek  or  Lower  Dublin
Baptist  Church,  Morrisania,  N.  Y."  (1869) ;  "  An-
drew Bradford,  Founder  of  the  Newspaper  Press
in  the  Middle  States  of  America "  (Philadelphia,
1869);  "The  Bradford  Prayer-Book  of  1710"
(1870) ;  "  Diary  of  S.  J.,  or  Journal  of  a  Country
Baptist  Minister  "  (1881) ;  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  Abel
Morgan  of  Pennepek  Church  "  (1882) ;  "  History  of
the  Great  Valley,  Pa.,  Baptist  Church"  (1883);
"  History  of  the  Brandywine,  Pa.,  Baptist  Church  "
(1884) ;  and  "  Welsh  Books  in  Brown  University  "
(Cincinnati,  1885).  In  1863  Brown  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  M.  A.,  and  in  1880  Judson  uni-
versity that  of  D.  C.  L.

JONES,  David  Ford,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Brockville,  Canada,  in  1818.  He
was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  college,  and  sub-
sequently engaged  in  business  as  a  manufacturer
of  agricultural  implements.  He  has  been  warden
of  Leeds  and  Grenville,  and  commanded  the  Ga-
nanoque  artillery  for  several  years.  He  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Canadian  parlia-
ment in  1863,  but  was  elected  in  January,  1864,
and  served  till  the  union.  He  was  elected  to  the
Dominion  parliament  in  1873,  and  again  in  1878.

JONES,  David  Rump,  soldier,  b.  in  South
Carolina  in  1825 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  8  March,
1863.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1846,  brevetted  1st  lieutenant  for  bra-
very at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  captain  for
gallantry  at  Chapultepec  during  the  Mexican  war.
He  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  in  1849,  was
assistant  instructor  in  military  tactics  at  West
Point  in  1851-'3,  assistant  adjutant-general,  with
the  rank  of  captain,  in  1853,  and  resigned  in  1861
to  enter  the  Confederate  army,  where  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general.  He  led  a  brigade  at
the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  in  1862  commanded  a
division  under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston.

JONES,  George,  author,  b.  in  York,  Pa.,  30
July,  1800 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Jan.,  1870.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1823,  taught  for  two
years  on  the  U.  S.  frigates  "Brandywine"  and
"Constitution,"  and  for  the  two  years  following
was  tutor  at  Yale.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  January,  1831,
officiated  at  Middletown,  Conn.,  and  in  1833  was
appointed  chaplain  in  the  IT.  S.  navy.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  stationed  at  the  U.  S.  naval
asylum  at  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Jones  accompanied
Com.  Perry  on  the  naval  expedition  to  Japan  in
1853-'5,  and  his  long  and  careful  observations  on
the  zodiacal  light  fill  one  volume  of  the  report  of
the  U.  S.  Japan  expedition.  The  theory  of  a
nebulous  ring  around  the  earth  is  a  deduction  from
these.  His  other  works  are  "Sketches  of  Naval
Life"  (New  Haven,  Conn.,  1836):  "  Excursions  to
Cairo,  Jerusalem,  and  Balbec  "  (New  York,  1836);
and  "Life  Scenes  from  the  Four  Gospels"  and
"Life  Scenes  from  the  Old  Testament" (1865).

JONES,  George  Wallace,  senator,  b.  in  Vin-
cennes,  Ind.,  12  April,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at
Transylvania  university,  Ky.,  in  1825,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  was  prevented  by
delicate  health  from  practising.  Removing  to  Mis-
souri, he  was  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  in
1826,  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Henrv  Dodge
in  the  Black  Hawk  war,  removed  to  Wisconsin
vol.  ni. — 30


and  settled  at  Sinsinawa  Mound,  where  he  was
judge  of  the  county  court,  and  colonel,  and  subse-
quently general,  of  militia.  He  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat  in  1834,  served  till  1837,  and
in  July,  1836,  procured  a  division  of  Michigan  terri-
tory and  the  establishment  of  the  territory  of  Wis-
consin. In  1839  he  was  appointed  by  President
Van  Buren  surveyor-general  of  the  Northwest  ter-
ritory. He  was  removed  by  President  Harrison,
but  reappointed  by  President  Polk.  He  was  U.  S.
senator  from  Iowa  from  January,  1848,  till  March,
1859,  and  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  pen-
sions and  on  enrolled  bills.  At  the  conclusion  of
his  last  term  he  was  appointed  by  President  Bu-
chanan minister  to  New  Grenada.  In  1861,  on  his
return  to  the  United  States,  he  was  charged  with
disloyalty  and  imprisoned  at  Fort  Warren.  Since
1862  he  has  resided  at  Dubuque,  Iowa.

JONES,  Hugh,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in
1669 ;  d.  in  Cecil  county,  Md.,  8  Sept.,  1760.  He
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1696,  and  was
rector  for  sixty-five  years  of  parishes  in  Maryland
and  Virginia.  In  1702  he  was  professor  of  mathe-
matics in  William  and  Mary  college,  Va.,  and
chaplain  of  the  Assembly  of  Virginia.  He  pub-
lished "  The  Present  State  of  Virginia,"  a  rare  and
curious  history  of  the  colony  (London,  1724).

JONES,  Hugh  Bolton,  artist,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  20  Oct.,  1848.  He  took  his  first  art  lessons  in
his  native  city,  but  visited  Europe  in  1877,  where
he  studied  four  years,  and  greatly  added  to  the
effectiveness  of  his  style.  He  was  elected  associate
of  the  National  academy  in  1881,  and  member  in
1883.  His  works  include  "  Tangier,"  "  Return  of
the  Cows,"  "  Brittany  "  (1878) ;  "  October  "  (1882) ;
and  "  On  Herring  Run,  Baltimore  "  (1884).

JONES,  Jacob,  naval  officer,  b.  near  Smvrna,
Del.,  in  March,  1768;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  3
Aug.,  1850.  He  studied  medicine  and  began  to
practise,  but  became  clerk  of  the  Delaware  supreme
court,  and  on  10  April,  1799,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy
as  a  midshipman.  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,
22  Feb.,  1801,  and  was  an  officer  on  the  frigate
"  Philadelphia  "  when  she  was  captured  in  1803  in
the  harbor  of  Tripoli,  remaining  a  prisoner  eighteen


months.  He  was  made  commander.  20  April,  1810,
assigned  to  the  "  Wasp,"  18  guns,  in  1811,  and  in
1812  was  despatched  with  letters  to  the  U.  S.  min-
isters to  France  and  England.  Before  he  returned,
war  had  been  declared  with  England,  and,  after
refitting  his  vessel,  he  left  the  Delaware  on  a  cruise
on  13  Oct.,  1812.  On  18  Oct.  he  fell  in  with  the
British  brig  "  Frolic,"  a  vessel  of  slightly  superior
force  to  his  own.  and  captured  her  after  a  sharp
engagement  of  forty-three  minutes,  during  the  lat-
ter part  of  which  the  ships  were  so  near  that  in
loading  some  of  the  "  Wasp's  "  guns  the  rammers
hit  against  the  bows  of  her  antagonist.  The  con-
test had  no  sooner  ended  than  the  English  ship
"  Poictiers,"  74  guns,  hove  in  sight,  and  captured
both  the  "  Wasp  "  and  her  prize,  carrying  them  to
Bermuda.  The  fight  between  the  "  Wasp  "  and  the
"  Frolic "  was  the  first  of  the  war,  in  which  the


466


JONES


JONES


vessels  were  nearly  equal,  and  it  did  much  to  de-
stroy the  idea  of  British  invincibility  on  the  ocean.
Jones  was  given  a  vote  of  thanks  and  a  gold  medal
by  congress  (see  illustration),  which  also  appropri-
ated $25,000  as  a  compensation  to  the  commander
and  crew  of  the  "  Wasp  "  for  the  recapture  of  their
prize.  Several  of  the  states  also  presented  Jones
with  swords,  and  the  Delaware  legislature  gave
him  a  piece  of  plate,  suitably  engraved.  He  was
made  post-captain,  3  March,  1813,  and  commanded
the  "  Macedonian,"  of  Decatur's  squadron.  After-
ward he  commanded  squadrons  in  the  Mediter-
ranean and  Pacific,  and  served  as  a  commissary
of  the  navy  board,  and  governor  of  the  Philadel-
phia naval  asylum.  Jones  was  described  in  a  sketch
that  was  written  during  his  life  as  of  "  about  the
middle  size,  of  an  active  mind  and  vigorous  make,
and  an  excellent  constitution."

JONES,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Georgetown,
D.  C,  18  Nov.,  1807 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  10
Oct.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  college,
D.  C,  in  1825,  and  in  medicine  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1828,  and  practised  in  his  native

Elace  till  1831,  when  he  removed  to  New  Orleans,
ia.,  was  editor  of  the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  Jour-
nal" of  that  city  in  1857-9,  and  was  connected
with  the  University  of  Louisiana,  from  1836  till
his  death,  as  professor  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of
women  and  children  in  1836-'9,  then  as  professor
of  practical  medicine  till  1866,  and  afterward  in
his  former  chair.  He  was  also  dean  of  the  faculty
in  1841-'2  and  1848-9,  and  delivered  courses  of
lectures  on  chemistry.  He  contributed  various  ar-
ticles to  medical  journals.

JONES,  James  Athearn,  author,  b.  in  Tisbury,
Mass.,vl  June,  1790;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  Au-
gust, 1853.  After  receiving  a  common-school  edu-
cation, he  made  several  voyages  to  the  West  Indies,
subsequently  taught,  and  was  an  editor  in  Phila-
delphia in  1826.  He  lived  in  England  in  1829-'31,
and  edited  papers  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1846,  and
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1851.  He  published  "  Traditions
of  the  North  American  Indians,  or  Tales  of  an  In-
dian Camp,"  with  etchings  by  W.  H.  Brooks  (3
vols.,  London,  1820).  Many  of  the  legends  were
obtained  from  the  author's  nurse,  an  Indian  woman
of  the  Gayhead  tribe  in  Massachusetts.  He  also
wrote  "  Letter  to  an  English  Gentleman  on  English
Libels  of  America"  (Philadelphia,  1826);  "Haver-
hill, or  Memoirs  of  an  Officer  in  the  Army  of
Wolfe"  (3  vols.,  1831);  and  poems.

JONES,  James  Chamberlain,  senator,  b.  in
Davidson  county,  Tenn.,  20  April,  1809 ;  d.  in  Mem-
phis, Tenn.,  29  Oct.,  1859.  He  lost  his  father  in  in-
fancy, and  spent  much  of  his  boyhood  in  working
on  the  plantation  of  his  guardian,  from  whose  li-
brary he  obtained  the  elements  of  an  English  edu-
cation, also  attending  a  country  school  at  intervals.
After  reaching  his  majority  he  married,  and  settled
on  a  farm  in  Wilson  county,  Tenn.  He  was  in  the
legislature  in  1837  and  1839,  a  candidate  for  elector
on  the  Harrison  and  Tyler  ticket  in  1840,  and  in
1841  and  1843  was  elected  governor  of  the  state  by
the  Whigs,  over  James  K.  Polk,  after  animated  per-
sonal canvasses  by  the  two  candidates.  In  1848  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Whig  convention,
where  he  earnestly  advocated  the  nomination  of
Henry  Clay,  but  he  subsequently  spoke  in  several
states  in  support  of  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor.  He  re-
moved to  Memphis  in  1850,  and  in  1851-'7  served
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  afterward  retiring  to  private
life.  He  was  a  supporter  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska
bill  in  1854,  and  was  afterward  identified  with  the
Democratic  party.  He  was  often  called  "  Lean
Jimmy  Jones  "  or  "  Bean-Pole."


JONES,  James  Kimbrongh,  senator,  b.  in
Marshall  county,  Miss.,  29  Sept.,  1839.  His  parents
were  residents  of  Tennessee,  but  in  1848  removed
to  a  plantation  in  Dallas  county,  Ark.  James
served  in  the  Confederate  army  during  the  civil
war,  and  then  engaged  in  planting  till  1873,  when
he  began  to  practise  law  in  Dalton  county.  Ark.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1873-'7,
and  its  president  in  the  last-named  year.  In
1881-'5  he  was  a  member  of  congress,  having  been
elected  as  a  Democrat,  and  in  the  latter  year  was
chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate.

JONES,  Joel,  jurist,  b.  in  Coventry,  Conn.,  25
Oct.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3  Feb.,  1860.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1817,  subsequently
studied  law  at  Litchfield  and  New  Haven,  and  set-
tled at  Easton,  Pa.,  where  he  practised  for  many
years.  In  1830  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner
to  revise  the  civil  code  of  Pennsylvania.  He  be-
came associate  judge  in  1835,  and  afterward  pre-
siding judge  of  the  Philadelphia  district  court,  was
the  first  president  of  Girard  college  in  1847-9, and
in  1849  mayor  of  Philadelphia.  He  took  an  active
interest  in  theological  speculations  and  inquiries,
and  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  a  literal  inter-
pretation of  those  scriptures  which  predict  the
second  coming  of  Christ.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Re-
ports of  a  Commission  to  Revise  the  Civil  Code
of  Pennsylvania " :  "A  Manual  of  Pennsylvania
Land  Law  " ;  "  Notes  on  Scripture,  or  Jesus  and
the  Coming  Glory  "  (Philadelphia,  1860 ;  new  ed.,
1865) ;  "  Knowledge  of  One  Another  in  the  Fu-
ture State " ;  and  "  Outlines  of  a  History  of  the
Court  of  Rome,  and  of  the  Temporal  Power  of  the
Popes,"  translated  from  the  French,  wrth  original
notes,  and  he  also  edited  several  English  works  on
prophecy.  —  His  brother,  Joseph  Huntington,
clergyman,  b.  in  Coventry,  Conn.,  24  Aug.,  1797;
d.  22  Dec,  1868,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,
and  for  a  time  was  employed  as  a  tutor  in  Bow-
doin.  He  then  studied  at  Princeton  theological
seminary,  and  was  ordained  as  an  evangelist,  29
April,  1824.  He  preached  for  a  time  at  Woodbury
and  Backwoodtown,  N.  J.,  and  in  1825  was  in-
stalled as  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  remaining  there  till  1838,  when
he  became  pastor  of  the  Sixth  church,  Philadel-
phia. From  1861  till  his  death  he  was  secretary  of
the  relief  fund  for  disabled  ministers.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Revival  of  Religion "  (Philadelphia,
1839) ;  "  Influence  of  Physical  Causes  on  Religious
Experience"  (1846);  "Life  of  Ashbel  Green,  D.D."
(New  York,  1849) ;  "  Sermon  on  the  Death  of  the
Rev.  Cornelius  C.  Cuyler,  D.  D."  (1850) ;  and  other
sermons,  reviews,  and  essays,  published  separately.

JONES,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  in
1729 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  June,  1791.  He
was  a  son  of  Dr.  Evan  Jones,  a  Welsh  physician,
who  came  to  this  country  in  1728.  He  was  edu-
cated professionally  at  the  medical  schools  and
hospitals  of  London,  Paris,  Leyden,  and  Edin-
burgh, where  he  became  acquainted  with  the  most
eminent  contemporary  professors.  On  his  return,
after  a  long  sojourn  in  Europe,  he  settled  in  New
York,  but  in  a  few  years  was  obliged  to  revisit
London  for  a  brief  period  for  the  benefit  of  his
health.  Dr.  Jones  was  professor  of  surgery  in
King's  college  from  1767  till  1776,  and  one  of  the
two  original  founders  of  the  New  York  hospital —
Dr.  Samuel  Bard  being  the  other — in  1771.  He
was  one  of  the  ablest  surgeons  of  his  time,  and
especially  skilful  as  an  operator  in  cases  of  lithot-
omy. He  left  New  York,  on  the  British  occupa-
tion of  the  city,  for  Philadelphia,  after  the  evacu-
ation of  that  city  by  the  enemy,  and  there  spent


JONES


JONES


467


the  remainder  of  his  life.  In  his  new  home  he  was
highly  esteemed,  holding  several  offices  of  trust
and  importance  connected  with  his  profession.
He  was  honored  by  the  confidence  and  friendship
of  Washington  and  Franklin.  On  a  critical  occa-
sion he  was  sent  for  to  attend  the  president  in
New  York  in  1790,  and  in  the  same  year  attended
Franklin  in  his  last  illness,  of  which  he  has  left  a
detailed  and  interesting  account.  Dr.  Franklin
remembered  him  in  his  will  as  among  his  personal
friends.  Dr.  Jones  was  the  author  of  "  Plain  Re-
marks upon  Wounds  and  Fractures,  designed  for
the  Use  of  the  Young  Military  Surgeons  of  Amer-
ica" (New  York,  1775 ;  new  ed.,  with  a  memoir  by
Dr.  James  Mease,  Philadelphia,  1795).

JONES,  John,  vocalist,  b.  in  London,  England,
in  1796;  d.  in  New  York  city,  2  Nov.,  1861.  He
made  his  first  appearance  at  the  Adelphi  theatre,
London,  in  1816,  in  an  operetta,  "  The  Conjurer."
In  1828  Jones  came  to  this  country,  where  he  first
sang  in  public  at  Niblo's  garden,  New  York  city,
in  a  musical  play  entitled  "  Amateurs  and  Actors."
Soon  afterward  he  appeared  at  the  Park  theatre  as
Prince  Orlando  in  "The  Cabinet."  In  1831  he
was  engaged  for  a  short  time  at  the  Chestnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  but  returned  to  New
York  city  and  accepted  a  permanent  engagement
at  the  Park  theatre,  which  lasted  for  many  years,
interrupted  only  by  a  brief  visit,  to  Europe  in  1835.
Having  partially  lost  his  voice,  Jones  retired  from
the  stage  in  1844,  and  became  a  teacher  of  vocal
music  in  the  eastern  states.  As  such  he  eventual-
ly settled  in  New  York  city,  where,  some  years  be-
fore his  death,  he  became  the  recipient  of  an  annu-
ity from  a  dramatic  benevolent  association.  Some
of  his  best  performances  were  the  leading  tenor
characters  in  "  La  Dame  Blanche,"  "  Norma,"  and
"  Cinderella."  Among  the  songs  he  published  was
"The  Mellow  Horn."  which  was  verv  popular.

JONES,  John  B.,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
in  1810.  He  was  for  many  years  engaged  in  jour-
nalism, and  in  1857  established  a  weekly  paper  in
Philadelphia  entitled  the  "  Southern  Monitor,"  de-
voted to  the  advocacy  of  southern  interests.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Books  of  Visions  "  (Philadelphia,
1847);  "Rural  Sports,  a  Poem"  (1848);  "The
Western  Merchant "  (1848) ;  "  Wild  Western
Scenes "  (1849) ;  "The  Rival  Belles "  (1852) ;  "Ad-
ventures of  Col.  Vanderbomb  "  (1852) ;  "  The  Mon-
archist "  (1853) ;  "  Life  and  Adventures  of  a  Coun-
try Merchant "  (1854) ;  "  Freaks  of  Fortune  "  (1854) ;
and  a  "  Rebel  War  Clerk's  Diary  at  the  Confed-
erate States  Capital "  (1866).

JONES,  John  Glancy,  lawyer,  b.  in  the  valley
of  Conestoga  river,  Pa.,  7  Oct.",  1811 ;  d.  in  Read-
ing. Pa.,  24  March,  1877.  He  studied  theology,
but  left  it  for  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  successfully  at  Reading,  Pa.  He  was  for
a  time  deputy  attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania,
and  except  for  part  of  the  33d  congress  was  a  rep-
resentative from  Pennsylvania  from  1850  till  1858,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  He  served  on
the  committee  on  claims  in  the  house  and  was  the
author  of  the  bill  creating  the  court  of  claims.  In
1856  he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and,  having  pre-
viously declined  the  Berlin  mission,  was  appointed
by  President  Buchanan  minister  to  Austria,  where
he  served  from  1  Nov.,  1858.  till  14  Nov.,  1861.

JONES,  John  Marshall,  soldier,  b.  in  Char-
lottesville, Va.,  26  Julv,  1820;  d.  in  Spottsvlvania,
Va.,  10  May,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1841,  and  after  serving  on
frontier  duty  was  assistant  instructor  of  infantry
tactics  at  the  academy  from  1845  till  1852.  In
1854-'5  he  was  a  member  of  the  board  to  revise


rifle  and  light  artillery  tactics,  and  on  3  March,
1855,  he  was  promoted  captain.  He  was  then  in
garrison  at  various  forts,  and  in  the  Utah  expedi-
tion of  1858-'60,  and  on  27  May,  1861,  resigned  and
entered  the  Confederate  army.  He  was  appointed
colonel  of  a  Virginia  regiment,  and  in  1863  pro-
moted brigadier-general  and  given  a  command  in
Gen.  Longstreet's  corps.  He  was  severely  wounded
at  Gettysburg,  and  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Knox-
ville,  Tenn.,  and  in  the  operations  from  the  Wil-
derness to  Spottsvlvania,  where  he  was  killed.

JONES,  John"  Mather,  journalist,  b.  in  Bangor,
North  Wales,  9  June,  1826;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  21
Dec,  1874.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  place,
came  to  this  country  in  1849,  and,  after  engaging
in  mercantile  pursuits,  made  a  voyage  around  the
world  for  his  health,  acting  as  purser  of  a  ship  of
which  his  brother-in-law  was  captain.  After  the
close  of  the  civil  war  he  founded  the  Welsh  town
of  New  Cambria,  Mo.,  and  in  1869,  with  James  A.
Whittaker,  he  bought  a  large  tract  of  land  in
Osage  county,  Kan.,  where  he  founded  the  town  of
Avonia.  From  1865  till  his  death  he  was  proprie-
tor and  publisher  of  "  Y  Drych  "  ("The  Mirror"),
the  oldest  Welsh  newspaper  in  the  United  States,
and  in  this  place  he  exercised  much  influence  over
his  countrymen.  Mr.  Jones  was  an  earnest  Aboli-
tionist and  a  Republican  in  politics,  but  never
sought  nor  held  any  office.  He  published  a  "His-
tory of  the  Rebellion  **  in  Welsh  (Utica,  N.  Y.,  1866).

JONES,  John  Paul,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Kirk-
bean,  Scotland,  6  July,  1747;  d.  in  Paris,  18  July,
1792.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Paul,  gardener  at
Arbigland.  The  name  Jones  was  assumed  about
1773.  At  the  age  of  twelve  he  went  to  sea,  sailing
from  Whiteha-
ven and  visit-
ing a  brother,
in  Fredericks-
burg, Va.,  on
his  first  voyage.
While  under
twenty  he  serv-
ed as  mate  in
two  vessels  that
were  engaged  in
the  slave-trade,
but  leaving  this
traffic  in  dis-
gust, he  sailed
for  England  as
a  passenger.
The  death  of
two  of  the  offi-
cers of  the  brig
left  him  the  on-
ly navigator  on
board,  and  he
took  charge  and  brought  her  into  port.  Her
Scotch  owners  then  employed  him  as  master,  and
he  made  two  voyages  to  the  West  Indies.  In  1770
a  charge  of  cruelty  to  one  of  his  crew  was  made
against  him  at  Tobago,  and.  although  it  was  dis-
missed as  frivolous,  the  man's  death  a  few  weeks
later  caused  it  to  be  revived.  Jones  was  not  ar-
rested, but  the  affair  caused  him  much  annoyance,
and  made  him  anxious  to  prove  his  innocence  at
home,  for  which  purpose  he  sent  affidavits  to  his
family.  The  brother  in  Virginia  died  in  1773,  and
Jones  took  charge  of  his  estate,  proposing  to  set-
tle at  Fredericksburg.  He. now  added  the  name
of  Jones  to  his  signature  for  reasons  which  are  un-
known. He  continued  to  correspond  with  his
family,  and  to  give  his  original  name  too  much
prominence  for  concealment. When  congress  de-


468


JONES


cided  in  1775  to  equip  a  navy  "  for  the  defence  of
American  liberty,  Jones  was  named  as  the  senior
1st  lieutenant.  He  sailed  from  Delaware  river  in
the  "  Alfred "  in  February,  1776,  to  attack  New
Providence.  The  expedition ,  returned  in  April,
and  Jones  was  placed  in  command  of  the  sloop
"  Providence."  He  cruised  for  six  weeks,  captur-
ing sixteen  prizes,  and  doing  some  damage  on  the
coast  of  Nova  Scotia.  Much  address  was  required
to  escape  from  vessels  of  superior  force,  as  his
sloop  was  armed  only  with  four  -  pounders.  He
was  then  given  the  "  Alfred,"  and  made  another
successful  cruise  to  the  northward.  Jones  felt
that  he  was  not  treated  justly  when  congress  un-
dertook to  establish  the  rank  of  naval  officers,  and
his  strenuous  remonstrance  to  the  marine  board
was  somewhat  arrogant  in  tone.  In  March,  1777,
he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  "  Ranger,"
and  sailed  in  her  for  France  in  November.  The
American  commissioners  at  the  French  court  gave
him  authority  to  "distress  the  enemies  of  the
United  States  by  sea  or  land,"  and,  accordingly,  he
sailed  from  Brest,  10  April,  1779,  took  prizes  in
St.  George's  channel,  and  landed  at  Whitehaven,
where  he  tried  to  burn  the  shipping  with  a  view
to  cutting  off  the  supply  of  coal  for  Ireland.
He  also  attempted  to  capture  the  Earl  of  Selkirk.
Off  Carrickfergus  he  fell  in  with  the  "  Drake,"  a
British  man-of-war  of  20  guns,  which  he  captured
after  a  close  action  lasting  more  than  an  hour.  The
"  Drake  "  lost  42  men,  including  her  captain  and
lieutenant,  and  was  badly  cut  up,  while  the  "  Ran-
ger's" loss  was  small.  Jones  returned  to  Brest
with  his  prizes,  after  a  cruise  of  28  days,  which
his  boldness,  nautical  skill,  and  local  knowledge
had  rendered  very  effective.  Jones  spent  more
than  a  year  in  trying  to  raise  a  force  for  further
operations,  and  met  with  many  disappointments,
but  got  to  sea  again  on  14  Aug.,  1779,  with  a
squadron  of  four  vessels.  His  own  ship  was  an
old  Indiaman  which  he  named  the  "  Bon  Homme
Richard."  To  her  battery  of  twelve-pounders  he
added  six  eighteens,  in  ports  cut  in  the  gun-room.
His  officers  were  Americans  without  experience  in
naval  duties,  and  his  crew  was  a  motley  assem-
blage. The  other  vessels  were  commanded  by
Frenchmen,  though  all  were  under  the  American
flag.  A  daring  scheme  to  seize  the  shipping  and
exact  a  ransom  at  Leith  was  frustrated  by  a  gale,
which  drove  him  out  of  the  Forth.  At  last,  on
23  Sept.,  he  sighted  a  fleet  of  40  British  merchant-
men returning  from  the  Baltic,  under  convoy  of
the  "  Serapis,"  44  guns,  and  the  "  Countess  of  Scar-
borough," 28  guns.  He  made  signal  for  a  general
chase,  but  most  of  the  merchantmen  ran  in  shore
and  anchored  under  the  guns  of  Scarborough  cas-
tle. At  seven  in  the  evening  the  "Bon  Homme
Richard "  closed  with  the  "  Serapis,"  and  began
one  of  the  most  desperate  conflicts  on  record.
After  a  few  broadsides  they  fouled  and  lay  side  by
side  until  the  fight  was  over.  The  "  Serapis  "  let
go  an  anchor  to  swing  clear,  but  Jones  lashed  the
two  ships  together  to  deprive  the  enemy  of  the
advantage  of  his  superior  battery  and  sail  power,
and  to  prevent  his  retreat.  Two  of  the  "  Rich-
ard's "  eighteens  had  burst  at  the  first  fire,  blow-
ing up  the  deck  and  many  of  their  crews.  The
fire  of  the  "  Serapis  "  silenced  her  opponent's  main-
deck  battery,  and  crashed  through  her  sides.
Jones  kept  on  fighting  with  a  few  light  guns  on
the  spar-deck,  and  musketry  in  the  tops.  A.  hand-
grenade  that  was  dropped  from  the  main-yard  of
the  "  Richard  "  down  a  hatchway  in  the  "  Serapis  "
caused  a  terrible  explosion  on  the  lower  deck.
Jones  drove  back  a  boarding  party,  and  the  "  Sera-


JONES


pis"  struck  her  flag  at  half-past  ten  at  night.
Each  ship  had  nearly  half  her  men  killed  or
wounded.  Capt.  Pearson,  of  the  "  Serapis."  re-
ported that  on  going  on  board  the  "Bon  Homme
Richard  "  he  "  found  her  in  the  greatest  distress,
her  counters  and  quarter  driven  in,  all  her  lower-
deck  guns  dismounted,  on  fire  in  two  places,  and
six  or  seven  feet  of  water  in  the  hold.  She  had
to  be  abandoned,  and  sank  the  next  morning.  The
"Alliance,"  commanded  by  Landais,  fired  indis-
criminate broadsides  of  grape  at  both  the  contend-
ing ships,  killing  several  of  the  "  Richard's"  crew.
The  "  Countess  of  Scarborough  "  was  taken  by  the
"  Pallas,"  the  only  other  ship  engaged.  Franklin
commended  "  the  sturdy,  cool,  and  determined
bravery  "  which  Jones  displayed  in  this  action,  and
the  victor  was  received  with  enthusiasm  in  France.
The  king  gave  Jones  a  gold  sword  and  the  order
of  merit.  He  also  received  the  thanks  of  congress
and  was  designated  by  a  unanimous  vote  to  com-
mand the  ship  of  the  line  that  was  then  building.
It  was  proposed  to  create  the  grade  of  rear-admi-
ral for  him,  and  he  was  considered  "  the  principal
hope  of  our  future  efforts  on  the  ocean,"  as  Jefferson
styled  him  in  1788.  But  he  had  no  further  op-
portunity for  active  service  under  the  American
flag.  After  visiting  Denmark  on  public  business,
he  entered  the  Russian  service  in  1788  with  the
rank  of  rear-admiral,  reserving  the  right  to  return
to  the  orders  of  congress  when  he  should  be  called
upon  to  do  so.  During  a  campaign  against  the
Turks  in  the  "  Limau  "  he  displayed  his  customary
skill  and  energy.  Disappointed  in  his  hope  of  at-
taining an  independent  command,  and  baffled  by
intrigue,  he  returned  to  St.  Petersburg,  was  grant-
ed an  indefinite  leave  of  absence,  and  returned  to
Paris  in  broken  health.  In  1792  an  appointment
as  commissioner  and  consul  of  the  United  States
at  Algiers  was  sent  out,  but  he  died  before  receiv-
ing it.  The  National  convention  sent  a  deputa-
tion to  attend  his  funeral.  Numerous  apocrvphal
narratives  of  his  life  appeared  in  England  and
France,  and  these  legends,  and  a  variety  of  preju-
dices, have  obscured  the  facts  of  his  career.  Eng-
lish writers  denounced  him  as  a  pirate  for  a  gen-
eration after  his  death,  and  still  call  him  an
adventurer.  He  would  have  resented  either  of
these  epithets.  In  1779  John  Adams  thought  him
"  ambitious  and  intriguing,"  and  in  1813  referred
to  him  as  a  "  foreigner  of  the  south,  arrogating  to
himself  merit  that  belongs  to  New  England  sail-
ors." On  the  other  hand,  he  seems  to  have  retained
the  respect  of  Franklin,  Jefferson,  and  Robert  Mor-
ris, after  a  long  acquaintance.  His  devotion  to
the  flag  of  the  United  States  is  as  unquestionable
as  his  daring.  He  declared  that  America  had  been
"  the  country  of  his  fond  election  since  the  age  of
thirteen."  His  zeal  for  glory  may  have  been  al-
layed by  a  strain  of  restless  vanity  like  that  of
other  great  seamen,  but  his  conceptions  of  naval
strategy  and  his  appreciation  of  the  value  of  in-
tellectual culture  for  naval  officers  are  far  in  ad-
vance of  his  age  and  profession.  He  left  letters
which  are  able  and  interesting,  in  spite  of  their
florid  style  and  passionate  assertion  of  his  claims.
He  was  always  kind  to  his  relatives  in  Scotland.
Jones  was  of  medium  height,  active,  but  quiet  in
manner,  with  a  soft  voice  and  a  keen  eye.  James
Fenimore  Cooper  made  use  of  some  of  the  inci-
dents of  Jones's  career  in  his  novel  "  The  Pilot."
His  life  has  been  written  by  John  H.  Sherbourne
(New  York  and  London,  1825 ;  2d  ed.,  New  York,
1851) ;  Janette  Taylor  "  from  letters,  etc.,  in  the

Stssession"  of  the  author  (1830); Alexander  S.
ackenzie  (2  vols.,  1841);  and  William  Gilmbre


JONES


JONES


469


Sirams  (1845) ;  James  Hamilton  (1848).  See  also
"  Paul  Jones,  der  kiihne  Seemann  "  (Leipsic,  1828).
JONES,  John  Percival,  senator,  b.  in  Hay,
Brecon  co.,  Wales,  in  1830.  Before  he  was  a  year
old  his  parents  came  with  him  to  the  United  States
and  settled  in  northern  Ohio.  He  attended  the
public  schools  in  Cleveland  for  a  few  years,  and  in
1849  went  to  California  and  engaged  in  mining
and  farming  in  Tuolumne  county.  Subsequently
he  was  sheriff  of  the  county,  and  was  several  times
its  representative  in  the  legislature.  In  1867  he
was  an unsuccessful candidate for  lieutenant-

fovernor  of  California,  and  the  same  year  went  to
levada,  where  he  engaged  in  mining  and  became
wealthy.  He  succeeded  James  Nye  as  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  Nevada,  took  his  seat,  4  March,  1873,  and
has  been  twice  re-elected.  His  term  of  service  will
expire  on  3  March,  1891.  He  made  a  notable
speech  on  the  inflation  bill  in  1874.

JONES,  John  Pringle,  jurist,  b.  near  Newton,
Berks  co.,  Pa.,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  16
March,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1831,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Philadelphia  in  1834,  afterward  settling  in  prac-
tice in  Reading,  Pa.  He  was  appointed  in  1839
deputy  attorney-general  for  Berks  county,  and  on
15  March,  1847,  presiding  judge  of  the  3d  judicial
district.  Under  the  elective  judiciary  system  of
1851  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Berks  county
courts  for  the  term  of  ten  years,  at  the  expiration
of  which  time  he  devoted  himself  to  literature.
In  1867,  on  the  death  of  Judge  Maynard,  of  the
3d  judicial  district.  Judge  Jones  was  appointed
his  successor  for  the  unexpired  term.  In  1872  he
travelled  in  Europe,  and  was  on  his  way  home
when  he  died.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Eulogy  on
A.  Laussat "  (Philadelphia,  1834) ;  and  volumes  xi.
and  xii.  of  "  Pennsylvania  State  Reports  "  (1850-'2).
JONES,  John  Sills,  soldier,  b.  in  Champaign
county,  Ohio,  12  Feb.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Ohio  Wesleyan  university  in  1855,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1857. He  was  elected

Erosecuting  attorney  for  Delaware  county  in  1860,
ut  resigned  in  1861,  and  enlisted  as  a  private  in
the  National  army.  He  served  with  distinction
throughout  the  war,  rising  to  the  colonelcy  of  the
174th  Ohio  regiment,  and  on  27  June,  1865,  he  was
brevetted  brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers.  In
1866  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Delaware,  Ohio,  and
was  prosecuting  attorney  of  Delaware  county,
1866-71,  when  he  declined  renomination.  He  was
a  member  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  Ohio
soldiers'  and  sailors'  qrphans'  home  from  1870  till
1874,  and  was  a  trustee  of  Wesleyan  female  college
at  Delaware  from  1865  till  1875.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1872,  and  was  afterward  elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  15  Oct.,
1877,  till  4  March,  1879.  He  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  of  Ohio  in  1879,  re-elected  in
1881,  and  was  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee
of  the  house.  He  became  a  trustee  of  the  Ohio
soldiers'  and  sailors'  orphan  home  in  1887.

JONES,  John  Taylor,  missionary,  b.  in  New
Ipswich,  N.  H„  16  July,  1802;  d.  in  Bangkok,
Siam,  13  Sept.,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst in  1825.  studied  theology  at  Andover  and
Newton  seminaries,  and  was  ordained  a  Baptist
missionary  to  Burmah  on  28  July,  1830.  Having
first  acquired  the  Taling  and  Siamese  languages,
he  left  Burmah  for  Siam,  and  reached  Bangkok  in
April,  1833.  He  visited  the  United  States  twice
subsequently,  and  was  eminently  successful  as  a
missionary.  Columbian  college  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1850.  Dr.  Jones  published  tracts
in  Siamese  (1834) ;  "  Brief  Grammatical  Notices  of


the  Siamese  Language"  (1842);  and  a  Siamese
translation  of  the  New  Testament  (1843).

JONES,  John  Winston,  member  of  congress,
b.  in  Chesterfield,  Va.,  22  Nov.,  1791 ;  d.  29  Jan.,
1848.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in
1803,  and  was  elected  a  representative  from  Vir-
ginia in  congress,  serving  bv  successive  elections
from  7  Dec.,  1835,  till  3  March,  1845,  when  he  de-
clined another  re-election.  He  was  speaker  of  the
house  during  his  last  term.

JONES,  John  W.,  physician,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  Md.,  14  April,  1806;  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
in  1872.  When  a  boy  he  removed  with  his  parents
to  Kentucky.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at
Jefferson  college,  Philadelphia,  subsequently  prac-
tised in  Griffin,  Ga.,  and,  after  becoming  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature,  was  elected  a  representative
in  congress,  and  served  from  6  Dec,  1847,  till  3
March,  1849.  He  afterward  removed  to  Alabama
and  engaged  in  planting,  but  returned  to  Georgia
and  was  a  professor  in  the  State  medical  college.

JONES,  Joseph,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1727;  d.  there,  28  Oct.,
1805.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses
from  King  George  county,  served  on  the  committee
of  safety  in  1775  and  in  the  convention  of  1776,
and  represented  Virginia  in  the  Continental  con-
gress in  1778-'9  and  1780-'3.  He  was  appointed
judge  of  the  general  court  on  23  Jan.,  1778,  but  re-
signed in  October,  1779.  He  was  reappointed  to  the
same  court,  19  Nov.,  1789,  was  a  member  of  the
convention  of  1788,  and  a  major-general  of  Virginia
militia.  He  was  a  friend  of  Washington,  and  had
a  correspondence  with  him  relative  to  the  limita-
tion of  the  power  of  congress  by  the  several  states
in  1780.  In  June,  1783,  a  proposition  had  been
made  in  the  Virginia  legislature  to  revoke  the  re-
lease to  the  United  States  of  the  territory  north-
west of  the  Ohio  river,  but  through  the  opposition
of  Mr.  Jones  it  was  rejected,  and  the  legislature
was  induced  to  conform  to  the  wishes  of  congress.
— His  sister,  Elizabeth,  married  Spence  Monroe,
and  became  the  mother  of  James  Monroe,  presi-
dent of  the  United  States.

JONES,  Joseph  Seawell,  author,  b.  probably
in  North  Carolina  about  1811 ;  d.  in  1855.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1833,
and  was  the  author  of  "  A  Defence  of  the  Revolu-
tionary History  of  North  Carolina"  (1834),  and
"  Memorials  of  North  Carolina  "  (1838).

JONES,  Joseph  Stevens,  plav-writer,  b.  in
1811 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  30  Dec,  1877.  Early  in
life  he  became  an  actor,  and  was  at  different  times
proprietor  and  manager  of  the  Old  National,  Tre-
mont,  and  other  theatres  in  Boston.  In  1843  he
was  graduated  at  the  Harvard  medical-school,  and
held  the  place  of  city  physician  for  several  years.
He  wrote  about  200  plays;  the  most  popular
among  them  were  "Solon  Shingle,"  "Eugene
Aram,"  "  The  Liberty  Tree,"  "  The  Fire  Warrior,"
"  The  Siege  of  Boston,"  "  Moll  Pitcher,"  "  Stephen
Burroughs,"  "The  Carpenter  of  Rouen,"  with  its
sequel  in  "  The  Surgeon  of  Paris,  or  the  Mask  of
the  Huguenots,"  "Job  and  Jacob  Gray,"  "The
Last  Dollar,"  "  The  People's  Lawyer,"  "  The  Sons
of  the  Cape,"  "Zofara,'  "Captain  Lascar,"  and
"Paul  Revere."  "The  Silver  Spoon,"  in  which
William  Warren,  of  the  Boston  museum,  made  his
great  success  as  Jefferson  Scattering  Batkins,  was
revived  at  that  theatre  through  many  seasons.
He  also  dramatized  "  The  Three  Experiments  of
Living,"  by  Mrs.  Hannah  F.  Lee.

JONES,  Leonard  Angnstus,  author,  b.  in
Templeton,  Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  13  Jan..  1832.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1855,  and  at  the


470


JONES


JONES


Harvard  law-school  in  1858,  and  has  since  prac-
tised in  Boston.  He  is  the  editor  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Law  Review,"  has  written  extensively  for  lit-
erary periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  A  Trea-
tise on  the  Law  of  Mortgages  of  Real  Property  "
(2  vols.,  Boston,  1878);  "A  Treatise  on  the  Law
of  Railroads  and  Other  Corporate  Securities "
(1879) ;  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Mortgages  of
Personal  Property  "  (1881) ;  "  Pledges,  including
Collateral  Securities  "  (1883) ;  "  Forms  in  Convey-
ancing" (1886);  and  "An  Index  to  Legal  Periodi-
cal Literature  "  (1887).

JONES,  Llewellyn,  Anglican  bishop,  b.  in  Liv-
erpool, England,  11  Oct.,  1840.  He  was  educated
at  Harrow  and  at  Trinity  college,  Cambridge,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1862.  He  was  curate
of  Bromsgrove,  Worcestershire,  from  1864  till  1874,
when  he  was  appointed  rector  of  Little  Hereford,
near  Tenbury.  He  was  nominated  by  the  crown  to
the  see  of  Newfoundland,  and  was  consecrated
bishop  in  St.  Paul's  cathedral,  1  May,  1878.  In
1879  he  accepted  the  episcopal  superintendence  of
the  Church  of  England  in  Bermuda,  and  has  since
visited  the  island  every  alternate  winter.

JONES,  Noble  Wimberly,  patriot,  b.  near
London,  England,  in  1724;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  9
Jan.,  1805.  He  was  the  son  of  Dr.  Noble  Jones,  an
early  settler  of  Georgia,  who  was  treasurer  of  the
province  and  a  councillor  of  state.  The  son  was
associated  with  his  father  in  the  practice  of  medi-
cine in  Savannah  from  1748  till  1756.  At  an  early
age  he  held  a  military  commission,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly  in  1761  and  subsequently,  and
served  frequently  as  speaker.  He  was  an  active
patriot  in  1774,  corresponding  with  Franklin,  who
was  then  in  England.  He  was  speaker  of  the
first  Georgia  legislature,  and  a  delegate  to  the  Con-
tinental congress  from  1775  till  1776,  and  from
1781  till  1783.  He  lost  a  son  at  the  capture  of  Sa-
vannah in  1778,  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  fall  of
Charleston  in  1780,  and  carried  to  St.  Augustine.
Dr.  Jones  was  exchanged  in  July,  1781,  and  prac-
tised medicine  in  Philadelphia  until  December,
1782,  when  he  returned  to  Georgia,  and  again  served
in  the  assembly.  He  practised  in  Charleston  from
1783  till  1788,*  after  which  he  lived  in  Savannah.
He  was  president  of  the  convention  that  revised
the  state  constitution  in  1795.

JONES,  Rebecca,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  8  July,  1739 ;  d.  there,  15  April,  1818.
From  an  early  age  she  frequented  Quaker  meetings,
notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  her  mother,  and,
wishing  to  join  the  society,  she  made  application
to  Catharine  Payton,  of  Worcestershire,  England,
who  had  come  to  visit  the  Friends  in  this  country
in  1754.  She  was  admitted  into  the  ministry  on
12  May,  1760,  at  the  monthly  meeting  in  Phila-
delphia. In  1784  she  went  to  England  on  a  relig-
ious visit,  returning  in  1788.  In  1799  she  visited
the  Society  of  Friends  in  New  England,  and  before
returning  to  Philadelphia  went  to  Canada  and
preached  in  Kingston  to  a  large  assemblage,
through  the  efforts  of  the  chief  justice.

JONES,  Roger,  soldier,  b.  in  Westmoreland
county,  Va.,  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  15
July.  1852.  He  was  appointed  2d  lieutenant  of
marines  on  29  Jan.,  1809,  and  on  12  July,  1812,  was
transferred  to  the  artillery,  with  the  rank  of  cap-
tain. He  received  the  brevet  of  major  for  services
in  the  battles  of  Chippewa  and  Lundy's  Lane,  and
lieutenant-colonel  for  gallantry  in  the  sortie  from
Fort  Erie.  On  10  Aug.,  1818,  he  was  appointed
adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  on
17  Sept.,  1824,  was  brevetted  colonel.  On  7  March,
1825,  he  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of the


army,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  in  June,  1832,  and  ma-
jor-general in  May,  1848. — His  brother,  Thomas
ap  Catesby,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1789 ;
d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  30  May,  1858,  entered  the
navy  on  22  Nov.,  1805,  and  became  lieutenant.  24
May,  1812.  commander,  28  March,  1820,  and  cap-
tain, 11  March,  1829.  From  1808  till  1812  he  was
engaged  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  where  he  was  suc-
cessful in  suppressing  piracy,  smuggling,  and  the
slave-trade.  When  the  British  naval  expedition
against  New  Orleans  entered  Lake  Borgne  in  1814,
he  endeavored  to  intercept  forty  British  boats  with
his  small  flotilla.  Although  wounded  and  com-
pelled to  surrender,  his  conduct  was  much  praised.
He  commanded  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1842,  and
took  possession  of  Monterey  on  receiving  the  erro-
neous information  that  war  existed  between  the
United  States  and  Mexico,  for  which  he  was  tem-
porarily suspended  from  the  service.

JONES,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1820;
d.  in  Bedford  Springs,  Va.,  31  July,  1887.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  July,
1841,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.  After
serving  on  garrison  duty,  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  and  instructor  of  tactics,
holding  these  offices  from  1846  till  1851.  He  was
promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  1847,  and  captain  in
1853,  when  he  served  on  frontier  duty  in  Texas.
He  was  assistant  to  the  judge-advocate  of  the  army
in  Washington,  D.  C,  from  1858  till  1861,  when  he
resigned  his  commission  to  enter  the  Confederate
army  with  the  rank  of  colonel.  Soon  afterward  he
became  brigadier-general,  and  in  1863  he  was  ap-
pointed to  command  a  division  with  the  rank  of
major-general.  He  commanded  the  Confederate
forces  in  West  Virginia  till  1864,  when  he  brought
his  troops  to  re-enforce  Gen.  Lee's  army  on  Rapi-
dan  river.  After  the  war  he  engaged  in  farming
in  Mattoax,  Va.,  but  removed  to  Washington  in
1880,  and  obtained  a  clerkship  in  the  War  depart-
ment, which  he  retained  until  his  death.

JONES,  Samuel  Porter,  clergyman,  b.  in
Chambers  county,  Ala.,  16  Oct..  1847.  He  went  with
his  father  to  live  in  Cartersville,  Ga.,  in  1859,  and
after  the  civil  war  studied  under  various  tutors,
but  was  unable  to  take  a  collegiate  course  on  ac-
count of  feeble  health.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1869,  and  married  one  month  afterward,
but  his  private  and  professional  life  was  a  failure
on  account  of  his  passion  for  drink.  After  his
father's  death  in  1872  he  made  a  profession  of  re-
ligion, and  in  one  week  from  that  time  preached
his  first  sermon,  entering  the  North  Georgia  an-
nual conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
south,  in  the  same  year.  From  the  first  his  suc-
cess as  a  revivalist  was  remarkable.  He  was  fre-
quently called  to  other  places,  preaching  during
the  first  eight  years  of  his  ministry  about  400  ser-
mons a  year.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  agent  of
the  Decatur  orphans'  home,  and  since  that  time
has  given  his  services  to  revival  work  in  the  large
cities  of  the  United  States.  Several  collections  of
his  sermons,  made  up  from  the  notes  of  short-
hand reporters,  have  been  published.  They  in-
clude *'  Sam  Jones's  Sermons  "  (Nashville,  1885) ;
"  The  Music  Hall  Series  "  (Cincinnati,  1886) ;  and
"Quit  Your  Meanness"  (1886);  revised  edition,
entitled  "  Sam  Jones's  Own  Book  "  (1887).

JONES,  Seaborn,  lawyer,  b.  in  Augusta,  Ga.,
in  1788 ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ga.,  in  1874.  He  entered
Princeton,  but  was  obliged  to  leave  before  gradu-
ation on  account  of  his  father's  failure  in  business.
He  then  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
by  special  act  of  the  legislature. He  became  so-


JONES


JONES


471


licitor-general  of  Georgia  in  1823,  and  was  after-
ward elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  1833  till  1835,  and  again  from  1845  till  1847.
Among  his  treasures  was  a  cane  made  from  the
timber  of  the  frigate  "  Constitution,"  presented  to
him  by  his  friend  Com.  Isaac  Hull.

JONES,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Strabane,  Ulster
co.,  Ireland,  about  1665 :  d.  in  Fort  Neck,  Queens
co.,  L.  I.,  13  Dec,  1713.  His  family  were  origi-
nally from  North  Wales.  Taking  part  in  the  civil
war  on  the  side  of  James  II.,  he  participated  in  the
battles  of  the  Boyne  in  1690,  of  Aghrim  in  1691,
and  in  the  siege  and  capitulation  of  Limerick  in
1691.  Escaping  to  France,  he  embarked  early  in
1692  under  one  of  the  numerous  letters  of  marque
to  participate  in  the  Revolution,  and  was  present
at  the  great  earthquake  of  Jamaica,  7  July,  1692,
and  in  that  year  came  to  Long  Island.  He  mar-
ried Freelove,  daughter  of  Thomas  Townsend,
who  presented  him  with  a  tract  of  land  at  the
confluence  of  the  Massapequa  river  with  the
Great  South  bay.  By  subsequent  purchases  from
the  Indians  and  neighboring  owners,  he  acquired
an  estate  of  6,000  acres,  and  in  1696  built,  near
the  river,  the  first  brick  house  in  that  part  of  the
island.  On  2  March,  1699,  he  was  admitted  by
deed  an  associate  freeholder  under  the  Oyster  Bav
patent  of  1677.  On  20  Oct.,  1702,  he  was  commis-
sioned captain  of  militia  in  Queens  county  by  Gov.
Cornbury.  On  14  Oct.,  1704,  he  was  appointed
high  sheriff  of  Queens  county,  and  on  3  April,
1706,  he  was  made  major  of  the  Queens  county
regiment.  He  received  the  commission  of  "ran-
ger-general of  the  island  of  Nassau "  (then  the
legal  name  of  Long  Island)  from  Gov.  Hunter
on  4  Sept.,  1710,  which  office  gave  him  the  mo-
nopoly of  the  whale  and  other  fisheries  from  the
shores  of  the  island,  his  jurisdiction  ranging  around
the  coast  from  Little  Neck  bay  to  Jamaica  bay,
and  over  all  ungranted  lands  within  its  limits.
He  held  this  office  until  his  death. — His  son,
David,  jurist,  b.  in  Fort  Neck,  L.  I.,  16  Sept.,
1699;  d.  there.  11  Oct.,  1775,  received  an  excellent
private  education  and  studied  law.  and  practised
in  New  York  city.  He  was  appointed  judge  of
Queens  county  in  1734,  and  in  1737  was  elected
to  the  colonial  assembly,  where  he  remained  till
1758,  serving  as  speaker  for  thirteen  years.  From
1758  till  1773  he  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court.
— His  son.  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Fort  Neck.  L.  I.,
30  April,  1731;  d.  in  Hoddesdon,  England,  25
July,  1792,  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  1750,  studied
law,  was  licensed  in  1755,  and  began  his  practice  in
New  York.  In  1757  he  was  appointed  clerk  of
Queens  county  courts,  and  for  many  years  he  was
the  attorney  for  the  governors  of  King's  college,  of
which  body  he  was  a  member,  and  also  attorney
for  the  corporation  of  New  York  city.  In  1769  he
became  recorder  of  the  city,  which  office  he  held
till  1773,  when  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  in  place  of  his  father,  serving  until
the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  war.  and  held  the
last  court  under  the  crown  at  White  Plains  in
April,  1776.  On  27  June,  1776,  he  was  arrested  at
his  house  by  an  armed  party  by  order  of  a  commit-
tee of  the  New  York  Provincial  congress  on  a  charge
of  refusing  to  obey  the  summons  of  the  committee
to  show  why  he  "should  be  considered  a  friend
of  the  American  cause."  He  was  brought  to  New
York  and  discharged  on  giving  his  parole  to  ap-
pear when  congress  should  direct.  On  11  Aug.  he
was  seized  by  a  body  of  riflemen,  taken  to  New
York  and  again  arraigned  before  a  board  of  offi-
cers, who  told  him  the  parole  was  void.  He  was
then  sent  to  Connecticut  as  a  prisoner,  remaining


there  under  the  charge  of  disaffection  until  De-
cember, when  he  signed  a  second  parole  and  re-
turned to  his  home  in  Fort  Neck.  On  6  Nov.,
1779,  his  house  was  suddenly  entered  and  robbed
by  a  party  of  Whigs  under  the  command  of  Capt.
Daniel  Hawley,  of  Connecticut,  who  seized  Jones,
though  under  parole,  and  carried  him  to  Connec-
ticut, in  order  to  effect  an  exchange  for  Gen.
Gold  Selleck  Silliman,  who  had  been  captured  six
months  before  in  his  house  in  Fairfield.  Neither
had  any  personal  con-
nection with  the  seiz-
ure, nor  did  it  alter
their  friendship  which
had  been  formed  in
Yale.  In  April,  1780,
they  were  exchanged.
While  in  Connecticut
Judge  Jones's  health
failed  owing  to  inju-
ries received  on  being
thrown  from  a  sleigh.
In  1781  Judge  Jones
sold  his  stock  at  auc-
tion, and  went  to  Eng-
land with  his  family.
After  living  in  Bath
for  his  health  for  three
years,  he  retired  to
Hoddesdon  in  Hert-
fordshire. The  negotia-
tion of  peace  in  1782  prevented  his  return,  as  he
was  included  in  the  New  York  act  of  attainder,  by
which  his  life  was  ipso  facto  forfeited  and  his  estate
confiscated.  He  married  Anne  de  Lancev,  daugh-
ter of  James  de  Lancev,  chief  justice  and  lieuten-
ant-governor of  New  York.  She  received  about
two  acres  of  land  from  her  brother  James,  between
the  Bowery  and  the  East  river,  upon  which  site
Jones  erected  a  large  house,  surrounded  with  gar-
dens. He  named  it  "  Mount  Pitt."  and  it  remained
standing  till  the  close  of  the  last  century.  When
Gen.  Charles  Lee  built  fortifications  around  New
York  in  1776,  he  made  this  point  the  site  of  a  large
redoubt,  which  was  called  Jones's  Hill  Fort.  The
accompanying  illustration  of  Fort  Neck  house
represents  his  spacious  residence,  which  is  still
(1887)  in  possession  of  the  family.  It  was  origi-
nally  Tryon hall, and was erected for Judge


Thomas  Jones  by  his  father  in  1770.  It  faces  the
Great  South  bay  and  has  a  frontage  of  ninety  feet.
His  father  entailed  this  estate  upon  him  and  his
heirs  and  in  default  of  the  latter  upon  his  daugh-
ters and  their  heirs,  on  condition  that  they  should
add  to  their  name  that  of  Jones.  Hence  David
Flovd.  son  of  Arabella  Jones  and  Richard  Floyd,
of  Suffolk  county.  N.  Y..  received  the  Fort  Neck
estate  under  the  entail  and  became  the  first  of  the
name  of  Floyd-Jones.  Judge  Jones  was  the  au-
thor of  "  History  of  New  York  during  the  Revo-
lutionary War."  which  was  edited  by  Edward  Floyd
de  Lancey  and  printed  for  the  New  York  histori-


472


JONES


JONES


cal  society  (New  York,  1879).  This  work  is  a
valuable  contribution  to  American  history.  It  is
an  account  of  the  Revolution  from  a  loyalist  point
of  view,  and  is  the  only  contemporary  history
written  by  one  living  at  that  time. — The  first
Thomas's  grandson,  Samuel,  son  of  William  Jones,
lawyer,  b.  26  July,  1734 ;  d.  in  Westneck,  L.  I.,  21
Nov.,  1819,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  William
Smith,  the  historian  of  New  York,  who  was  subse-
quently chief  justice.  During  the  Revolution  he
remained  in  the  British  lines,  being  a  loyalist  in
principle,  but  took  no  part  in  the  war.  After
peace  was  declared  he  became  a  strong  Federalist.
He  held  many  offices  of  trust,  political  and  legal,
was  often  in  the  state  assembly,  and  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  convention  at  Poughkeepsie  that  adopted
the  constitution  of  the  United  States  in  1788.
In  1789,  with  Richard  Varick,  he  revised  the  stat-
utes of  the  state  of  New  York,  of  which  work  he
did  the  principal  part.  In  the  same  year  he  was
appointed  recorder  of  the  city  of  New  York,  an
office  he  held  for  eight  years,  when  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  Chancellor  Kent.  At  the  request  of
John  Jay  in  1796  he  drew  up  the  law  establishing
the  comptroller's  office  of  New  York  state  as  it  now
(1887)  exists,  and  was  appointed  in  that  year  to
this  office,  which  he  held  for  three  years,  after  which
he  retired  to  his  country-seat,  Westneck,  L.  I.  Dr.
David  Hosack  said :  "  Common  consent  has  indeed
assigned  him  the  highest  attainments  in  jurispru-
dence, and  the  appellation  of  father  of  the  New
York  bar."  "  No  one,"  says  Chancellor  Kent,  "  sur-
passed him  in  clearness  of  intellect  and  in  mod-
eration and  extreme  simplicity  of  character ;  no
one  equalled  him  in  his  accurate  knowledge  of  the
technical  rules  and  doctrines  of  real  property,  and
his  familiarity  with  the  skilful  and  elaborate,  but
now  obsolete  and  mysterious,  black-letter  learning
of  the  common  law."  He  published,  with  Richard
Varick,  "  Laws  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1789),  and  contributed  valuable  papers
on  the  history  of  New  York  to  the  collections  of
the  New  York  historical  society. — His  second  son,
Samuel,  jurist,  b.  26  May,  1769 ;  d.  in  Cold  Spring,
N.  Y.,  9  Aug.,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1790,  and  studied  law  in  his  father's  office,  having
for  his  fellow-student  De  Witt  Clinton.  He  held
many  important  judicial  offices,  and  at  the  outset
of  his  career  took  an  active  part  in  politics.  He
was  a  member  of  the  assembly  in  1812-'14,  recorder
of  New  York  city  in  1823,  chancellor  of  the  state  in
1826-'8,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court  of  New
York  city  in  lb28-'47,  and  justice  of  the  state  su-
preme court  in  1847-9.  At  the  age  of  eighty,  on
the  expiration  of  his  term,  he  resumed  practice
at  the  bar,  and  was  actively  engaged  in  profession-
al life  till  within  about  two  months  of  his  death.
He  was  active  in  the  councils  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  to  his  latest  days  remarka-
ble for  his  interest  in  all  matters  of  social  and  pub-
lic importance.  Judge  Jones,  like  his  father,  was
often  called  the  "  father  of  the  New  York  bar." —
Another  son,  David  S.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Westneck,
L.  I.,  3  Nov.,  1777;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10  May,
1848,  was  graduated  first  in  his  class  at  Colum-
bia in  1796.  For  a  few  years  after  leaving  college
he  was  secretary  of  Gov.  Jay,  and  for  nearly  half
a  century  one  of  the  most  active  and  influential
members  of  his  profession.  After  residing  for  sev-
eral years  on  his  estate  at  Massapequa,  L.  I.,  he  re-
moved to  New  York.  He  was  especially  interested
in  the  institutions  of  that  city,  Columbia  college,
the  Society  library,  and  the  General  theological
seminary,  and  connected  with  each  of  them  as
trustee  and  legal  adviser  for  an  unusual  term  of


years. He  also  took  much  interest  in  the  affairs  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal church. He was first

Sdge  of  his  native  county  while  a  resident  at
assapequa,  and  about  1840  received  the  title  of
LL.  D.  from  Alleghany  college,  Meadville,  Ph.
Mr.  Jones  was  connected  by  his  three  marriages
with  the  Livingston,  LeRoy,  and  Clinton  families.
See  "  Memorial  of  the  Hon.  David  S.  Jones  "  (New
York,  1849).— David  S.'s  son,  William  Alfred,  au-
thor, b.  in  New  York  city,  26  June,  1817,  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1836,  and  studied  law  with
Daniel  Lord,  but  has  never  practised.  He  resided
in  his  native  city  till  1867,  and  since  then  has  lived
in  retirement  in  Norwich,  Conn.  He  was  librarian
of  Columbia  college  from  1851  till  1865.  Mr.  Jones
has  contributed  many  literarv  and  critical  essays
to  periodicals.  His  published  volumes,  which  are
principally  collections  of  these  essays,  are  "The
Analyst,  a  Collection  of  Miscellaneous  Papers"
(New  York,  1839);  "Literary  Studies"  (2  vols.,
1847) ;  "  Essays  upon  Authors  and  Books  "  (1849) ;
"Memorial  of  Hon.  David  S.  Jones,"  his  father
(1849) ;  and  "  Characters  and  Criticisms  "  (2  vols.,
1857).  His  pamphlets  include  "The  Library  of
Columbia  College  "  (New  York,  1861) ;  "  The  First
Century  of  Columbia  College  "  (1863) ;  and  "  Long
Island,"  an  address  before  the  Long  Island  his-
torical society  (1863). — The  first  Samuel's  grand-
son, Samuel  William,  jurist,  son  of  Maj.  William
Jones,  of  Cold  Spring,  b.  6  July,  1791 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  1  Dec,  1855,  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1810.  He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his  uncle,
Samuel  Jones,  and  practised  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,
of  which  city  he  was  mayor  many  years.  He  was
also  surrogate,  and  first  judge  of  Schenectady
county. — The  first  Samuel's  nephew,  Walter  Re-
stored, marine  underwriter,  son  of  John  Jones,  b.
in  Cold  Spring,  L.  I.,  15  April,  1793 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  5  April,  1855,  was  the  founder  of  the
Atlantic  mutual  marine  insurance  company,  of
New  York  city.  By  his  untiring  energy  and  devo-
tion, his  accuracy  and  masterly  management  of  its
interests,  he  built  up  a  comparatively  weak  cor-
poration to  a  valuable  institution,  over  which  he
presided  for  many  years.  Mr.  Jones  was  largely
interested  also  in  manufacturing  enterprises,  and
especially  in  whaling  operations,  at  a  day  when
that  was  a  lucrative  department  of  our  national
industries.  He  may  be  considered  the  founder  of
the  Life  saving  association. — Walter  Restored's
nephew,  John  Divine,  son  of  John  H.  Jones,  b.  in
Cold  Spring,  N.  Y.,  15  Aug.,  1814,  was  placed  in  the
office  of  his  uncle,  and  under  his  guidance  filled  all
the  offices  of  the  Atlantic  company,  of  which  he
has  been  president  since  1855.  Mr.  Jones  has  been
a  liberal  benefactor  of  many  public  institutions,
especially  to  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  of
New  York  city  and  Long  Island,  and  to  the  His-
torical society  of  New  York.

JONES,  Walter,  physician,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1745;  d.  in  Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  31  Dec.
1815.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in
1760,  and  studied  medicine  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,
receiving  his  degree  in  1770.  On  his  return  he
settled  in  Northumberland  county,  Va.,  and  at-
tained note  as  a  scholar  and  physician.  In  1777
he  was  appointed  by  congress  physician-general  of
the  hospital  in  the  middle  military  department.
He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  1797  till  1799,  and  again  from
1803  till  1811.  He  was  at  one  time  a  free-thinker,
but  he  subsequently  embraced  the  Christian  faith
and  wrote  a  volume  denouncing  his  former  theories.

JONES,  William,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,  b
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1754;  d.  in  Providence,  9


JONES


JORDAN


473


April,  1822.  He  was  a  carpenter  in  his  youth,  but
entered  the  Revolutionary  array  in  1775  as  a  cap-
tain in  Lippett's  Rhode  Island  regiment.  He  after-
ward commanded  a  marine  corps  on  a  National
frigate,  and  was  made  prisoner  at  Charleston,  S.  C.
After  the  war  he  engaged  in  business  at  Providence,
was  for  several  years  a  representative  in  the  state
assembly,  and  served  as  its  speaker.  He  was  gov-
ernor of  the  state  from  1811  till  1817.

JONES,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1760;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  5  Sept.,  1831.
He  joined  a  volunteer  company  at  the  age  of  six-
teen, and  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Trenton  and
Princeton.  Afterward  he  entered  the  Continental
naval  service,  and  served  gallantly  under  Com.
Truxtun  on  James  river,  when  that  officer  encoun-
tered and  beat  off  a  British  ship  of  superior  force.
He  then  entered  the  merchant  service,  but  in  1790-'3
lived  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  He  returned  to  Phila-
delphia in  the  latter  year,  and  was  elected  to  con-
gess  as  a  Democrat,  serving  one  term  in  1801-'3.
e  was  secretary  of  the  navy  from  12  Jan.,  1813,
to  7  Dec,  1814,  and  afterward  served  as  president
of  the  U.  S.  bank  and  collector  of  the  port  of  Phila-
delphia. He  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  and  published  "  Winter  Naviga-
tion on  the  Delaware  "  (Philadelphia,  1822).

JONES,  William  Edmondson,  soldier,  b.  near
Glade  Spring,  Washington  co.,  Va.,  in  May,  1824 ;
d.  near  New  Hope,  Augusta  co.,  Va.,  5  June,  1864.
He  was  educated  at  Emory  and  Henry  college,  and
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1848.  He  was  assigned  to  the  mounted
rifles,  and  served  in  various  frontier  posts  till  26
Jan.,  1857,  when  he  resigned,  and,  after  travelling
abroad,  became  a  farmer  near  Glade  Spring,  Va.
He  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  captain,  and
on  28  Sept.,  1861,  became  colonel  of  the  1st  Vir-
ginia cavalry.  He  was  promoted  to  brigadier-gen-
eral on  19  Sept.,  1862,  and  in  the  winter  of  1862-3
commanded  the  Department  of  the  Valley  of  Vir-
ginia. He  was  made  major-general  in  1863,  and
then  had  charge  of  southwestern  Virginia  and
eastern  Tennessee  till  he  was  ordered  back  to  the
valley  of  Virginia  to  meet  Gen.  Hunter.  He  was
killed  in  an  action  with  the  forces  of  that  general.

JONES,  William  Palmer,  physician,  b.  in
Adair  county,  Ky.,  17  Oct.,  1819.  He  attended  the
Louisville  medical  institute  in  1839-'40,  and  subse-
quently received  diplomas  from  the  Medical  college
of  Ohio,  and  Memphis  medical  college.  He  re-
moved to  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  1848,  and  has  since
been  a  resident  of  that  city.  He  established  the
"  Parlor  Visitor "  in  1852,  was  an  editor  of  the
"Southern  Journal  of  Medicine"  for  several  years
after  1853,  and  in  1874  was  associate  editor  of  the
"Tennessee  School  Journal."  He  aided  in  found-
ing Shelby  medical  college  in  1858,  and  filled  its
chair  of  materia  medica,  and  in  1876  became  presi-
dent of  Nashville  medical  college,  and  professor  of
psychological  medicine  and  mental  hygiene.  He
was  in  charge  of  the  first  military  hospital  in  Nash-
ville on  the  arrival  of  the  National  forces  in  the
state,  and  in  1862  became  superintendent  of  the
Tennessee  hospital  for  the  insane,  one  of  the  first
institutions  of  the  kind  for  colored  people  on  the
continent.  As  a  member  of  the  state  senate  he  in-
troduced the  public-school  law,  which  provides
equal  educational  advantages  for  children  of  all
races.  In  1877  he  became  postmaster  of  Nashville.
He  has  contributed  to  current  medical  literature,
chiefly  on  the  treatment  of  the  insane.

JORDAENS,  Mauritius  (zhor-dah'-ains),  Dutch
physician,  b.  in  Surinam  in  1762;  d.  there  in  1824.
He  served  as  a  military  surgeon  in  Saint  Eustache,


Java,  and  Sumatra,  and  in  1797  was  appointed
president  of  the  board  of  health  of  Dutch  Guiana,
which  post  he  held  till  his  death,  refusing  in  1816
the  presidency  of  the  University  of  Leyden.  His
medical  publications  on  the  diseases  peculiar  to
America  include  "  Von  der  Wasserscheu  oder  der
tollen  Hundswuth,  nebst  den  bewaehrtesten  Mit-
teln,  diesem  Ungluck  zu  begegnen  "  (2  vols.,  Am-
sterdam and  Leipsic,  1806) ;  "  Des  maladies  pesti-
lentielles  "  (Amsterdam,  1809) ;  "  Traite  de  la  fievre
jaune"  (Surinam,  1810);  "Thesaurus  artis  medici-
nae  "  (Amsterdam,  1819).

JORDAENS,  Melchior,  Dutch  physician,  b.  in
Leyden  in  1751 ;  d.  in  Dort  in  1829.  "  He  entered
the  service  of  the  company  of  the  Indies,  and  was
for  several  years  surgeon  in  Batavia,  and  after-
ward in  Surinam.  He  became  deputy  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  island  of  Saint  Eustache  in  1783,
president  of  the  board  of  health  in  Dutch  Guiana  in
1792,  and  deputy  lieutenant-governor  of  Surinam
in  1795,  which  post  he  held  till  1806,  when  he  retired
to  Dart.  Jordaens  not  only  promoted  many  sani-
tary measures  in  Guiana,  but  greatly  exerted  him-
self in  improving  the  country,  drying  some  former-
ly inundated  lands,  encouraging  emigration  from
Europe,  and  obtaining  from  the  home  government
the  decree  of  homestead  that  brought  the  country
to  the  prosperity  it  enjoyed  at  the  beginning  of
the  19th  century.  Napoleon  appointed  Jordaens
chief  surgeon  of  the  kingdom  of  Westphalia  in
1809.  and  afterward  president  of  the  board  of
health  of  Hamburg,  which  post  he  held  till  1813.
He  then  retired  again  to  Dart,  which  he  never  left
afterward.  Jordaens  is  the  author  of  many  trea-
tises, some  of  which  are  yet  consulted.  Those
relating  to  America  include  "  Guianaland,  geo-
gnostisch  und  geologisch  dargestellt "  (2  vols..  Ham-
burg, 1811);  "  Geognostische  Bemerkungen  iiber
die  basaltischen  Gebilde  des  westlichen  Guiana-
landes"  (2  vols..  Leipsic  and  Dort,  1816).

JORDAN.  Ambrose  Latting,  lawyer,  b.  in
Hillsdale,  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1791 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  16  July.  1865.  He  began  the  practice
of  law  in  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  in  1813,  and  in  1820
removed  to  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  in
business  until  he  settled  in  New  York  city  in  1838.
He  attained  eminence  as  a  lawyer,  was  a  member
of  the  assembly,  a  state  senator,  judge  of  the  court
of  appeals,  and  attornev-general  of  the  state.

JORDAN,  Conrad  N.,  banker,  b.  in  New  York
city.  20  April.  1830.  He  studied  in  private  schools
until  \\e  was  thirteen  years  of  age.  and  then,  enter-
ing a  printing-office,  learned  the  trade  and  became
a  compositor,  which  occupation  he  followed  until
1852.  Tie  then  was  appointed  clerk  in  the  Hanover
bank  of  New  York,  and  in  1864  was  made  cashier
of  the  Third  national  bank  of  that  city.  In  1880
he  became  treasurer  of  the  New  York,  Ontario,  and
Western  railroad,  but  resigned  in  1884,  and  in  1885
was  appointed  assistant  treasurer  of  the  United
States,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1887  to  accept
the  post  of  vice-president  of  the  Western  national
bank  in  New  York  city.  In  July  of  that  year  he  de-
vised a  new  form  of  silver  bullion  certificate,  which
was  issued  and  put  on  the  market  by  the  bank.

JORDAN,  Cornelia  Jane  Matthews,  poet,  b.
in  Lvnchburg,  Va.,  11  Jan.,  1830.  She  is  the  daugh-
ter of  Edwin  Matthews,  who  was  at  one  time  mayor
of  Lynchburg.  Miss  Matthews  received  her  educa-
tion at  the  Academy  of  the  visitation  in  George-
town, D.  C,  and  in  "1851  she  married  Francis  H.
Jordan,  of  Page  county,  Va.  In  1863  she  visited
Corinth,  Miss.,  where  her  husband  held  a  staff  ap-
pointment under  Gen.  Beauregard,  and  where  she
wrote  her  poem  "  f«iM«t.h  " This  was  seized  o


•Corinth." This  was  seized  on


474


JORDAN


JORQUERA


its  publication  in  1865  as  '•  objectionable  and  in-
cendiary," and  was  burned  in  the  court-house  yard
in  Lynchburg,  by  order  of  Gen.  Alfred  H.  Terry.
Her  publications  include  "  Flowers  of  Hope  and
Memory  "  (Richmond,  1861) ;  "  Corinth  and  Other
Poems  of  the  War "  (1865) :  "  A  Christmas  Poem
for  Children  "  (Lynchburg,  1865) ;  "  Richmond :
Her  Glory  and  Her  Graves "  (Richmond,  1867) ;
and  "  Useful  Maxims  for  a  Noble  Life  "  (1884).

JORDAN,  David  Starr,  naturalist,  b.  in
Gainesville,  N.  Y.,  19  Jan.,  1851.  He  became  in-
structor in  botany  at  Cornell  in  1870,  meanwhile
also  studying  at  that  university,  where  he  was  grad-
uated in  1872.  Subsequently  he  settled  in  Indian-
apolis, and  was  graduated  at  the  Indiana  medical
college  in  1875,  after  lecturing  in  1874  on  marine
botany  at  the  Anderson  summer  school  of  natural
history  at  Penikese  island,  Mass.,  and  on  botany  and
ichthyology  at  the  Harvard  school  of  geology,  at
Cumberland  gap,  in  1875.  He  then  became  pro-
fessor of  biology  at  Butler  university,  and  in  1879
was  appointed  to  a  similar  chair  in  Indiana  uni-
versity. During  1879-'81  he  was  a  special  agent
of  the  U.  S.  census  for  the  marine  industries  of  the
Pacific  coast,  and  he  has  also  held  appointments  at
various  times  as  assistant  to  the  U.  S.  fish  com-
mission and  the  U.  S.  national  museum.  Mr.
Jordan  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  has
published  about  250  papers  on  North  American
ichthyology,  also  a  "  Manual  of  the  Vertebrates  of
the  Northern  Unites  States  "  (Chicago,  1876).

JORDAN,  John,  antiquarian,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  8  May,  1808.  He  was  educated  at
Nazareth  hall,  became  a  merchant  in  Philadelphia,
and  was  for  twenty-eight  years  president  of  the
Mechanics'  national  bank  in  that  city.  For  over
forty  years  he  has  been  a  zealous  antiquarian.
He  is  one  of  the  oldest  surviving  members  of  the
Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania,  an  active  pro-
moter of  its  interests,  among  its  most  liberal
donors,  and  is  now  one  of  its  vice-presidents,  and
a  trustee  of  all  its  various  trusts.  He  has  con-
tributed largely  to  the  printed  archives  of  the
"  United  Brethren." — His  nephew,  John  Woolf,
antiquarian,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  14  Sept.,  1840,  was
graduated  at  Nazareth  hall  in  1857.  He  is  the
assistant  librarian  of  the  Historical  society  of  Penn-
sylvania, editor  of  the  "  Pennsylvania  Magazine  of
History  and  Biography,"  and  a  contributor  to  his-
torical publications,  especially  to  "  The  Moravian."
Among  his  publications  are  "  Friedensthal  and  its
Stockaded  Mill :  a  Moravian  Chronicle,  1749-1767"
(Bethlehem,  1877);  "A  Red  Rose  from  the  Olden
Time  "  (1883) ;  "  Something  about  Trombones  "
(1884) :  and  "  Occupation  of  New  York  by  the  Brit-
ish, 1775-1783  "  (1887).

JORDAN,  Richard,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Norfolk  county,  Va.,  19  Dec,  1756 ;  d.  in  Newton,
N.  J.,  14  Oct.,  1826.  He  became  a  minister  in  the
Society  of  Friends,  and  began  to  preach  at  the  age
of  twenty-five,  visiting  the  entire  eastern  portion
of  the  United  States.  In  1803  he  went  to  Europe,
where  he  remained  for  three  years.  He  visited  in
his  ministerial  capacity  every  yearly  meeting  of
the  society  in  existence,  and  labored  in  behalf  of
the  negroes.  He  wrote  an  autobiography,  "  Jour-
nal of  Richard  Jordan  "  (Philadelphia,  1879).

JORDAN,  Robert,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Nansemond,  Va.,  27  Oct.,  1693 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
5  Aug.,  1742.  He  began  to  preach  in  1718,  visited
Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Carolina,  and  New  Eng-
land in  1722,  suffering  imprisonment  for  his  prin-
ciples. He  travelled  in  Great  Britain  and  the  West
Indies  in  1728-'30,  made  a  journey  to  Barbadoes  in
1740, and  was  in Boston  in  1741,  returning  to


Philadelphia. — His  brother,  Joseph,  b.  in  Nanse-
mond, Va.,  in  1695;  d.  26  Sept.,  1735,  preached
with  his  brother  Robert  in  1718,  in  this  country
and  in  parts  of  England  and  Ireland.  lie  also
labored  in  Holland.

JORDAN,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Luray  valley,
Va.,  30  Sept.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1840,  and  served  as  2d
lieutenant  of  the  3d  infantry  in  the  war  against
the  Seminole  Indians.  He  was  then  on  garrison
duty  in  the  west  and  south,  and  took  part  in  the
war  with  Mexico.  He  became  1st  lieutenant,  18
June,  1846,  and  captain  and  quartermaster,  3  March,
1847,  serving  on  the  Pacific  coast.  He  resigned,  21
May,  1861,  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel, and  was  immediately  made  adjutant-
general  of  the  forces  at  Manassas  Junction.  He
accompanied  Gen.  Beauregard  to  Tennessee  as  chief
of  staff,  and  became  brigadier-general  after  the  bat-
tle of  Shiloh.  He  served  temporarily  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Bragg,  but  returned  to  his  former  post  with
Gen.  Beauregard  during  the  defence  of  Charleston
in  1862-'4.  A  f ter  the  war  he  was  made  chief  of  the
general  staff  of  the  Cuban  insurgent  army,  and  in
May,  1869,  landed  at  Mayari  with  300  men,  and  arms,
ammunition,  and  supplies  for  6,000.  On  marching
into  the  interior  to  join  the  insurgents  he  was  at-
tacked by  the  Spanish  forces  and  lost  80  men.  In
December  he  succeeded  to  the  chief  command  of  the
revolutionists,  and  in  January,  1870,  gained  a  vic-
tory over  a  superior  force  at  Guaimaro.  But  as
the  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition  was  exhausted,
and  as  there  was  small  chance  of  reorganizing  an
effective  force,  he  resigned  in  February,  1870,  and
returned  to  the  United  States.  He  has  since  re-
sided in  New  York  city  and  is  now  (1887)  editor
of  the  "  Mining  Record."  Immediately  after  the
civil  war  he  published  a  critical  review  of  the  Con-
federate operations  and  administration  in  "  Har-
per's Magazine,"  and  was  the  editor  of  the  "  Mem-
phis Appeal"  in  1866.  He  has  contributed  to
periodical  literature  and  published,  in  connection
with  J.  B.  Pryor,  "  The  Campaigns  of  Lieut.-Gen.
Forrest"  (New  York,  1868).

JORDON,  Edward,  a  West  Indian  statesman,
b.  in  Kingston,  Jamaica,  13  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  in  St.
Andrews,  Jamaica,  8  Feb.,  1869.  He  was  a  quad-
roon, and  in  his  youth  suffered  from  the  social
proscription  and  political  disabilities  to  which  the
colored  people  were  at  that  time  subjected  in  all  the
West  India  colonies  of  England.  He  had  received  a
good  education,  and  began  agitation  with  the  view
of  obtaining  political  rights  for  the  free  colored
population.  Having  succeeded  in  securing  these,  he
became  a  zealous  advocate  of  emancipation,  calling
on  his  enfranchised  countrymen  of  the  colored
class  to  unite  with  the  anti-slavery  party  of  England
in  bringing  about  this  result.  For  expressions
that  were  used  in  a  newspaper  of  which  he  was
editor  he  was  put  on  his  trial  for  treason,  with  the
certainty  of  being  hanged  if  convicted ;  but  the
firmness  of  one  man  on  the  jury  saved  his  life.
About  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  emancipation
act  Jordon  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Jamaica
house  of  assembly,  and  thenceforward  he  rose  until
he  had  been  successively  member  of  the  privy
council,  prime  minister  in  the  first  executive  com-
mittee under  Sir  Henry  Barkly's  administration,
speaker  of  the  house  of  assembly,  receiver-general,
and  finally  colonial  secretary.  He  became  a  com-
mander of  the  bath  in  1854,  the  first  instance  in
which  this  honor  was  given  to  a  colored  man.

JORQUERA,  Jacinto  (hor-kay'-rah),  Chilian
clergyman,  b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1600;  d.  there  in
1675. He  entered  the  Dominican  order  in  Santiago,


JORRfN


JOUBERT


475


and  received  the  degrees  of  doctor  of  philosophy
and  theology  at  a  very  early  age  from  the  university
of  that  city.  He  was  next  appointed  professor  of
theology  and  general  examiner  of  the  diocese  of
Santiago,  and  in  1640  was  elected  provincial  of  the
Dominicans  of  Chili.  During  his  provincialship,
IB  May,  1647,  Santiago  was  destroyed  by  an  earth-
quake, and  he  excited  general  admiration  by  his
devotion  to  the  sufferers.  Immediately  afterward
he  began  to  rebuild  his  convent,  but  left  the  care
of  finishing  this  work  to  his  deputy,  and  went  to
visit  the  different  parts  of  his  province.  During
his  visit  he  introduced  important  reforms  in  the
convents  of  Paraguay,  Cordova,  and  Buenos  Ayres.
He  was  nominated  bishop  of  Paraguay  by  the
Spanish  court,  but  the  chronicles  of  his  order
make  no  mention  of  his  acceptance,  and  it  is  certain
that  he  died  a  simple  monk  in  the  convent  of  San-
tiago. Father  Jorquera  was  a  voluminous  writer
on  religious  subjects.  Most  of  his  works  are  in
manuscript,  but  a  memoir  that  he  published,  de-
fending Bernardino  de  Cardenas,  bishop  of  Para-
guay, against  the  powerful  men  who  persecuted
him.  excited  great  attention  at  the  time  both  in
Spain  and  in  Spanish  America.

JORRIN,  Jos6  SilVerio  (hor-reen'),  Cuban  au-
thor, b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1816.  He  studied
law  in  his  native  city,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1841.  After  finishing  his  studies  he  spent  sev-
eral years  in  travel  through  the  United  States  and
Europe,  and  on  his  return  to  Havana  filled  im-

Sortant  offices,  devoting  his  time  to  his  professional
uties, literary  pursuits,  and  the  promotion  of  public
instruction  in  the  island.  Jorrin  belongs  to  several
literary  and  scientific  societies,  and  is  a  correspond-
ing member  of  the  Historical  society  of  New  York.
He  has  been  elected  several  times  senator  for
Cuba  in  the  Spanish  cortes,  and  has  been  always  a
Liberal  in  politics  and  a  stanch  abolitionist.  He
has  published  a  "  Tratado  de  Dibujo  Lineal "  (1839) ;
"  Recuerdos  de  un  Viaje  a  Italia  " ;  a  translation
of  Tacitus ;  and  a  "  Life  of  Columbus."

JOSi-l  DE  SANTA  THERESA  (ho-say'),  pen-
name  of  Joao  de  Noroxha  Freire,  Portuguese
historian,  b.  in  Lisbon  in  1658:  d.  in  Rome  in
1736.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  for  twelve
years  attached  to  the  missions  of  South  America,
but  his  health  compelled  him  to  return  to  Europe,
where  in  1694  he  became  librarian  of  the  college
Of  the  Jesuits  in  Rome.  He  published  "  Istoria
delle  guerre  del  Regno  del  Brasile  accadute  tra
corone  di  Portogallo  e  la  republica  di  olanda,"  a
standard  work  (2  vols.,  Rome,  1698);  "Bibliotheca
historica  de  Portugal  "  (4  vols.,  Rome,  1727);  and
several  less  important  works.

JOSEPHINE  (Marie  Josephine  Rose  Tas-
cher  de  la  Pagerie),  empress  of  France,  b.  in
Trois  Ilcts,  Martinique,  24  June,  1763;  d.  in  Mal-
maison,  near  Paris,  29  March,  1814.  She  was  de-
scended from  a  family  of  the  county  of  Blois,  of
which  a  branch  settled  in  Martinique  in  1726,  and
her  father,  an  artillery  officer,  held  the  post  of
harbor-master  of  Port  Royal  at  the  time  of  her
birth.  She  received  her  education  in  the  latter
city,  at  the  convent  of  the  Sisters  of  Saint  Joseph,
and  at  the  age  of  thirteen  was  an  accomplished
Creole  of  great  beauty.  Her  family  betrothed  her
to  the  Viscount  Beauharnais,  a  scion  of  an  old
family  and  the  son  of  a  former  governor  of  Mar-
tinique, whom  she  wedded  in  Paris  on  13  Dec.
1779.  The  union  was  not  happy,  as  the  viscount
became  so  jealous  of  the  distinction  that  was  shown
to  his  young  wife  at  the  court  of  Marie  Antoinette
that  he  went  to  Martinique  in  1786  to  inquire  into
her  former  life,  and  on  his  return  sued  for  divorce.


But  the  parliament  of  Paris  dismissed  his  com-
plaint. In  the  following  year  Josephine  returned
to  Trois  Ilets,  and  remained  till  1790,  when  troubles
began  in  the  island,  and  she  was  obliged  to  fly
for  her  life  in  great
haste.  Josephine
was  imprisoned  in
Paris  during  the
reign  of  terror,  and
her  husband  was
executed  in  1794,
but  she  never  lost
courage,  as  an  old
colored  woman  in
Martinique  had
predicted  in  her
infancy  that  she
would  some  day
occupy  an  exalt-
ed position.  On  9
March,  1796,  she
married  Napoleon
Bonaparte,  and  in
1804  ascended  the
throne  with  him.
She  used  her  in-
fluence in  behalf
of  acts  of  benevolence,  interceding  with  Napoleon
for  Toussaint  L'Ouverture,  disapproving  the  ex-
pedition to  Santo  Domingo,  and  urging  him  to
cede  Louisiana  to  the  United  States.  For  political
reasons,  Napoleon  was  divorced  from  her,  9  Jan.,
1810,  but  he  .always  entertained  a  kind  regard,  and
maintained  her  household  as  that  of  the  reigning
empress.  By  her  former  marriage,  Josephine  had
two  children,  both  born  in  Paris.  Eugene  de  Beau-
harnais, known  as  Prince  Eugene,  who  became
viceroy  of  Italy  and  a  noted  general,  and  Hortense,
who  married  Louis,  king  of  Holland,  and  became
the  mother  of  Napoleon  III.

JOSSELYN,  John,  traveller,  b.  in  England
early  in  the  17th  century.  He  was  the  son  of  Sir
Thomas  Josselyn,  of  Kent.  He  sailed  for  New
England  on  26  April,  arriving  in  Boston  on  2  July,
1638,  and  "  presented  his  respects  to  Mr.  Winthrop,
the  governor,  and  to  Mr.  Cotton,  the  teacher  of
Boston  church,  to  whom  he  delivered  from  Mr.
Francis  Quarles,  the  poet,  the  translation  of  sev-
eral Psalms  into  English  meter."  He  returned  to
England  in  October.  1639.  and  made  a  second
voyage  on  23  May,  1663,  to  New  England,  where
he  spent  eight  years.  On  his  return  in  December,
1671,  he  published  a  book  entitled  4i  New  England's
Rarities  Discovered  in  Birds,  Beasts,  Fishes.  Ser-
pents, and  Plants  of  that  Country,  etc.,"  with  a
picture  of  Boston  in  1663  (London,  1672).  This
was  reprinted,  with  notes,  by  Edward  Tuckerman
(Boston,  1865).  Josselyn  was  also  the  author  of
••  An  Account  of  Two  Voyages  to  New  England,
etc."  (1674)  and  "  A  Chronological  Table  of  the
most  Remarkable  Passages  from  the  First  Dis-
covery of  the  Continent  of  America  to  1673,"
which  was  appended  to  the  former  work.  Both  of
these  were  reprinted  (Boston.  1865). — His  brother,
Henry,  was  active  and  influential  in  the  affairs  of
Maine,  arriving  in  Piscataqua  in  1634.  From  1636
till  1640  he  was  a  member  of  the  Maine  govern-
ment, in  1643  he  succeeded  to  the  Cammock  pat-
ent at  Black  Point,  Me.,  and  in  1645  became  dep-
uty governor.  He  was  appointed  a  commissioner
for  the  administration  of  the  government  in  1665.

JOUBERT,  Antoine Henry (zhoo'-bair). Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Besaneon  in  1601 ;  d.  in  San-
tiago. Chili,  in  1674.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  was
attached  to  the  missions  of  South  America,  and


476


JOUETT


JOUFFROY


was  successively  professor  of  rhetoric  and  rector  of
the  College  of  Santiago.  In  1652  he  became,  procu-
rator of  Chili  and  visitor  of  the  order,  the  next
rank  to  that  of  commissary-general,  of  the  Jesuits.
Joubert  published  "  Epistola  ad  prajposituus  gene-
ralem  Societatis  Jesu  qua  statuus  in  provincia
Chilensi  exponit "  (3  vols.,  Santiago,  1656) ;  "  His-
torica  relacion  del  Reino  de  Chile  y  de  las  misi-
ones  y  ministerios  que  ejercita  en  el  la  CompaRia
de  Jesus  "  (2  vols.,  1659) ;  "  Compendium  Geo-
graphic American*  "  (1658) ;  "  Dictionario  geografi-
co  estatistico  y  historico  del  Reino  de  Chile  "  (3
vols.,  1661) ;  and  "  Memorias  sobre  las  colonias  de
Bspafia  situadas  en  la  costa  oriental  y  occidental
de  America  "  (6  vols.,  Buenos  Ayres,  1664).

JOUETT,  Matthew  Harris,  artist,  b.  in  Mer-
cer county,  Ky.,  22  April,  1788 ;  d.  in  Lexington,
Ky.,  10  Aug.,  1827.  His  ancestors  were  Hugue-
nots, who  emigrated  to  North  Carolina,  and  finally
settled  in  Virginia.  They  were  stanch  patriots
during  the  Revolution,  Matthew,  his  uncle,  being
clerk  of  the  first  legislative  body  that  assembled
west  of  the  Alleghany  mountains,  23  May,  1775,
and  subsequently  serving  as  captain  in  the  Revo-
lutionary army,  falling  at  Brandywine.  His  father,
John,  eluded  the  British  commander  Tarleton,
and  gave  the  alarm  to  the  legislature,  then  in  ses-
sion at  Charlottesville,  Va.,  for  which  action  he
received  complimentary  resolutions  from  congress,
and  Virginia  presented  him  with  a  sword  and
pistols.  The  son  was  educated  for  the  law,  but
devoted  much  time  to  drawing  and  painting.  He
enlisted  in  the  war  of  1812  as  lieutenant  of  the
28th  infantry,  serving  in  the  northwest,  and  was
appointed  captain.  In  1815  he  taught  himself
portrait  and  miniature  painting,  but  in  1816  went
to  Boston,  where  he  studied  four  months  under
Gilbert  Stuart.  In  October,  1816,  he  returned  to
Lexington,  achieving reputation as a portrait-

f>ainter,  practising  his  art  with  success  in  New  Or-
eans  and  Natchez,  and  throughout  Kentucky.  He
painted  more  than  300  portraits,  among  which  one
of  Lafayette  was  ordered  by  the  legislature  of  the
lower  house  of  congress  of  Kentucky.  A  sketch  of
his  life  is  now  (1887)  in  preparation  by  his  grand-
son, Richard  Jouett  Menefee. — His  son,  George
Payne,  soldier,  b.  near  Lexington,  Ky.,  14  April,
1813;  killed  at  the  battle  of  Perrysville,  Ky.,  8
Oct.,  1862;  was  educated  at  Transylvania,  where
he  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Benjamin  W.  Dud-
ley. Subsequently  he  read  law  with  his  brother-
in-law  Richard  H.  Menefee  and  finally  engaged  in
commerce  until  the  civil  war,  and  was  the  owner
of  steamboats  on  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers.
He  raised  with  Col.  Curran  Pope  and  Major  Camp-
bell the  15th  Kentucky  Federal  regiment.  His
amateur  efforts  in  sculpture  proved  rare  artistic
talent. — Another  son,  Alexander  Stuart,  soldier,
b.  near  Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1816;  d.  in  Harrods-
burg,  Ky.,  in  1849.  was  a  non-commissioned  officer
in  young  Henry  Clay's  regiment  of  mounted  in-
fantry that  fought  so  gallantly  at  Buena  Vista.
He  possessed  great  courage  and  gained  a  reputa-
tion in  the  Mexican  war. — Another  son,  James
Edward,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  27
Feb.,  1828,  was  educated  at  the  high-school  in  Lex-
ington, and  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  midship-
man on  10  Sept.,  1841.  He  served  in  the  Mexican
war,  was  made  a  lieutenant  on  15  Sept.,  1855,  and
took  an  active  part  in  the  civil  war.  In  command
of  the  first  and  second  launches  of  the  U.  S.  frigate
"Santee,"  on  the  night  of  7  Nov.,  1861,  he  cap-
tured by  boarding  the  armed  schooner  "  Royal
Yacht,"  in  the  harbor  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  after  an
obstinate  encounter,  during  which  he  was  twice


Jaj.&ffctvce&t


severely  wounded.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-
commander  in  1862,  and  ordered  by  Admiral  Far-
ragut  to  the  steamer  "  R.  R.  Cuyler,"  off  Mobile.
He  was  afterward  sent  to  command  the  "Meta-
comet."  which  was  selected  by  Farragut  to  accom-
pany the  flag-ship  "  Hartford  "  through  the  engage-
ment in  Mobile  bay,
the  two  vessels  being
lashed  together  ac-
cording to  his  plan
of  the  battle.  Dur-
ing the  engagement
the  "  Metacomet  "
cast  off  to  chase  Con-
federate gun-boats,
and  crippled  the
•'  Gaines,"  so  that  she
ran  ashore  and  was
destroyed  by  her  cap-
tain. The  "Morgan"
had  retreated,  and  in
one  hour's  running
fight  up  the  bay  the
"  Selma "  was  cap-
tured, Capt.  Jouett
having  attacked  four
times  the  number  of
his  guns  in  this  encounter.  In  his  official  report  of
the  battle  Farragut  says :  "  Lieut.-Com.  Jouett's
conduct  during  the  whole  affair  commands  my
warmest  commendations."  A  board,  composed  of
Admirals  Farragut,  Dupont,  Goldsborough,  Davis,
and  Porter,  recommended  that  Commander  Jouett
should  "  receive  an  advancement  of  thirty  num-
bers for  heroic  conduct  in  battle."  He  was  subse-
quently engaged  with  the  "  Metacomet "  on  block-
ade duty  off  the  coast  of  Texas.  He  became  a  com-
mander, 25  July,  1866,  and  a  captain  and  member
of  the  board  of  inspection  on  6  Jan.,  1874.  He  was
made  commodore,  11  Jan.,  1883,  and  while  in  com-
mand of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron  conducted
the  operations  on  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  in  1885
for  the  protection  of  American  interests  during
an  insurrection,  securing  a  free  transit  across  the
isthmus,  restoring  order,  and  receiving  the  thanks
of  the  citizens,  both  native  and  foreign.  He  became
a  rear-admiral,  19  Feb.,  1886,  and  is  now  (1887)
president  of  the  board  of  inspection  and  survey.

JOUFFROY,  Gabriel,  French  missionary,  b.
in  Calais  in  1631 ;  d.  in  St.  Vincent,  W.  I.,  in  1685.
He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  attached,  in  1658,  to
the  missions  of  Cuba,  moving  some  years  later  to
St.  Vincent,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.  He
is  considered  the  apostle  of  the  Caribs,  who  had
made  the  island  their  refuge.  He  did  much  to
bring  them  to  civilization,  and  deserves  praise  for
his  exertions  in  rescuing  from  a  savage  life  many
white  men,  for  the  most  part  English,  whom  the
Caribs  had  kidnapped  when  they  were  children,
and  who  had  forgotten  their  own  language,  and
scorned  all  entreaties  of  the  missionaries  to  lead  a
more  becoming  life.  It  is  said  that  Father  Jouffroy
converted  thousands  of  them,  thus  greatly  helping
to  weaken  the  forces  of  the  Caribs,  and  otherwise
contributing  to  the  advancement  of  civilization.
He  left  several  manuscripts,  which  were  published
after  his  death,  and  are  the  most  exact  descrip-
tions of  the  habits  of  an  extinct  race.  They  include
"  Voyage  qui  contiens  une  relation  exacte  de  l'ori-
gine,  mceurs,  coutumes,  guerres  et  voyages  des  Ca-
ra'ibes,  sauvages  des  iles  Antilles  de  l'Amerique  "
(2  vols.,  Paris,  1696) ;  "  Dictionnaire  Carai'be  Fran-
cais  "  (1697) ;  and  "  Maniere  d'apprendre  la  langue
des  Carai'bes,  suivie  d'un  traite  sur  la  prononcia-
tion  de  ces  peuples  "  (1697).


JOUIN


JOYCE


477


JOUIN,  Lonis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Berlin,  Prus-
14  June,  1818.  He  is  descended  from  a
[uguenot  family  that  settled  in  Berlin  after  the
avocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  He  was  edu-
ited  by  private  tutors  and  afterward  entered  a
allege  that  prepared  young  men  for  the  adminis-
ition  of  large  estates.  At  the  age  of  twenty-two
le  became  a  Roman  Catholic,  and  in  1841  he  en-
ered  the  Society  of  Jesus.  He  prepared  himself
for  the  priesthood  in  the  Roman  college,  and  at
the  conclusion  of  his  studies  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  in  the  College  of  Rezzio.
The  revolution  of  1848  forced  him  to  leave  Italy,
and  he  came  to  the  United  States,  where  he  has
since  been  employed  as  professor  of  mental  phi-
losophy in  Jesuit  colleges,  with  the  exception  of
the  years  1875-'7,  when  he  taught  philosophy  in
the  College  of  Montreal.  Father  Jouin  has  been
for  several  years  professor  in  the  post-graduate
course  in  St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  N.  Y.  He
is  the  author  of  "  Elementa  Philosophic  Moralis  "
(Amiens,  1862;  New  York,  1873);  "Compendium
Logicae  et  Metaphysical  "  (New  York,  1809) ;  and
*  Evidences  of  Religion  "  (1877) ;  and  is  about  to
publish  a  course  of  lectures  that  he  has  delivered
on  "  Church  and  State."

JOUTEL,  Henry,  French  explorer,  b.  in  Rouen,
France,  late  in  the  17th  century;  d.  there  early  in
the  18th.  He  was  a  soldier  in  early  life.  When
La  Salle  was  commissioned  in  1684  to  reconnoitre
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  by  sea,  Joutel  ac-
companied him  as  intendant.  In  1685  he  was  ap-
pointed by  La  Salle  to  finish  Fort  St.  Louis,  which
the  latter  had  begun.  After  the  departure  of  La
Salle  on  his  expedition  two  of  the  colonists  formed
a  plot  to  murder  Joutel,  but  he  discovered  it  in
time,  and,  having  received  an  order  on  14  July  to
join  La  Salle  with  all  his  force,  he  delivered  the
criminals  to  the  latter.  In  October,  Joutel  was
again  made  commander  of  Fort  St.  Louis  with  34
men  under  him,  and  was  again  disturbed  by  plots
to  kill  him  or  deprive  him  of  his  office.  He  set
out  for  the  Illinois  on  12  Jan.,  1687,  with  La  Salle,
and,  after  the  assassination  of  the  latter  on  19
March,  JoutePs  death  was  also  decided  on,  but  his
life  was  finally  spared.  Not  long  afterward  he  set
out  for  the  Illinois  accompanied  by  six  other
Frenchmen,  and  after  various  adventures  reached
Fort  St.  Louis  on  14  Sept.,  and  arrived  in  Macki-
naw on  10  May.  Joutel  went  to  Montreal  and
Quebec  shortly  afterward  and  embarked  for  Rouen,
where  he  appears  to  have  spent  the  rest  of  his  life.
Charlevoix  says  he  saw  and  conversed  with  him
in  1723.  He  speaks  of  Joutel  as  being  a  very  up-
right man  and  the  only  one  of  La  Salle's  party  on
whom  that  explorer  could  rely.  He  also  says  that
Joutel's  account  of  the  last  expedition  of  La  Salle
is  the  only  trustworthy  one.  This  work  of  Joutel,
in  which  the  author  gives  an  account  of  his  own
travels  after  the  death  of  La  Salle,  is  entitled
"Journal  historique  du  dernier  voyage,  que  feu
M.  de  la  Salle  fit  dans  le  Golfe  de  Mexique,  pour
trouver  rembouchure  &  le  cours  de  la  Riviere  de
Missicipi,  nomme  a  present  la  Riviere  de  Saint
Louis,  qui  traverse  la  Louisiane.  Ou  Ton  voit
l'histoire  tragique  de  sa  mort  &  plusieurs  choses
curieuses  du  nouveau  monde,  par  Monsieur  Joutel,
l'un  des  compagnons  de  ce  voyage,  redige  &  mis
en  ordre  par  Monsieur  de  Michel"  (Paris,  1713).

JOY,  Charles  Arad,  chemist,  b.  in  Ludlow-
-ville,  N.  Y.,  8  Oct.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Stockbridge.  Mass.,
29  May,  1891.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Harvard
law-school  in  1847.  During  the  same  year  he  was
appointed  on  the  U.  S.  geological  survey  of  the
Lake  Superior  region,  under  Josiah  D.  Whitney


and  Charles  T.  Jackson.  Subsequently  he  went
to  Europe  and  studied  chemistry  in  Berlin,  at  Got-
tingen,  where  in  1852  he  received  the  degree  of
doctor  of  philosophy,  and  at  the  Sorbonne  in  Paris.
Soon  after  his  return  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
chemistry  in  Union  college,  and  held  it  until  1857.
when  he  was  elected  to  a  similar  professorship  in
Columbia,  remaining  there  till  1877.  His  original
investigation  began  in  Gottingen  with  researches
on  the  combination  of  alcohol  radicles  with  sele-
nium, in  which  field  he  was  one  of  the  earliest
workers.  Later  he  examined  the  compounds  of
glucinum,  and  published  an  account  of  his  inves-
tigations in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science."
He'  also  made  numerous  analyses  of  minerals  and
meteorites.  Of  the  former,  many  were  contributed
to  Dana's  "  Mineralogy."  Prof.  Joy  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  juries  of  the  International  world's  fairs  of
London,  Paris,  Vienna,  and  Philadelphia,  and  also
a  member  of  scientific  societies.  In  1866  he  was
elected  president  of  the  Lyceum  of  natural  history
(now  New  York  academy  of  sciences).  He  was
also  president  of  the  American  photographic  so-
ciety, chairman  of  the  Polytechnic  association  of
the  American  institute,  and  foreign  secretary  of
the  American  geographical  society.  Prof.  Joy
was  a  large  contributor  of  popular  articles  on  sci-
entific subjects  to  various  journals,  and  had  held
the  editorship  of  the  "Scientific.  American,"  and
later  of  the  "Journal  of  Applied  Chemistry,"  also
of  the  chemical  articles  in  the  "  American  Cyclo-
paedia." Failing  health,  the  result  of  a  sunstroke,
that  he  received  at  the  World's  fair  in  Philadel-
phia during  1876,  compelled  his  retirement,  and
for  several  years  he  resided  in  Germany.

JOY,  James  F„  railroad-constructor,  b.  in  Dur-
ham, N.  H.,  in  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1833,  removed  to  Detroit,  Mich.,  in  1836,
and  was  a  successful  lawyer.  He  organized  the
Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy  railroad  about
1850,  and  became  president  of  the  Michigan  cen-
tral and  its  connections  in  1866.  He  organized
the  company  that  constructed  the  St.  Mary's  falls
ship-canal,  and  has  been  a  railroad  constructor
and  manager  in  the  western  states.

JOY,  Sylvanus,  Canadian  manufacturer,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1833.  He  was  educated  at
Union  college,  the  University  of  New  York,  and
Queen's  college,  Kingston,  Canada,  where  he  was
graduated  in  medicine  in  1856.  He  afterward
practised  in  Tilsonburg,  Ontario,  and  has  been  for
twenty-five  years  coroner  of  the  county  of  Oxford.
In  1880  he  organized  a  company  for  the  manufac-
ture of  sugar  from  sorghum,  which  did  not  prove
remunerative;  but  he  was  more  successful  as  a
producer  of  wine  from  Canadian  grapes,  and  was
awarded  a  diploma  at  the  World's  fair  at  Paris.
Dr.  Joy  is  also  one  of  the  largest  fruit-growers  in
the  Dominion. — His  daughter,  Ida,  artist,  b.  in
Tilsonburg,  Ontario,  in  November,  1858,  after
studying  art  in  this  country  was  sent  to  Europe,
where  she  remained  for  eight  years.  She  received
medals  for  paintings  that  were  exhibited  at  the
salon  exhibitions  in  Paris,  and  the  Royal  Albert
exhibition  in  London.

JOYCE,  Charles  Herbert,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wher-
well,  Hants,  England,  30  Jan.,  1830.  He  emi-
grated with  his  parents  to  the  United  States  in
1836,  and  settled  in  Washington  county,  Vt.  He
afterward  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1852,  and  began  practice  at  Northfield.  He  was
state  librarian  in  1855-'6,  and  county  attorney  in
1856-'7.  Mr.  Joyce  served  in  the  ISational  army
durjng  the  civil  war  as  major  and  lieutenant-colo-
nel, and  after  resuming  practice  in  Rutland,  Vt^,


478


JOYCE


JUAREZ


was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature  in  1869-'71,
and  its  speaker  in  1870-'l.  He  was  afterward
elected  to  congress  from  Vermont  as  a  Republican,
and  served  from  1875  till  1888.

JOYCE,  Robert  Dwyer,  poet,  b.  in  County  Lim-
erick, Ireland,  in  September,  1886;  d.  in  Dublin,
28  Oct.,  1883.  He  received  his  education  in  his  na-
tive county  and  at  Dublin,  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  Queen's  university  in  that  city,  and  became
professor  of  English  literature  in  the  preparatory
college  of  the  Roman  Catholic  university  there.
He  also  practised  his  profession  with  success  in
Dublin,  but  in  1866  came  to  this  country  with  his
wife  and  family,  and  resided  in  Boston  till  his
death.  After  coming  to  the  United  States  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  Irish  academy.  He
wrote  many  ballads,  songs,  and  sketches  for  the
"  Pilot "  and  other  Irish  journals,  and  published  a
collection  of  them  with  the  title  "  Ballads,  Ro-
mances, and  Songs  "  (Boston,  1872).  His  best  work
is  "  Deirdre,"  an  epic  poem  that  appeared  anony-
mously as  one  of  the  "  No  Name  "  series  (1876).  He
also  published  "  Legends  of  the  Wars  in  Ireland  "
(1868) ;  "  Fireside  Stories  of  Ireland  "  (1871) ;  "  Bla-
nid,"  a  poem  (1879) ;  and  "  The  Squire  of  Castle-
ton,"  an  historical  novel.

JOYNES,  Levin  Smith,  physician,  b.  in  Acco-
mac  county,  Va.,  13  May,  1819 ;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  18  Jan.,  1881.  His  father,  William  T.  Joynes,
was  a  judge  of  the  Virginia  court  of  appeals.  He
was  graduated  at  Washington  college,  Pa.,  in  1835,
and  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in
1839.  He  afterward  studied  medicine  in  Paris,
Dublin,  and  elsewhere,  in  1843  began  practice  in
Accomac,  and  in  1844  removed  to  Baltimore,  Md.
He  became  professor  of  physiology  and  medical
jurisprudence  in  Franklin  medical  college,  Phila-
delphia, in  1846,  returned  to  Accomac  in  1849,  and
in  1855  was  appointed  professor  of  the  institutes  of
medicine  and  medical  jurisprudence  in  the  medi-
cal college  of  Virginia  at  Richmond,  becoming
dean  of  the  faculty  in  1857,  and  holding  both
places  until  his  resignation  in  1871,  when  he  was
made  emeritus  professor.  He  was  assistant  sur-
geon in  the  forces  of  Virginia  from  April  till  June,
1861.  In  1872  he  was  appointed  permanent  secre-
tary of  the  state  board  of  health,  and  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  International  medical  congress  of
1876.  He  contributed  to  various  medical  jour-
nals.— His  brother,  Edward  Southey,  educator,
b.  in  Accomac  county,  Va.,  2  March,  1834,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1853,
and  immediately  appointed  assistant  professor  of
ancient  languages  under  Dr.  Gessner  Harrison.
He  went  to  Berlin  for  study  in  1856,  and  returned
in  1858,  as  professor  of  Greek  in  William  and
Mary  college.  He  was  in  the  Confederate  civil
service  during  the  late  war,  and  in  1866  became

f)rofessor  of  modern  languages  in  Washington  col-
ege,  Lexington,  Va.  By  his  request,  the  subject
of  English  was  attached,  and  for  the  first  time  in
Virginia  made  a  prominent  college  study.  His
courses  of  lectures  have  since  become  widely  known,
and  the  example  has  been  followed  (of  English
study)  in  other  colleges.  In  1875  he  removed  to
Vanderbilt  university,  and  bore  a  leading  part  in
its  organization.  In  1878  he  was  called  to  a  pro-
fessorship in  the  University  of  Tennessee,  Knox-
ville,  and  in  1883  he  accepted  the  chair  of  modern
languages  in  South  Carolina  college,  Columbia,
S.  C.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  he  has  been  especially
useful  in  the  work  of  organization.  He  is  the  edi-
tor of  the  Joynes-Otto  series  of  text  -  books,  in
French  and  German  (New  York,  1870-'5),  and  also
of  classic  French  plays  that  have  been  used  in  both


Harvard  and  Yale  (2  vols.,  1870-'82).  Prof.  Joynes
has  written  nothing  on  English,  although  his*  lec-
tures have  received  much  attention.  He  has  taken
an  active  part  in  public-school  work  in  both  Vir-
ginia and  Tennessee,  and  also  in  the  National  edu-
cational association,  before  which  he  has  delivered
addresses  on  "  The  Study  of  the  Classics  "  (1873) ;
and  '•  Modern  Languages  in  Higher  Education "
(1876).  He  has  in  press  (1887)  the  "  Joynes-Meiss-
ner  German  Grammar  "  (Boston).

JUAN  Y  SANTACILIA,  Jorge  (hwan -e-san-
tah-theel'-yah),  Spanish  mariner,  b.  in  Novelda.  near
Alicante,  5  Jan.,  1713 ;  d.  in  Madrid,  21  June,  1773.
At  the  age  of  twelve  he  entered  the  order  of  Malta,
and  after  some  campaigns  in  Africa  was  admitted
to  the  royal  marine  guards,  studying  mathematics
and  astronomy  in  the  Schools  of  his  corps  at  Car-
thagena.  He  was  intrusted,  at  the  age  of  twenty-
two,  with  the  command  of  a  corvette,  in  which  he
made  several  voyages  to  America.  In  1735  he  ac-
companied Ulloa,  La  Condamine,  and  others  in
their  journey  to  Peru  to  execute  the  project  of
measuring  an  arc  of  the  meridian  at  the  equator,
and  it  was  entirely  owing  to  him  that  the  height
of  mountains  was  measured  successfully  by  means
of  the  barometer.  On  his  return  to  Spain  he  de-
voted himself  to  the  reorganization  of  the  Spanish
navy.  In  addition  to  several  works  on  navigation,
he  wrote  "  Observaciones  sobre  astronomia  y  fisica,
hechas  en  el  Reino  del  Peru  por  Don  Jorge  Juan  y
Don  Antonio  Ulloa"  (Madrid,  1748;  French  trans-
lation, Amsterdam  and  Paris,  2  vols.,  1752);  "Di-
sertacion  historica  sobre  el  meridiano  de  demarca-
tion entre  los  dominios  de  Espana  y  Portugal"
(1749;  French  translation,  Paris,  1776);  and"Es-
tado  de  la  astronomia  en  Europa  "  (1773).

JUAREZ,  Benito  Pablo  (wah'-reth),  president
of  Mexico,  b.  in  San  Pablo  Guelatao,  Oajaca,  21
March,  1806 ;  d.  in  Mexico,  18  July,  1872.  His  par-
ents, of  pure  Indian  race,  died  when  he  was  scarcely
four  years  old,  and,
although  they  had
left  a  modest  inherit-
ance, the  boy  grew
up  in  the  house  of  an
uncle  without  learn-
ing to  read  and  write
or  to  speak  Spanish
correctly.  But  at  the
age  of  twelve  a  de-
sire for  knowledge
seized  him,  and  he
went  to  Oajaca,where
Antonio  Salanueva,
a  former  Franciscan
monk,  took  him  un-
der his  protection
and  taught  him  the
elementary  branch-
es, placing  him  in
1821  in  the  seminary
,of  that  city,  where  he  made  rapid  progress  and  was
graduated  in  1827.  He  now  abandoned  theology
for  the  studv  of  law  at  the  new  college,  where  from
1829  till  1831  he  held  the  chair  of  experimental
physics,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1834.  He
had  been  elected  a  member  of  the  board  of  aldermen
in  1831,  and  in  1833  was  deputy  to  the  state  assem-
bly. He  was  imprisoned  for  a  short  time  in  1836,  in
consequence  of  an  abortive  rebellion  against  the
conservative  government,  appointed  judge  of  the
civil  court  in  1842,  and  in  1845  secretary  to  the  gov-
ernor, Gen.  Leon,  but  soon  resigned  and  was  elected
prosecutor  of  the  superior  court,  which  place  he
lost  in  the  same  year  by  the  revolution  of  Paredes.


&**^  y*^*^c*f


JUAREZ

After  the  counter-revolution  of  Gen.  Salas  in  1846,
the  state  of  Oajaca  resumed  its  sovereignty,  and  a
junta  of  the  principal  citizens  put  the  executive
power  into  the  hands  of  a  triumvirate,  composed
of  Jose  Maria  Arteaga,  Fernandez  del  Campo,  and
Juarez,  which  lasted  till  the  restoration  of  the
federal  constitution  of  1824.  Arteaga  was  chosen
governor,  and  Juarez  sent  as  delegate  to  the  con-
stituent congress,  where  he  supported  with  vigor
the  liberal  policy  of  the  acting  president,  Gomez-
Farias,  and  helped  to  negotiate  a  loan  on  church
property  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  war  against
the  United  States.  When  Santa- Anna  dissolved
the  congress  at  the  end  of  the  year,  Juarez  re-
turned to  Oajaca,  and,  as  Arteaga  had  resigned,  he
was  elected  in  1847  constitutional  governor.

During  the  war  with  the  United  States  he  took
energetic  measures  for  the  national  defence,  and
after  the  destruction  of  the  Oajaca  division  under
Gen.  Leon  at  Molino  del  Rey,  raised  new  forces,
and  in  a  few  days  forwarded  three  battalions  and
a  field-battery  to  the  seat  of  war.  After  the  occu-
pation of  Mexico  by  the  U.  S.  forces  Santa-Anna
appeared  with  an  escort  at  Tehuacan,  intending  to
go  to  Oajaca :  but  Juarez,  fearing  his  schemes,  sent
orders  to  Teotitlan  to  prevent  his  passage,  and
after  a  short  time  Santa- Anna  abandoned  the  presi-
dency. In  1849  Juarez  was  re-elected  governor
for  three  years,  and  soon  Oajaca  became  under  his
administration  the  model  state  of  the  federation.
He  introduced  many  reforms  and  managed  the
finances  so  honestly  and  skilfully  that  he  antici-
pated all  the  contributions  to  the  national  govern-
ment, liquidated  the  state  debt  of  eighteen  years'
standing,  and  on  retiring  from  office  in  August,

1852,  l«ft  in  the  treasury  a  casli  surplus  of  $50,000.
He  was  then  elected  director  of  the  Institute  for
science  and  arts,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law :
but  when,  in  consequence  of  the  revolution  of
Jalisco,  Santa-Anna  returned  to  power  in  April,

1853,  one  of  his  first  acts  was  to  revenge  himself
on  Juarez  by  ordering  his  arrest,  imprisonment  in
the  castle  of  Ulua,  and  final  expatriation.

Juarez  remained  for  two  years  in  Xew  Orleans,
suffering  great  privations ;  but  when  he  learned  of
the  favorable  progress  of  the  revolution  of  Ayutla
against  Santa-Anna,  he  joined  Gen.  Alvarez,  the
commander  of  the  revolutionary  forces  in  Aca-
pulco,  in  July,  1855,  and  followed  him  to  the  capi-
tal. When  Alvarez  was  elected  president  on  4
Oct.,  he  appointed  Juarez  minister  of  justice  and
religion,  and  the  latter  proposed  and  procured  the
passage  of  a  bill  for  the  abolition  of  the  special
clerical  and  military  courts,  under  which  the
clergy  and  the  army  had  practically  enjoyed  im-
munity from  the  laws  for  a  long  time.  When
Comonfort  succeeded  Alvarez  as  president,  11  Dec,
1855,  fearing  Juarez's  influence,  he  appointed  him
governor  of  Oajaca,  in  order  to  remove  him  from
the  cabinet.  Here  Juarez  improved  education  and
finances,  sanctioned  the  civil  and  criminal  code,
and  in  September,  1857,  was  elected  by  an  over-
whelming majority  constitutional  governor.  But
at  the  same  time  he  had  been  chosen  at  the  general
elections  president  of  the  supreme  court  of  justice,
which,  according  to  the  new  constitution,  is  equiva-
lent to  the  vice-presidency  of  the  nation.  In  Oc-
tober, Comonfort  was  forced  by  the  voice  of  the
Liberal  press  to  appoint  Juarez  secretary  of  the  in-
terior, and  his  presence  in  the  cabinet  was  almost
the  only  support  of  the  president,  whose  conservative
inclinations  had  already  begun  to  cause  suspicion.
When  the  latter  finally  joined  the  church  party,
and  the  revolt  of  Tacubaya  began  on  17  Dec.,
Juarez,  who  tried  to  preserve  order,  was  imprisoned


JUAREZ


479


in  the  government  palace.  But  the  revolutionists
did  not  recognize  Comonfort's  authority,  and  the
latter  tried  too  late  to  obtain  the  support  of  the
Liberals  by  setting  Juarez  free  on  11  Jan.,  1858.
After  the  occupation  of  Mexico  by  Miramon  and
Osollo,  Comonfort  retired  to  Vera  Cruz  and  Juarez
to  Guanajuato,  whence  he  issued  a  manifesto  on
19  Jan.,  assuming  the  executive  in  virtue  of  his
office  as  chief  justice,  and  formed  a  cabinet,  his
government  being  recognized  by  the  states.  Un-
able to  oppose  the  reactionary  forces,  he  had  to
transfer  the  seat  of  government  first  to  Guada-
lajara, then  to  Colima,  and  finally,  by  way  of  Pana-
ma and  New  Orleans,  to  Vera  Cruz,  where  he
arrived,  4  May,  1858.  Here,  protected  by  the  troops
under  the  governor,  Gutierrez  Zamora,  he  installed
his  government,  which  was  recognized  by  the
United  States  in  April,  1859,  and  on  12  and  13
July  of  that  year  he  issued  laws  abolishing  relig-
ious orders  and  confiscating  all  church  property
for  the  benefit  of  the  nation.

After  the  final  defeat  of  Gen.  Miramon,  Juarez
entered  the  capital  on  11  Jan.,  1861,  and  in  the
general  elections  of  March  was  chosen  constitu-
tional president  over  Miguel  Lerdo  de  Tejada.  In
consequence  of  the  law  that  was  sanctioned  by
congress,  17  July,  1861,  ordering  the  suspension  for
two  years  of  payments  on  account  of  the  foreign
debt  and  of  the  diplomatic  conventions,  the  alli-
ance of  intervention  was  signed  in  London  on  31
Oct.  between  England,  France,  and  Spain,  and  on
8  Dec.  the  allied  forces  reached  Vera  Cruz.  But
Juarez  sent  Manuel  Doblado  to  treat  with  the
foreign  plenipotentiaries  in  La  Soledad,  and  by  his
promise  to  protect  the  interests  of  foreign  debtors
obtained  the  rupture  of  the  tripartite  convention
at  Orizaba.  9  April,  1862,  and  the  British  and
Spanish  forces  evacuated  the  country,  while  France,
under  the  pretext  of  protecting  French  residents,
declared  war  against  Juarez  on  16  April.  After
the  capture  of  Puebla  by  Gen.  Forey,  17  May,
1863,  the  Republican  government  dissolved  con-
gress, and  evacuated  the  capital  on  31  May,  and
Juarez,  on  10  June,  established  his  government  in
San  Luis  Potosi.  He  was  obliged  to  retire  before
the  advancing  French  troops  on  22  Dec.  to  Saltillo;
but  being  informed  that  the  governor  of  Coahuila
and  Leon,  Santiago  Vidaurri,  was  treating  with
the  French,  Juarez  went  to  Monterey.  He  was  not
recognized  by  Vidaurri,  who  offered  armed  resist-
ance ;  but,  not  being  sustained  by  the  citizens  of
those  states,  the  latter  had  to  fly  to  Mexico,  and
Juarez  established  his  government  in  Monterey.
On  15  Aug.  he  had  to  retreat  from  that  city  before
the  imperialist  forces  under  Gen.  Quiroga.  and
after  some  detentions  at  Viezca,  Mapimi,  and  Na-
zas,  to  organize  the  rest  of  the  Republican  forces
from  the  states  of  Zacatecas,  Durango,  and  Chi-
huahua, he  arrived  in  the  latter  city  on  12  Oct.
He  had  at  last  to  withdraw  from  Chihuahua,  5
Aug..  1865,  and  on  the  15th  of  that  month,  accom-
panied by  twenty-two  of  his  most  trusted  friends,
who  were  afterward  called  in  Mexico  the  "  immacu-
lates,"  he  established  his  government  on  the  U.  S.
frontier  in  Paso  del  Xorte.

Meanwhile,  Juarez's  term  of  office  having  ex-
pired on  30  Nov.,  Gen.  Gonzalez  Ortega,  as  nominal
president  of  the  supreme  court,  which  place  he
had  practically  abandoned  long  before,  claimed
the  executive  power;  but  Juarez,  foreseeing  the
disastrous  effects  of  a  change  of  government  under
such  circumstances,  declared  his  term  of  office  ex-
tended until  constitutional  elections  in  time  of
peace  could  take  place,  and  was  sustained  by  the
few  Republican  authorities  that  remained  in  the


480


JUAREZ


JUAREZ


northern  states.  To  avoid  the  appearance  of  aban-
doning the  national  soil,  which,  according  to  the
constitution,  would  cause  his  forfeiture  of  the
presidency,  he  frequently  refused  friendly  invita-
tions from  the  commander  of  the  U.  S.  troops  at
Port  Bliss  to  visit  hinu  On  20  Nov.,  1865,  when
Chihuahua  had  been  evacuated  by  the  French
troops,  Juarez  transferred  his  government  to  that
city,  but  had  to  retreat  before  the  returning  ene-
my, on  9  Dec,  to  Paso  del  Norte,  arriving  on  18
Dec.  Early  in  June,  1866,  the  Republican  arms
obtained  the  first  decided  success.  Chihuahua  was
finally  evacuated  by  the  Imperialists,  and  on  the
17th  Juarez  established  his  government  again  in
that  city.  Henceforth  the  tide  of  war  turned  in
favor  of  the  Republican  arms,  the  northeastern
states  were  gradually  wrested  from  the  Imperial-
ists, and  as  the  victorious  army  of  Escobedo  ad-
vanced southward.  Juarez  transferred  his  govern-
ment, on  26  Dec,  1866,  to  Durango,  and  on  22  Jan.,
1867,  toZacatecas,  where,  on  27  Jan.,  he  barely  es-
caped falling  into  the  hands  of  Miramon's  forces,
and  was  obliged  to  fly  to  Sombrerete.  After
Miramon's  defeat  at  San  Jacinto,  Juarez  finally
established  himself  in  San  Luis  Potosi  early  in
February,  while  Maximilian's  forces  began  to  con-
centrate at  Queretaro.  After  the  fall  of  Maximilian
and  the  capture  of  Mexico  by  Diaz  on  21  June,
Juarez  entered  the  capital  again  on  5  July,  1867.
After  the  execution  of  Vidaurri  without  trial,
milder  counsels  prevailed,  and  the  Imperialist
chiefs  and  political  followers,  who  had  been  im-
prisoned to  the  number  of  over  200,  were  regularly
judged  by  the  courts,  and  only  nineteen  executed,
among  them  Gen.  O'Horan  and  Gen.  Severo  Cas-
tillo. On  14  Aug.,  Juarez  called  for  general
elections.  Congress  met  in  December,  and  on  25
Dec.  proclaimed  Juarez  elected  constitutional  presi-
dent over  Porfirio  Diaz.  His  term  of  office  was
disturbed  by  the  constant  revolutionary  attempts
of  Diaz,  Garcia  de  la  Cadena,  Negrete,  and  others.
Even  Santa-Anna  invaded  the  republic,  and  was
caught  and  sentenced,  but  escaped  execution.

When  the  electoral  campaign  of  1871  approached,
Juai'ez  was  advised  by  his  best  friends  to  decline
a  re-election:  but,  either  owing  to  his  ambition
or  because  he  thought  his  presence  in  the  govern-
ment necessary  for  the  good  of  the  nation  in  an
abnormal  period,  he  accepted  the  candidacy  against
Sebastian  Lerdo  de  Tejada  and  Porfirio  Diaz.
Congress  met  on  16  Sept.,  1871,  and  on  12  Oct.,
Juarez  was  declared  re-elected,  as  the  votes  of  the
opposition  were  divided  between  Lerdo  and  Diaz.
This  re-election,  although  at  that  time  it  was  per-
mitted by  the  constitution,  was  generally  unpopu-
lar, and  in  consequence  there  were  numerous  revo-
lutionary attempts.  Diaz  proclaimed  the  plan  de
la  Noria,  and  numerous  officers  pronounced  against
the  government,  including  Trevino  in  Monterey,
Garcia  de  la  Cadena  in  Aguas  Calientes,  Donato
Guerra  in  Zacatecas,  and  Martinez  in  Coahuila.
With  indomitable  energy  Juarez  confronted  every
new  attempt  with  new  military  forces,  notwith-
standing the  complete  exhaustion  of  the  treasury,
the  military  alone  being  paid  ;  and  even  repeated
reverses  could  not  discourage  him  when,  after  a
short  illness,  he  died  near  midnight  of  18  July  of
heart-disease,  or,  as  some  have  hinted,  of  poison.

This  extraordinary  man  has  been  judged  differ-
ently by  admirers  and  enemies.  Although  only  of
medium  talent  and  defective  education,  he  supplied
these  defects  by  perception  and  judgment,  and  his
distinct  characteristics  were  a  will  of  iron  and  the
cold  impassibility  of  his  native  Indian  race  in  the
presence  of danger. He  has been  accused  of


cruelty  for  not  commuting  the  sentence  of  death
of  Maximilian  and  his  principal  followers ;  but  it
must  be  remembered  that,  according  to  Juarez's
view,  a  terrifying  example  was  needed  to  discourage
forever  future  attempts  against  the  national  in-
tegrity, and  after  the  first  and  perhaps  necesaart
executions,  only  those  persons  that  were  guilty  of
common  crime,  or  officers  deserting  active  service,
were  condemned  to  death.  He  was  a  constant
enemy  of  the  retrograde  church  party  and  heartily


hated  by  its  members,  and  while  he  could  pardon
his  political  opponents,  he  followed  with  relentless
hate  his  personal  enemies,  and  even  those  political
followers  who  by  chance  had  offended  him.  His
supreme  and  redeeming  quality  was  his  thorough
honesty,  and  perhaps  in  this  character  alone  he
deserves  the  name  of  the  Mexican  Washington,
which  some  have  bestowed  on  him  in  his  country.
His  funeral  took  place  on  22  July,  1872.  The  body,
after  lying  in  state  at  the  government  palace  for
two  days,  was  carried  in  procession  to  the  cemetery
of  San  Fernando,  where  a  group  in  white  Carrara
marble  has  been  erected,  of  which  the  accompany-
ing picture  is  an  illustration.  It  is  the  work  of  the
brothers  Isla  of  the  city  of  Mexico.

JUAREZ,  Jos§  (wah'-reth),  Mexican  painter,
lived  in  the  17th  century.  The  information  re-
garding his  birth  and  death  is  very  uncertain,  nor
is  it  known  whether  he  was  a  relative  of  Luis,  the
elder  painter  of  that  name.  Two  of  his  paintings
are  signed  in  1642  and  1698  respectively.  His
works  are  noted  for  the  elegant  position  of  the
figures,  vigorous  tone,  and  delicacy  of  execution.
The  two  most  noteworthy  are  in  the  academy  of
San  Carlos,  and  are  "  The  Adoration  of  the  Three
Magi "  and  "  The  Martyrdom  of  St.  Justo  and  St.
Pastor."  There  is  also  at  the  above-mentioned
academy  another  of  his  paintings,  "  Heavenly  Vis-
ion of  St.  Francis,"  which,  although  not  equal  to
the  others,  is  an  excellent  work. — His  nephews,
Juan  and  Nicolas  Rodriguez,  who  lived  toward
the  end  of  the  17th  and  the  beginning  of  the  18th
century,  were  painters,  but  never  reached  the  fame
of  either  their  uncle  or  Luis  Juarez.  Nicolas  Rod-
riguez, a  priest  of  some  means,  never  exercised  his
art  as  a  profession.  His  best  painting,  marked
1690,  is  a  "  Saint  Gertrude  "  kneeling  before  an
altar,  offering  her  heart  to  God,  and  has  rich  col-
oring worthy  of  the  Venetian  school.

JUAREZ,  or  XUAREZ,  Juan  (wah-reth),
Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Spain ;  d.  probably  on
the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  river  late  in  1528.  He
entered  the  reformed  order  of  Franciscans,  and
when  Cortes  applied  for  missionaries  to  undertake
the  conversion  of  Mexico,  was  one  of  those  who
sailed  from  Sanlucar,  15  Jan.,  1524.  He  landed  at
Vera  Cruz  on  13  May,  and  was  appointed  superior
of  the  mission  at  Huexotzingo.  Here  the  mission-
aries assembled  the  Indian  children  for  instruc-


JUAREZ


JUCHERAU


481


tion,  and  in  a  short  time  the  natives  allowed  the
temple  to  be  destroyed,  in  which  they  were  accus-
tomed to  offer  human  sacrifices.  In  1526  Father
Juarez  returned  to  Spain,  accompanied  by  some  of
his  Indian  pnpils,  and  laid  a  report  of  the  state  of
his  mission  before  his  superiors.  It  is  said  that  he
returned  to  Mexico  the  same  year,  bringing  with
him  six  other  Franciscans ;  but,  if  so,  it  was  for  a
brief  interval,  as  he  was  again  in  Spain  in  1527.
He  accompanied  the  expedition  of  Panfilo  de  Nar-
vaez  to  Florida  with  five  Franciscans,  of  whom  he
was  appointed  commissarv.  It  is  said  by  some
Spanish  authorities  that  he  was  also  nominated
bishop  of  Florida,  that  his  diocese  was  to  extend
from  the  Atlantic  to  Rio  de  las  Palmas  in  Mexico.
This  assertion,  if  true,  would  make  him  the  first
bishop  that  was  appointed  to  any  see  within  the
present  territory  of  the  United  States.  The  fleet
of  Narvaez,  while  endeavoring  to  enter  the  harbor
of  Havana,  was  driven  on  the  coast  of  Florida.
The  Spaniards  landed  near  Appalachee  bay  and  be-
gan a  long  and  disastrous  march  along  the  north-
ern coast  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Father  Juarez
and  his  companions  embarked  in  one  of  the  five
boats  that  Narvaez  built,  in  the  hope  of  reaching
some  Spanish  settlement.  The  boat  was  over-
turned, probably  near  Mobile,  and  the  missionaries
had  a  narrow  escape.  There  is  no  further  record
of  Father  Juarez,  and  it  is  supposed  that  he  per-
ished from  hunger  or  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians.

JUAREZ,  Lais,  Mexican  painter,  b.  late  in  the
16th  century;  d.  about  1650.  He  was  a  contempo-
rary of  Echave  (q.  v.),  belonged  to  the  same  school,
and,  although  his  inferior  in  correctness  of  design,
excels  in  the  softness  of  his  brush  as  well  as  in
color.  One  of  his  best  pictures  is  an  altar-piece  in
the  church  of  Jesus  Maria,  in  Mexico,  representing
biblical  scenes,  which  was  finished  in  1621,  and
cost  $9,000,  a  large  amount  at  that  time.  The
greater  part  of  his  paintings  that  are  preserved  are
in  the  academy  of  San  Carlos,  notably  the  "  Appa-
rition of  the  Infant  Jesus  to  Saint  Antonio,"  "  Ap-
parition of  the  Virgin  to  St.  Ildefonso,"  "  Betrothal
of  Saint  Barbara,  "Ascension  of  the  Saviour,"
and  "  Praver  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane."

JUAREZ-CELMAN,  Miguel  (wah'-reth-thel-
mahn),  president  of  the  Argentine  Republic,  b.  in
Cordova,  29  Sept.,  1844.  He  studied  law  in  the
university  of  his  native  city,  and  was  graduated  in
1870  as  doctor  in  jurisprudence.  He  entered  po-
litical life  during  the  agitation  of  the  religious
question,  and  by  his  eloquence  aided  in  the  triumph
of  the  Liberal  party.  He  was  elected  to  the  pro-
vincial assembly,  and  later  to  the  senate  of  the
province,  and  in  1878  became  minister  of  the  inte-


rior for  his  province.  In  1880  he  was  chosen  gov-
ernor of  the  province,  and  surrounded  himself
with  the  ablest  councillors,  without  regard  to  par-
ty. He  introduced  gas  and  water  in  the  city  of
Cordova,  and  gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  public

VOL.  III. — 31


schools.  In  1884  he  was  elected  to  the  national
senate  for  Cordova,  and  took  an  active  part  in  favor
of  the  educational  law,  which  was  then  under  dis-
cussion. In  1886  his  name  was  presented  as  a  can-
didate for  the  presidency  by  independent  branches
of  the  different  political  parties.  The  canvass  was
one  of  the  most  hotly  contested  that  had  taken
place  in  the  republic,  and  on  11  April,  Juarez-Cel-
man  was  declared  elected.  On  12  Oct.,  1886,  he
took  the  oath  of  office  and  assumed  the  executive.
His  inaugural  message  made  a  favorable  impres-
sion, and  thus  far  his  administration  has  been  pro-
gressive and  favorable  to  the  general  welfare  of  the
country,  to  national  education,  and  to  emigration,
which  of  late  years  has  given  a  great  impulse  to
the  agriculture  of  the  country.  The  accompany-
ing illustration  represents  the  new  government
palace  at  La  Plata,  finished  during  the  adminis-
tration of  Juarez-Celman.

JUARREZ,  Jose"  Domingo  (war-reth'),  Para-
guayan author,  b.  in  San  Jose  de  los  Arroyas  in
180i  ;  d.  in  Caraguaty  in  1837.  He  began  life  as  a
teacher,  and  soon  acquired  the  reputation  of  a  suc-
cessful writer.  He  went  to  Asuncion  in  1824,  and
was  presented  to  the  dictator  Francia,  who  took
an  interest  in  him  and  gave  him  an  appointment
in  the  state  department  to  enable  him  to  pursue
his  historical  studies.  But  later  Francia  became
offended  by  Juarrez's  "  Historia  de  la  Independen-
cia  del  Paraguay "  (2  vols.,  Asuncion,  1834),  in
which  he  saw  a  criticism  of  his  government,  and
he  sent  the  author  to  the  prison  of  Oliva.  Juarrez
was  released  in  the  following  year  and  exiled  to
Caraguaty,  where  he  died.  His  other  works  in-
clude "  Historia  de  peregrinaciones  "  (1825) ;  "  Noti-
cias  para  a  historia  e  geographia  das  nacoes  ultra-
marinas  "  (2  vols.,  1827) ;  "  Disputatio  Esquimauy
j  gente  America "  (1827) ;  "  Memorias  sobre  an-
tigiiedades  Uruguayas  y  Paraguayas  "  (1'831) :  and
"  Viagero  Universal,"  a  cyclopaedia  of  the  explora-
tions of  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  in  South
America  below  the  river  Plate  (1832).

JUARROS,  Domingo  (war'-ross),  Central
American  historian,  b.  in  the  city  of  Guatemala  in
1752 ;  d.  there  in  1820.  He  had  access  to  ecclesi-
astical and  government  records,  and,  as  a  result  of
his  researches,  published  "  Historia  de  la  ciudad  de
Guatemala  "  (2  vols..  Guatemala,  1808-'18 ;  abridged
English  translation.  London,  1823 ;  new  ed.,  Guate-
mala, 1857).  This  is  in  reality  a  history  of  Central
America.  The  first  volume  treats  of  geography,
settlements,  church  topics,  and  the  history  of
Guatemala  city ;  the  second  of  the  ancient  records
of  the  country,  its  conquest  and  settlement.

JUCHERAU,  Nicholas  (zhoo'-she'-ro'),  Sieur  de
St.  Denis,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Ferte  Vidame,
France,  in  1626;  d.  in  Baupre,  Canada,  in  1692.
He  came  with  his  father,  John  Jucherau,  to  Cana-
da, about  1640,  and  was  afterward  appointed  mem-
ber of  the  superior  council  of  Quebec.  With  the
view  of  protecting  the  colonists  from  the  incur-
sions of  the  Iroquois,  he  formed  his  tenantry  into
a  body  of  militia,  and  at  their  head  followed  De
Courcelles  in  his  expedition  against  the  Agniers  in
1665.  His  conduct  on  this  occasion  was  so  ad-
mirable that  he  was  made  perpetual  commander  of
this  force.  He  commanded  the  militia  at  the  bat-
tles at  Beaufort  against  the  English  under  Sir
William  Phipps  on  18,  20.  and  21  Oct.,  1690,  and
was  severely  wounded.  The  victory  was  consid-
ered due  to  Jucherau's  bravery.  He  was  ennobled
by  Louis  XIV.  for  his  conduct  on  this  occasion. —
His  son,  Lonis  (called  by  some  writers  Barbe),
Sieur  de  St.  Denis,  soldier,  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,
18  Sept.,  1676 ;  d.  probably  in  Louisiana  after  1731,


482


JUDAH


JUDD


acquired  renown  in  Louisiana  as  a  skilful  negotia-
tor and  able  soldier.  His  influence  with  the  Indi-
ans and  knowledge  of  their  language  induced  Iber-
ville (q.  v.)  to  place  him  in  command  of  the  French
fort  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  in  1700.  La
Motte  Cadillac  sent  him  on  a  mission  to  the  vice-
roy of  Mexico,  in  1714,  to  make  a  treaty  of  com-
merce. After  travelling  through  a  great  extent  of
country  and  meeting  several  Spanish  governors
and  officers,  by  whom  he  was  well  received,  he
reached  the  city  of  Mexico,  25  June,  1715.  He  was
at  first  imprisoned  by  the  viceroy,  but,  on  the  lat-
ter's  learning  that  he  was  a  relative  of  Iberville,
he  was  set  at  liberty  and  treated  with  courtesy.  He
afterward  went  on  a  mission  to  the  Assinais  Indi-
ans of  Texas,  who  were  in  revolt,  persuaded  them
to  submit  to  the  Spaniards,  and  returned  to  Mexi-
co accompanied  by  twenty- five  of  their  chiefs.  He
was  not  successful,  however,  in  achieving  the  object
of  his  embassy,  returning  to  Mobile,  25  Aug.,  1716.
During  the  attack  of  the  Spaniards  on  the  French
possessions  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  1719,  he
assembled  the  Biloxi  and  other  Indian  tribes,
and,  at  their  head,  contributed  to  the  repulse  of
the  Spaniards  from  Dauphin  island.  He  was  re-
warded with  the  cross  of  St.  Louis  and  made  gov-
ernor of  Fort  Natchitoches  in  1720.  The  fort  was
besieged  in  1731  by  the  Natchez.  He  had  only  a
few  soldiers,  but,  having  received  a  re-enforcement
of  Assinais,  he  attacked  the  enemy  and  defeated
them,  destroying  nearly  all  their  leaders.

JUDAH,  Henry  Moses,  soldier,  b.  in  Snow
Hill,  Md.,  12  June,  1821 ;  d.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,
14  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U".  S.
military  academy  in  July,  1843,  and,  entering  the
8th  infantry,  served  in  the  Mexican  war.  He  com-
manded his  company  at  the  storming  of  Monterey,
and  for  bravery  at  Molino  del  Rey,  and  at  the  cap-
ture of  the  city  of  Mexico,  was  brevetted  1st  lieu-
tenant and  captain.  On  29  Sept.,  1853.  he  became
captain  in  the  4th  infantry,  and  served  actively
against  the  Indians  of  California  and  Washington
and  Oregon  territories  till  the  civil  war.  He  was
made  colonel  of  a  regiment  of  volunteers  in  1861,
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  21  March,  1862,
and  acting  inspector-general  of  the  Army  of  the
Tennessee.  Resigning  his  staff  appointment,  he
was  ordered  to  command  the  1st  division  of  the
army  of  the  reserve,  which  he  relinquished  after
the  evacuation  of  Corinth  by  the  Confederate
troops.  He  was  reappointed  acting  inspector-gen-
eral of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  10  Oct.,  1862,  and
held  various  other  commands  until  he  was  mus-
tered out  of  volunteer  service.  24  Aug.,  1865.  He
was  active  in  his  pursuit  of  Morgan  at  the  time  of
the  latter's  raid  into  Kentucky,  Indiana,  and  Ohio,
in  1863.  At  his  death  he  was  commandant  of
the  post  at  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.

JUDD,  Gerrit  Parmalee,  Hawaiian  statesman,
b.  in  Paris,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  23  April,  1803 ;  d.  in
Honolulu,  Hawaiian  islands,  12  July,  1873.  He
studied  medicine,  and  in  1828  went  to  Honolulu  as
a  physician  in  the  service  of  the  American  foreign
mission.  In  1840  he  accompanied  Com.  Wilkes  in
his  exploring  expedition  through  the  islands,  and
in  1842  he  severed  his  connection  with  the  mission
and  became  recorder  and  interpreter  to  the  govern-
ment, of  Kamehameha  III.  When  Lord  George
Paulet  took  possession  of  the  islands  in  1843,  Dr.
Judd  was  appointed  one  of  the  joint  commission  to
represent  the  king,  but  soon  resigned.  When  the
sovereignty  was  restored  to  Kamehameha  III.,  31
July,  1843,  Dr.  Judd  was  invited  by  the  king  to  or-
ganize a  ministry,  which  he  did,  and  this  was  the
first  Hawaiian  cabinet. In  the  following  year  he


took  the  portfolio  of  finance,  which  he  held  till
1853.  In  1849  he  accompanied  the  princes  Liholi-
ho  and  Lot  Kamehameha  to  Europe  to  make  new
treaties  and  to  settle  a  difficulty  with  France.  Dr.
Judd  established  a  good  financial  reputation  for
the  Hawaiian  government  and  many  substantial
improvements  in  the  city  of  Honolulu.

JUDD,  Norman  Buel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rome,
N.  Y.,  10  Jan.,  1815;  d.  in  Chicago,  10  Nov.,  1878.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  studied
law,  and  in  1836  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  beginning
practice  in  Chicago.  He  was  city  attorney  there
in  1837-'9,  state  senator  in  1844-,60,  a  member  of
the  Bloomington  convention  which  organized  the
Republican  party  in  1856,  and  chairman  of  the
state  central  committee  of  that  party  in  1856-'61.
He  was  chairman  of  the  Illinois  delegation  in  the
Chicago  convention  that  nominated  Abraham  Lin-
coln for  the  presidency,  and  was  U.  S.  minister  to
Prussia  from  1861  till  1865.  He  was  then  elected
to  congress,  serving  from  4  March,  1867,  till  3
March,  1871,  and  was  afterward  appointed  collec-
tor of  the  port  of  Chicago  by  President  Grant.  He
was  president  of  the  Peoria  and  Bureau  Valley  rail-
road and  of  the  Rock  Island  railroad  bridge  com-
pany. A  sketch  of  his  life  was  published  by  Ar-
thur Edwards  (Chicago,  1878).

JUDD,  Orange,  editor,  b.  near  Niagara  Falls,
N.  Y.,  26  July,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at  Wes-
leyan  university  in  1847,  and,  after  teaching  until
1850,  spent  three  years  in  studying  analytical  and
agricultural  chemistry  at  Yale.  He  became  editor
of  the  "  American  Agriculturist "  in  1853,  and  in
1856  its  owner  and  publisher,  continuing  as  such
until  1881,  and  also  holding  the  place  of  agricul-
tural editor  of  the  "  New  York  Times  "  in  1855-'63.
He  was  the  principal  member  of  the  firm  of  Orange
Judd  and  Company,  which  made  a  specialty  of
publishing  agricultural  and  scientific  books,  and
also  published  "  Hearth  and  Home."  During  1863
he  served  with  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission  at
Gettysburg,  and  then  with  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac from  the  Rapidan  to  Petersburg.  In  1868-'9
he  was  president  of  the  New  York,  Flushing,  and
North  Side  railroad,  and  also  president  of  the  New
York  and  Flushing  railroad.  He  has  taken  an  ac-
tive interest  in  the  affairs  of  Wesleyan  university
and  edited  the  first  edition  of  the  "  Alumni  Rec-
ord." The  Orange  Judd  hall  of  natural  science,
dedicated  in  1871,  is  the  result  of  his  munificence,
and  he  held  the  office  of  trustee  in  1871-'81.  Mr.
Judd  has  written  for  the  press,  notably  in  his  own
journals,  and  originated  in  1862  a  series  of  Sunday-
school  lessons  for  every  Sunday  in  the  year,  upon
which  the  later  Berean  and  International  lessons
have  been  modelled. — His  brother,  David  Wright,
editor,  b.  in  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  1  Sept.,  1838 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  6  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1860,  was  connected  with  the  "  N>w
York  Times,"  and  became  editor  and  a  proprietor
of  "  Hearth  and  Home,"  and  in  1883,  president  of
the  O.  Judd  publishing  company.  During  the
civil  war  he  enlisted  as  a  private,  but  received  a
captain's  commission  before  he  resigned.  He  was
elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  New  York  legisla-
ture in  1871,  and  introduced  the  Judd  jury  bill
and  also  the  bill  establishing  the  National  rifle
association.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
three  commissioners  of  quarantine,  and  he  held
the  office  by  reappointment  till  his  death.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Two  Years'  Campaigning  in  Vir-
ginia and  Maryland  "  (Rochester,  N.  Y.,  1864),  and
edited  "  The  Educational  Cyclopaedia"  (New  York,
1874),  and  "  The  Life  and  Writings  of  Frank  For-
ester," in  ten  volumes  (vols.  i.  and  ii.,  1882).


JUDD


JUDSON


483


JUDD,  Sylvester,  antiquarian,  b.  in  Westhamp-
ton.  Mass.,  23  April,  1789;  d.  in  Northampton,
Mass..  18  April,  1860.  He  received  only  a  com-
mon-school education,  but  while  employed  in  the
country  store  of  his  native  town  taught  himself
languages,  history,  and  mathematics,  and  in  later
years  gave  much  attention  to  botany  and  geology.
He  became  a  partner  in  the  store,  and  in  1817  was
sent  to  the  legislature.  In  1822  he  removed  to
Northampton,  and  became  the  owner  and  editor  of
the  "  Hampshire  Gazette,"  which  he  conducted  till

1834.  He  spent  many  years  in  investigating  the
history  of  the  towns  of  Massachusetts  and  the
Connecticut  valley,  and  published  a  genealogical
work  on  his  family  from  the  coming  of  the  first
American  ancestor  in  1633  or  1634,  entitled
"  Thomas  Judd  and  his  Descendants  "  (Northamp-
ton, 1856).  His  "  History  of  Hadley,"  with  a  notice
of  his  life,  was  published  posthumously  (1863). —
His  son,  Sylvester,  b.  in  Westhampton,  Mass..  23
July,  1813 ;  d.  in  Augusta,  Me.,  26  Jan.,  1853,  was

¥raduated  at  Yale  in  1836.  While  teaching  at
empleton.  Mass.,  he  became  a  Unitarian,  and,  de-
clining a  professorship  in  Miami  college,  entered
the  divinity-school  at  Harvard,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1840.  On  1  Oct.  of  that  year  he  was
ordained  pastor  of  a  church  in  Augusta,  Me.,
with  which  he  was  connected  till  his  death.  His
first  published  work  was  a  series  of  papers  entitled
|  A  Young  Man's  Account  of  his  Conversion  from
Calvinism,"  written  in  his  second  year  at  the  theo-
logical seminary.  In  1843  he  began  a  work  entitled
"  Margaret,  a  Tale  of  the  Real  and  Ideal,  including
Sketches  of  a  Place  not  before  described,  called
Mons  Christi"  (Boston,  1845;  revised  ed.,  1851).
In  1856  a  folio  edition  of  illustrations  by  Felix  0.
C.  Darley  was  published.  The  book  was  intend-
ed to  promote  the  cause  of  liberal  Christianity  and
the  principles  of  temperance  and  universal  peace.
It  consists  of  a  loosely  constructed  tale  of  old  New
England  life,  interspersed  with  descriptions  of
nature.  In  addition  to  his  work  in  the  pastorate,
Mr.  Judd's  services  were  in  frequent  demand  as  a
lecturer  on  social  questions,  especially  in  opposi-
tion to  war  and  slavery,  and  in  advocacy  of  tem-
perance. In  the  later  years  of  his  ministry  he
devoted  his  efforts  to  spreading  the  idea  of  birth-
right in  the  church,  urging  that  children  should
be  regarded  as  members  of  the  church  from  their
birth,  and  that  no  distinction  should  be  made
between  the  church  and  the  community,  but  that
all  people  should  share  in  whatever  of  value  there
is  in  the  administration  of  the  sacraments.  These
principles  were  adopted  by  his  own  society  and  by
many  others  in  Maine.  He  also  published  a  didac-
tic poem  in  defence  of  Unitarian  doctrines,  entitled
"  Philo,  an  Evangeliad  "  (Boston,  1850) ;  a  novel  of
modern  New  England  life,  similar  in  purpose  and
character  to  "  Margaret,"  under  the  title  of  "  Rich-
ard Edney  and  the  Governor's  Family  "  (1850) ;  and
a  posthumous  work  entitled  "  The  Church,  in  a
Series  of  Discourses"  (1854).  He  left  in  manu-
script "The  White  Hills,"  a  tragedy  illustrating
the  evils  of  avarice.  See  "  Life  and  Character  of
Sylvester  Judd,"  by  Arethusa  Hall  (Boston,  1854).
JUDD,  Willard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Southington,
Conn.,  23  Feb.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Wyoming.  N.  Y„  in
February,  1840.  He  was  educated  in  Southington
academy,  and  after  teaching  for  some  time  settled
in  Canaan,  N.  Y.,  and  was  licensed  as  a  Baptist
minister  in  1826.  He  then  removed  to  Herkimer
county  and  preached  alternately  in  Salisbury  and
Oppenheim till  August, 1828,"  after  which,  till

1835,  his  labors  were  limited  to  the  church  in  Sal-
isbury. In  1839  he  was  appointed  classical  teacher


c^f  -£o<-  <5fc-^w2-^


in  Middlebury  academy,  Wyoming,  N.  Y.,  which
place  he  held  till  his  death.  He  published  "  Review
of  Professor  Stuart's  Work  on  Baptism  "  (New  York,
1836),  and  a  collection  of  some  of  his  miscellane-
ous papers,  with  a  memoir,  was  published  after  his
death  (New  York).

JUDSON,  Adoniram,  missionary,  b.  in  Maiden.
Mass.,  9  Aug.,  1788;  d.  at  sea,  12  April,  1850.  His
father  was  a  Congregational  minister.  Adoniram
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1807,  and  spent  a  year
in  teaching  in  Plymouth,  Mass.  He  had  become
sceptical  on  theological  subjects,  and,  being  in-
clined to  adopt  dra-
matic authorship  as
his  profession,  at-
tached himself  for  a
short  time  to  a  the-
atrical company  for
the  purpose  of  be-
coming familiar  with
the  regulations  of  the
stage.  But  he  soon
experienced  a  de-
cided change  of  feel-
ing, and  in  1808  en-
tered Andover  theo-
logical seminary  as  a
special  student.  Dur-
ing his  residence
there  he  became
deeply  interested  in
the  subject  of  foreign  missions,  and  in  1810  formed
the  resolution  to  go  as  missionary  to  Burmah.  In
April,  1810,  he  addressed  a  letter,  in  behalf  of  him-
self and  two  or  three  associate  students,  to  the  Lon-
don missionary  society,  offering  to  go  in  its  service
to  "  India,  Tartary,  or  any  part  of  the  eastern  con-
tinent," and  his  proposition  was  favorably  received.
He  married,  5  Feb.,  1812,  Ann  Haseltine,  of  Brad-
ford, Mass.,  and  on  19  Feb.  they  sailed  for  Asia,
landing  at  Calcutta  in  June.  The  most  noteworthy
incident  of  the  voyage  was  a  change  in  the  views  of
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Judson  on  the  subject  of  Christian
baptism.  They  became  convinced  that  the  baptism
of  the  New  Testament  was  immersion,  and  in  ac-
cordance with  this  view  they  were  baptized  by  im-
mersion on  reaching  Calcutta.  Being  thus  severed
from  the  body  under  whose  auspices  they  had  en-
tered on  their  mission,  they  were  left  for  a  time  in
uncertainty  as  to  their  future  support.  Dr.  Jud-
son's  objective  point  had  been  Burmah,  but  he  and
his  associates  were  not  favorably  received  there,
and  unpleasant  relations  between  England  and
Burmah  made  their  stay  impossible.  They  were
ordered  to  return  to  America,  and  only  after  much
effort  and  anxiety  obtained  permission  to  proceed
instead  to  the  Isle  of  France.  After  a  stay  there  of
a  few  months,  they  determined  to  go  to  Madras,
whence,  by  reason  of  the  renewed  hostility  of  the
East  India  company's  officers  toward  the  mission-
aries, they  found  themselves  forced  either  to  re-
turn home  or  to  venture  into  Burmah.  They
chose  the  latter  course,  and  went  to  Rangoon,
where  Dr.  Judson  applied  himself  at  once  to  the
task  of  learning  the  Burmese  language.  His  mas-
tery of  this  difficult  and  unattractive  language
evinced  strikingly  his  persistence,  his  ability,  and
his  consecration  to  his  chosen  work.  He  practi-
cally abandoned  the  English  language,  and  read,
spoke,  and  thought  in  Burmese.  In  May,  1814,  he
received  the  news  that  the  Baptists  of  America
had  formed  a  missionary  union,  which  had  taken
the  Baptist  missionaries  under  its  care.  As  soon
as  his  Knowledge  of  the  language  permitted,  Dr.
Judson began  his  public  preaching. The  first


484


JUDSON


JUDSON


inquirer  after  religious  truth  gave  him  great  en-
couragement, and  the  baptism  of  the  first  convert
was  an  occasion  of  much  rejoicing.  Dr.  Judson
prepared  and  published  tracts,  taught,  preached,
undertook  a  perilous  journey  to  obtain  the  assist-
ance of  a  few  native  Christians  of  whom  he  had
heard,  and  in  many  other  ways  pushed  forward  the
work.  He  was  prosecuting  it  with  much  hope  and
some  success,  when  the  accession  to  the  throne  of  a
bigoted  and  zealous  Buddhist  cast  a  dark  shadow
over  the  prospects  of  the  mission.  Dr.  Judson  re-
solved to  go  in  person  to  Ava  to  solicit  from  the
king  tolerance  for  the  Christian  religion.  Al-
though this  seemed  to  secure  to  the  missionaries  no
very  favorable  result,  yet  for  several  years  their
work  was  not  seriously  interrupted.  In  1817  Dr.
Judson  completed  the  translation  of  the  Gospel  of
Matthew,  and  in  1821  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephe-
sians.  In  1824  he  removed  to  Ava,  where  he  was
well  received.  The  war,  which  at  this  time  began
between  the  English  and  the  Burmese,  involved
the  missionaries  in  extremest  sufferings.  They
were  suspected  of  being  in  correspondence  with
the  English,  and  were  subjected  to  every  form  of
cruelty  and  indignity  that  a  fierce  and  malicious
government  could  invent.  They  were  imprisoned
in  the  "death  prison,"  where  there  was  foul  air
and  no  light,  were  given  little  food,  and  loaded
with  five  pairs  of  fetters.  They  were  driven  like
cattle,  almost  naked,  under  a  scorching  sun  to
another  prison,  where  the  purpose  was  to  burn
them  alive  in  the  presence  of  one  of  the  high
officials,  who  regarded  it  as  a  festive  occasion.
They  were  finally  liberated  and  assisted  through
the  agency  of  Sir  Archibald  Campbell,  and  left
Ava  for  Rangoon.  Finding  this  place  ineligible
for  the  re-establishment  of  their  mission,  they  re-
moved to  Amherst,  the  capital  of  the  provinces  re-
cently ceded  to  the  British.  Dr.  Judson  had  been
previously  offered,  but  had  declined,  the  post  of
interpreter  in  the  English  service,  at  a  salary  of
$3,000.  In  1830  and  1831  he  made  missionary
tours  to  Prome  and  Rangoon,  where  hundreds  of
his  tracts  were  distributed.  In  1831  he  removed
his  residence  to  Maulmain,  which  had  been  selected
as  the  English  capital.  At  this  time  he  began  a
series  of  preaching-tours  in  the  Karen  jungles,
which  were  followed  by  marked  results.  The  next
twenty-five  years  witnessed,  it  is  estimated,  20,000
conversions  among  the  Karens  to  the  Christian
faith.  In  June,  1833,  Dr.  Judson  completed  the
translation  of  the  Bible  into  Burmese.  He  at
once  began  a  revision  of  the  whole  Scripture,  which
occupied  him  till  near  the  close  of  1840.  His
chief  literary  works  consisted  of  a  Burman  gram-
mar, a  Pali  dictionary,  a  Burman  dictionary,  and  a
complete  Burman  bible.  His  mastery  of  the  Bur-
mese language  was  remarkable ;  he  forbade  himself
the  use  of  English,  excepting  one  English  newspaper.
About  1841  he  began  the  revision  of  his  Burman
dictionary.  His  first  plan  of  the  work  was  to  make
only  one  part,  Burmese  into  English;  but  the
work  grew  on  his  hands,  and  he  decided  to  make  it
double,  Burmese  into  English,  and  English  into
Burmese.  He  finished  the  first  part  in  1849,  and
hoped  to  complete  the  second  in  the  following
year.  Brown  university  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1823.  In  1842  Mrs.  Judson's  declining
health  made  it  necessary  that  she  should  seek  a
colder  climate.  Her  husband  was  obliged  to  ac-
company her,  and  they  took  passage  for  America.
On  their  way  thither  Mrs.  Judson  died,  pnd  was
buried  on  the  island  of  St.  Helena.  Dr.  Judson,
with  the  children,  continued  the  voyage  a'.d  landed
in  Boston. On  11  July, 1846,  he  embarked  for


Maulmain.  He  fixed  his  residence  in  Rangoon,
with  the  resolution  of  trying  again  to  get  a  foot-
hold in  Ava ;  but  on  account  of  the  low  state  of
the  treasury  was  obliged  to  return  to  Maulmain,
where  he  devoted  himself  to  the  completion  of
his  dictionary.  In  November,  1849,  he  took  a
violent  cold,  and  from  that  time  his  health  failed
steadily  until  his  death  at  sea,  on  his  way  to  the
Isle  of  France.  His  life  has  been  written  by  Fran-
cis Wayland  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1853),  and  by  his
son  Edward  (New  York,  1883).— His  first 'wife,
Ann  Haseltine,  missionary,  b.  in  Bradford,  Mass.,
22  Dec.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Amherst,  India,  24  Oct.,  1826,
was  educated  at  the  Bradford  academy.  She  mar-
ried Dr.  Judson  on  5  Feb.,  1812,  and  sailed  with
him  for  Calcutta.  Her  health  having  become  im-
paired, she  left  India  in  August,  1821,  and  after  a
visit  to  England  arrived  in  New  York,  25  Sept.,
1822.  She  visited  Philadelphia,  Bradford,  and
Baltimore,  where  she  spent  the  winter  in  preparing
a  "  History  of  the  Burmese  Mission,"  in  the  form
of  letters  addressed  to  her  English  host,  Josiah
Butterworth.  In  March,  1823,  she  visited  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  where  the  Baptist  general  convention
held  its  session.  A  committee  was  appointed  to
confer  with  her  respecting  the  Burman  mission,
and  at  her  suggestion  several  important  measures
were  adopted.  The  copyright  of  her  "  History  of
the  Burmese  Mission  "  she  presented  to  this  com-
mittee. She  returned  to  Calcutta  in  1823,  and
sailed  thence  to  Rangoon.  Dr.  Judson  having
been  committed  to  the  "  death  prison,"  she  was  un-
protected against  the  plundering  of  her  goods  and
the  seizure  of  her  person.  She  visited  those  in
authority  to  ask  assistance  for  the  imprisoned  mis-
sionaries, and  with  her  infant  and  two  Burmese
girls  she  followed  her  husband  to  the  prison.
After  Dr.  Judson's  release,  she  was  attacked  with
spotted  fever,  and  only  partially  recovered.  A  trib-
ute to  Mrs.  Judson,  which  appeared  in  a  Calcutta
paper,  written  by  one  of  the  English  prisoners,
calls  her  "the  author  of  those  eloquent  and  for-
cible appeals  to  the  government  which  prepared
them  by  degrees  for  submission  to  terms  of  peace
never  expected  by  any  who  knew  the  hauteur  and
inflexible  pride  of  the  Burman  court."  After
peace  was  concluded  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Judson  settled
in  Amherst.  With  the  aid  of  a  teacher,  she  trans-
lated the  Gospel  of  Matthew  and  the  Burmese
catechism  into  Siamese,  and  assisted  him  in  pre-
paring a  Burmese  grammar  and  made  translations
into  that  language. — His  second  wife,  Sarah  Hall
Boardman,  missionary,  b.  in  Alstead,  N.  H.,  4
Nov.,  1803 :  d.  in  the  harbor  of  James  Town,  St.
Helena,  1  Sept.,  1845,  married  George  Dana  Board-
man  (q.  v.\  and  went  with  him  to  India,  remain-
ing two  years  in  Calcutta,  studying  the  Burmese
language,  and  preparing  for  future  work.  In
April,  1827,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Boardman  removed  to
Amherst,  which  had  been  selected  as  the  seat  of
the  mission  and  also  for  the  English  capital  in
Burmah.  They  subsequently  resided  in  Maul-
main, and  removed  to  Tavoy  in  1828,  where  she
established  a  girls'  school.  After  the  death  of  her
husband  in  1831,  she  remained  in  Burmah,  and
made  journeys  through  the  Karen  jungles  accom-
panied by  some  of  her  Karen  disciples,  and  ad-
dressed assemblies  of  two  or  three  hundred.  In
1834  she  married  Dr.  Judson.  and  removed  to
Maulmain.  In  1845  her  health  became  impaired,
and  she  went  with  her  husband  to  the  Isle  of
France  and  re-embarked  there  for  the  United
States,  but  died  and  was  buried  in  the  island  of
St.  Helena.  In  connection  with  her  missionary
labors,  she  translated  a  portion  of  "  Pilgrim's  Prog-


JUDSON


JUELS


485


r  SB,"  Mr.  Boardman's  "Dying  Father's  Advice,"
a  tract,  which  became  popular,  about  twenty  hymns
in  Burmese,  printed  in  the  chapel  hymn-book,
which  she  was  appointed  by  the  mission  to  edit,
and  published  four  volumes  of  Scripture  questions,
for  use  in  the  mission  schools. — His  third  wife,
Emily  Chubbuck,  b.  in  Eaton,  Madison  co.,
X.  Y.,*  22  Aug.,  1817 :  d.  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  1  June,
1854.  As  a  child  she  was  delicate  in  health,  and
had  an  extremely  sensitive  mental  organization.
She  became  a  teacher  in  1834,  united  with  a  Bap-
tist church,  gave  much  thought  to  foreign  missions,
and  early  recorded  her  desire  to  engage  in  mission-
ary work.  In  1840  she  entered  the  Utica  female
seminary,  where  she  reached  at  once  the  front  rank
as  a  scholar,  and  exhibited  an  easy  and  graceful
style  in  writing.  In  1841  she  wrote  her  first  book.
"  Charles  Linn,"  her  second, "  The  Great  Secret,"  in
1842,  and  "Allan  Lucas"  in  1843,  all  of  which  showed
decided  talent,  and  were  for  a  time  much  in  demand.
In  1844  she  became  acquainted,  through  the  "  New
Mirror,"  with  Nathaniel  P.  Willis,  its  editor,  and  a
warm  literary  friendship  sprang  up  between  them.
Mr.  ^'illis  was  at  this  time  one  of  the  most  popular
editors  and  writers  of  the  country,  and  by  timely
praise  and  kindly  suggestion  and  influence  won  the
right  to  the  title,  which  she  gave  him,  of  the  "  fos-
ter-father" of  her  intellect.  The  two  or  three
years  following  her  introduction  to  him  comprised
her  career  as  an  author,  in  which  she  became  known
in  the  literary  world  as  Fanny  Forrester.  Many
stories  from  her  pen,  of  spirit  and  elegance,  always
pervaded  by  a  high  moral  tone,  appeared  in  the
magazines,  and  most  of  them  were  subsequently
collected  under  the  title  of  "  Alderbrook  "  (2  vols.,
Boston,  1846).  In  December,  1845,  Miss  Chubbuck
met  Dr.  Judson,  then  on  his  only  visit  to  this
country,  and  they  were  married,  2  June,  1846,  at
Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  where  she  then  resided.  On  11
July  they  sailed  from  Boston,  and  landed,  30  Nov.,
at  Amherst,  in  Bengal.  When  Dr.  Judson  died  at
sea,  early  in  1850,  Mrs.  Judson  remained  in  igno-
rance of  his  death  for  nearly  four  months.  Her
health  decided  the  question  of  remaining  in  the
mission  field,  and  she  embarked,  22  Jan.,  1851,  for
the  United  States,  with  three  children  (one  her
own,  and  two  of  the  late  Mrs.  Judson's),  and
reached  New  York  in  October,  1851.  Her  first
efforts  were  directed  to  the  gathering  together  of
her  husband's  children  in  a  home  at  Hamilton;
her  next  to  the  collecting  of  material  for  his  biog-
raphy, written  by  Francis  Wayland.  She  then
devoted  her  pen  to  the  advancement  of  the  cause
of  missions,  and  wrote  a  small  volume  called  the
"  Kathayan  Slave  "  (Boston.  1853).  She  published
her  collected  poems  under  the  title  of  "  An  Olio  of
Domestic  Verses  "  (New  York,  1852).  Some  of  her
occasional  poems  are  exceedingly  beautiful,  and
show  alike  fine  poetical  taste  and  capacity.  But
her  health  steadily  declined  and  she  died  of  con-
sumption. Her  other  publications  include  "  Trip-
pings in  Author  Land  "  (New  York,  1846) :  "  My
Two  Sisters "  (Boston.  1854) :  and  a  memoir  of
Mrs.  Sarah  B.  Judson  (New  York,  1850).  Her  life
was  written  by  Asahel  C.  Kendrick  (New  York.
1860). — Edward,  son  of  Adoniram  and  Sarah
Boardman  Judson,  clergyman,  b.  in  Maulmain.
Burmah,  27  Dec.,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1865,  became  principal  of  a  seminary  in  Towns-
hend,  Vt.,  and  in  1867  was  made  professor  of  Latin
and  modern  languages  in  Madison  university.  In
1875  he  became  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in
North  Orange,  N.  J.,  where  the  membership  was
largely  increased  during  his  ministry ;  but  in  1881
he  resigned  and  removed  to  New  York  city,  where


he  entered  upon  a  peculiar  mission  work,  becoming
pastor  of  the  Berean  Baptist  church,  in  a  down-
town district,  and  attracting  thither  a  large  con-
gregation. Besides  numerous  contributions  to  cur-
rent literature,  he  has  published  a  life  of  his  father
(New  Y'ork,  1883).  He  was  given  the  degree  of
D.  D.  by  Madison  university  in  1883.

JUDSON,  Andrew  Thompson,  lawver,  b.  in
Ashford,  Conn.,  29  Nov.,  1784:  d.  in  Canterbury,
Conn.,  17  March,  1853.  His  father,  Andrew,  by
whom  the  son  was  chiefly  educated,  was  first  pas-
tor of  the  third  church  in  Ashford.  The  son  stud-
ied law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1806,  and  after
two  years'  residence  at  Montpelier,  Vt.,  settled  in
Canterbury,  Conn.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in
1816,  and  in  1818  was  one  of  the  most  active  mem-
bers of  the  Toleration  party,  which  had  for  its  ob-
ject disunion  between  church  and  state.  After  a
severe  struggle  the  Tolerationists,  aided  by  the
Democrats,  succeeded  in  setting  aside  the  charter
that  was  granted  by  Charles  II.,  and  adopted  the
new  constitution,  which  has  been  the  fundamental
law  of  Connecticut  since  that  time.  Mr.  Judson
became  state's  attorney  in  1819,  was  for  several
terms  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1834  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  till
1837,  when  he  became  district  judge  of  Connecti-
cut, which  he  held  until  his  death.

JUDSON,  Edward  Z.  C,  author,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1822 ;  d.  in  Stamford,  Delaware  co.,
N.  Y.,  16  July,  1886.  His  father  was  a  lawyer,  and
intended  to  educate  the  son  for  the  bar,  but  he  ran
away  to  sea  as  a  cabin-boy,  and  the  next  year
shipped  on  board  of  a  man-of-war.  When  thirteen
years  old  he  rescued  the  crew  of  a  boat  that  had
been  run  down  by  a  Fulton  ferry  boat,  and  received
from  President  Van  Buren  a  commission  as  mid-
shipman in  the  U.  S.  navy.  On  being  assigned  to
the  "  Levant,"  he  fought  seven  duels  with  midship-
men who  refused  to  mess  with  him  because  he  had
been  a  common  sailor,  and  escaped  from  each  with-
out a  wound.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  chief
of  scouts  among  the  Indians,  with  the  rank  of
colonel,  and  during  his  service  received  twenty
wounds.  His  first  literary  efforts  began  with  a
story  of  adventure  in  the  "  Knickerbocker  Maga-
zine "  in  1838.  He  became  editor  of  a  weekly  story-
paper,  called  "  Ned  Buntline's  Own,"  in  1848,  and
during  the  Astor  place  riots  was  arrested  for  excit-
ing an  outbreak  through  its  columns.  In  Septem-
ber, 1849,  he  was  sentenced  to  a  $250  fine  and  a
year's  imprisonment.  After  his  release  he  devoted
himself  to  writing  sensational  stories  for  weeklv
newspapers  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Ned  Buntline,''
and  his  income  from  this  source  is  said  to  have
amounted  to  $20,000  a  year.  He  was  a  frequent
lecturer  on  temperance,  and  until  the  presidential
canvass  of  1884  was  an  ardent  Republican  politician.

JUELS,  Niels  (yoo'-els),  Swedish  geographer,
b.  in  Westrogothia  in  1729 ;  d.  in  Upsala  in  1793.
He  was  the  son  of  a  poor  miner,  and  worked  for
some  time  in  the  mines  of  Dalecarlia.  At  the  age
of  nineteen  he  joined  a  Dutch  merchant- vessel  that
was  bound  for  South  America,  but  deserted  on
reaching  Buenos  Ayres.  He  was  successively  a
servant,  trader,  ranchman,  and  merchant,  and  for
two  years  remained  a  prisoner  among  the  Charruas
Indians.  In  1758  he  was  converted  by  Father
Quesada,  vicar  of  the  cathedral  of  Buenos  Ayres,
who  took  an  interest  in  him  and  employed  his
leisure  time  in  giving  him  lessons.  Juels  obtained
through  his  influence  a  brevet  of  lieutenant  in  the
Spanish  army  in  1760.  In  the  following  year  he
wedded  the  daughter  of  a  prosperous  Portuguese
merchant,  who  died  soon  afterward,  leaving  him  all


486


JUENGLING


JULIEN


her  property.  Juels  then  devoted  twenty  years  to
travel  in  South  and  North  America,  Europe,  and
India,  returning  to  Stockholm  in  1784.  He  settled
in  Upsala,  where  he  received  from  the  university
the  honorary  diploma  of  LL.  D.,  and  obtained  let-
ters of  nobility  from  Gustav  1  LI.  The  remainder
of  his  life  was  devoted  to  scientific  pursuits.
Among  his  works  are  "  Lehrbuch  der  allgemeinen
Geographie  "  (Upsala,  1787) :  "  En  Resa  till  Norra
Amerika"  (2  vols.,  1787);  "En  Resa  till  SOdra
Amerika"  (2  vols.,  1789);  "En  Resa  till  India"
(1789) ;  "  Bes  Krifning  om  Amerikanska  Maysen  "
(1790) ;  "  SOdra  Amerikanska  Sargoter  "  (1791) ;  and
"Compendium  Universi  completens  geographica
descriptio  "  (1793).

JUENGLING,  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  Oct.,  1846;  d.  there  31  Dec,  1889.
He  studied  in  his  native  city,  adopted  art  as  a  pro-
fession, and  attained  to  high  rank  as  an  engraver.
He  was  a  founder  of  the  American  society  of  wood-
engravers,  its  first  secretary  in  1881-2,  and  in
1882-'3  was  vice-president  of  the  Art  students'
league.  Mr.  Juengling  was  identified  with  what  is
known  as  the  new  school  in  wood-engraving.  He
received  honorable  mention  at  the  Paris  salon  in
1881,  and  a  second-class  medal  at  the  International
exhibition  of  fine  arts,  held  in  Munich  in  1883.
Among  his  works  are  "  The  Professor,"  engraved
after  Frank  Duveneck,  and  "The  Voice  of  the
Sea,"  after  Arthur  Quartley.  His  paintings  in-
clude "  The  Intruder ''  (1884) ;  "  Westward  Bound  "
(1884) ;  and  "  In  the  Street "  (1886).

JUGLER,  Lorenz  (yu'-gler),  German  naturalist,
b.  in  Detmold  in  1692 ;  d.  in  Halle  in  1764.  He
united  with  the  Moravian  church,  but  was  after-
ward converted  to  the  Lutheran  faith.  He  be^
came  preceptor  to  the  children  of  the  Prince  of
Reuss-Greitz,  and  professor  of  chemistry  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Gottingen,  and  afterward  at  Dortrecht.
The  young  Prince  of  Reuss  died  in  1746  and
left  him  a  handsome  legacy,  which  enabled  him  to
travel.  After  a  journey  of  three  years  in  Europe
he  sailed  for  India  in  1749,  but  was  taken  in  the
latter  country  as  a  spy  both  by  the  French  and
English,  and  in  spite  of  his  protestations  was  not
allowed  to  proceed.  Returning  to  Holland,  he
sailed  for  Boston,  and  travelled  in  North  and  South
America  for  seven  years,  settling  in  Plalle  on  his
return  in  1755.  Among  his  many  publications  are
"Geschichte  und  Zustaende  der  Deutschen  in
Amerika"  (Leipsic,  1756);  " Metallurgische  Reise
durch  einen  Theil  von  Neu  England  "  (Halle,  1756) :
"  Erste  Urkunden  der  Geschichte  der  Amerikas  "
(2  vols.,  1757) ;  "  Thesaurus  geographicus  "  (1758) ;
and  "Flora  Americana)"  (2  vols.,  1763-4).

JULIAN,  George  Washington,  statesman,  b.
near  Centreville,  Ind.,  5  May,  1817.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  taught  for  three  years,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1840.
He  was  elected  to  the  Indiana  house  of  representa-
tives in  1845  as  a  member  of  the  Whig  party ;  but
becoming  warmly  interested  in  the  slavery  ques-
tion through  his  Quaker  training,  severed  his  party
relations  in  1848,  became  one  of  the  founders  and
leaders  of  the  Free-soil  party,  was  a  delegate  to  the
Buffalo  convention,  and  was  then  elected  to  con-

fress,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1849,  to  3  March,  1851.
n  1852  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency
on  the  Free-soil  ticket.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Pittsburg  convention  of  1856,  the  first  National
convention  of  the  Republican  party,  and  was  its
vice-president,  and  chairman  of  the  committee  on
organization.  In  1860  he  was  elected  as  a  Repub-
lican to  congress,  and  served  on  the  joint  commit-
tee on  the  conduct  of  the  war. He  was  four  times


re-elected,  and  served  on  the  committee  on  recon-
struction, and  for  eight  years  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  public  lands.  He  espoused  the  cause
of  woman  suffrage  as  early  as  1847,  and  in  1868
proposed  in  congress  a  constitutional  amendment
conferring  the  right  to  vote  on  women.  During
the  discussions  on  reconstruction  he  was  zealous  in
demanding  the  electoral  franchise  for  the  negro.
In  1872  he  joined  the  Liberal  Republicans,  and
supported  Horace  Greeley  for  president.  His  most
strenuous  efforts  in  congress  were  directed  to  the
championship  of  the  homestead  policy  and  the
preservation  of  the  public  lands  for  the  people.
In  May,  1885,  he  was  appointed  surveyor-general
of  New  Mexico.  He  has  published  "  Speeches  on
Political  Questions."  containing  a  sketch  of  his  life
by  Lydia  Maria  Child  (Boston,  1872),  and  "  Polit-
ical Recollections "  (Chicago,  1884),  and  has  con-
tributed to  magazines  and  reviews  articles  deal-
ing with  political  reforms. — His  brother,  Isaac
Hoover,  journalist,  b.  in  Wayne  county,  Ind.,
19  June,  1823,  removed  to  Iowa  in  1846, "resided
there  till  1850,  and  returning  to  Indiana  settled  in
Centreville  and  edited  the  "  Indiana  True  Repub-
lican," which  he  afterward  published  in  Richmond,
Ind.,  under  the  title  of  "The  Indiana  Radical."
He  occupied  several  local  offices  in  that  town,
removed  to  San  Marco,  Texas,  in  1873,  and  since
that  date  has  edited  the  "  San  Marco  Free  Press."
He  has  published,  besides  numerous  poems,  pam-
phlets, and  essays,  a  "  Memoir  of  David  Hoover  1
(Richmond,  Ind.,  1857).

JULIEN,  Alexis  Anastay,  geologist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  13  Feb.,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1859,  but  continued  as  a  student
in  the  chemical  laboratory  a  year  longer.  In  1860
he  went  to  the  guano  island  of  Sombrero  as  resi-
dent chemist,  and  continued  there  until  1864,  also
making  studies  of  its  geology  and  natural  history,
especially  of  its  birds  and  land  shells.  He  sent
his  collections  to  the  Smithsonian  institution,  for
which  he  also  made  meteorological  observations,
this  island  being  the  most  southerly  under  its  di-
rection. In  1862  he  made  a  geological  survey  of
the  islets  around  St.  Bartholomew  for  the  Swedish
government,  receiving  in  recognition  of  his  services
a  gold  medal  from  the  king  of  Sweden.  Soon  after
the  establishment  of  the  Columbia  school  of  mines
he  became  the  assistant  in  charge  of  the  quantita-
tive laboratory,  and  in  1885  he  was  appointed  in-
structor in  charge  of  the  department  of  microscopy
and  biology  in  the  same  institution.  He  was
connected  with  the  geological  survey  of  Michigan
in  1872,  making  a  special  study  of  the  crystalline
rocks  and  ores  of  the  Marquette  district,  and  his
lithological  reports  appear  in  the  published  volumes
of  the  survey. In  1875  he  began  the  study  of  the

{>etrography  of  North  Carolina  for  the  state  geo-
ogical  survey,  and  served  for  three  successive  sum-
mers in  the  field.  He  visited  the  islands  of  Bo-
naire, Curacoa,  and  Aruba,  W.  I.,  during  1881-'2,
and  investigated  the  guano  deposits  and  geology  of
these  islands.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  in  1882  by  the  University  of  New  York.
He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  was  vice-
president  of  the  New  York  academy  of  sciences  in
1884.  Dr.  Julien  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
New  York  microscopical  society  in  1880,  and  in
1883  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Society  of
naturalists  of  the  eastern  United  States.  His  con-
tributions to  scientific  literature  have  been  very
numerous.  Among  his  papers  are  "On  the  Geo-
logical Action  of  the  Humus  Acids  "  (1879) :  "  On
Spodumene  and  its  Alterations  "  (1879) ;  "  Build-
ing-Stones of  New  York  City  and  Environs "  and


JULIO


JUNCKER


487


"  The  Durability  of  Building-Stones  in  New  York
City  and  Vicinity  "  (contributed  to  the  U.  S.  cen-
sus reports,  1880) ;  "  The  Genesis  of  the  Crystalline
Iron-Ores"  (1882);  "Notice  on  the  Microscopical
Examination  of  a  Series  of  Ocean,  Lake,  River,  and
Desert  Sands v  (1884) ;  and  "  On  the  Variation  of
Decomposition  in  the  Iron  Pyrites,  its  Cause,  and
its  Relation  to  Density  "  (1886).

JULIO,  E.  B.  D.  Fabrino,  artist,  b.  in  the
island  of  St.  Helena  in  1843;  d.  in  Georgia,  15
Sept.,  1879.  He  was  the  son  of  an  Italian  father
and  a  Scotch  mother.  After  a  careful  education  in
Paris,  he  removed  to  the  United  States  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war,  lived  in  the  north  several
years,  and,  removing  to  New  Orleans,  established
himself  there  as  a  portrait-painter.  Revisiting
Paris  about  1872,  he  entered  the  studio  of  Leon
Bonnat,  and,  returning  to  New  Orleans  two  years
later,  established  a  school  of  art  in  that  city.  His
best-known  painting,  "The  Last  Meeting  of  Lee
and  Jackson,"  is  a  composition  of  merit.  His
"  Diana,"  the  "  Harvest  Scene,"  exhibited  at  the
Centennial  in  1876,  a  sketch  of  "  Kernochan's  Plan-
tation," and  several  Louisiana  landscapes,  although
defective  in  color,  show  him  to  have  been  a  i-apid
and  skilful  draughtsman,  and  an  original  artist.

JUMEL,  Eliza  Bowen,  heiress,  b.  at  sea  be-
tween France  and  the  West  Indies  in  1769;  d.  in
New  York,  16  July,  1865.  Her  mother,  whose  name
was  Capet,  died  at  her  birth,  and  the  daughter  was
adopted  by  a  Mrs.  Thompson,  of  Newport,  R.  I.
At  seventeen  years  of  age  Eliza  eloped  with  and
married  Col.  Peter  Croix,  a  British  officer,  and,  re-
moving to  New  York  city,  became,  through  her
great  beauty  and  talents,  the  friend  and  favorite
of  many  distinguished  men  of  the  age.  Her  un-
bounded, love  of  admiration  caused  her  to  commit
many  imprudences,  from  which  her  reputation
suffered. After  the  death  of  Col.  Croix,  she  mar-


ried, about  1801,  Stephen  Jumel,  a  French  wine-
merchant  of  great  wealth.  She  then  removed  to
Paris,  and  became  a  leader  of  fashion  under  the
patronage  of  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette.  In  a  few
years  she  spent  a  large  portion  of  Jumel's  fortune
by  her  extravagance,  but,  returning  to  the  United
States,  devoted  herself  to  its  restoration  with  such
success  that  she  soon  regained  all  she  had  dissi-
pated. After  Jumel's  death  she  sought  legal  ad-
vice from  Aaron  Burr,  with  whom  she  had  been
acquainted  in  her  youth.  He  was  at  that  time
seventy-eight  years  of  age,  but  the  pair  were  mar-
ried in  1830.  On  Burr's  losing,  in  Texas  specula-
tions, a  large  sum  of  money  that  she  had  put  in  his
hands  a  few  days  after  the  wedding,  she  filed  a
complaint  against  him,  and  a  separation  ensued,
although  a  divorce  was  not  granted.  The  remain-
der of  her  life  was  spent  in  retirement  in  New  York
city.  The  Jumel  estate  on  the  Harlem  river,  near
Manhattanville,  has  recently  been  divided  and  sold


as  city  lots,  but  the  mansion  erected  by  Col.  Roger
Morris  in  1758,  represented  in  the  accompanying
illustration,  still  remains  in  the  possession  of  her
heirs — one  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  old  land-
marks of  Manhattan  island.  Washington  used  it
as  his  headquarters,  and  there  Madame  Jumel,
who  purchased  it  in  1810,  entertained  Joseph  Bona-
parte, Moreau,  and  many  other  distinguished  men.
There,  too,  on  a  rocky  eminence  overlooking  the
river,  Fitz-Greene  Halleck  wrote  his  famous  lines
on  the  Greek  patriot  "  Marco  Bozzaris."

JUMONVILLE,  N.  Conlon  de,  French  sol-
dier, b.  in  Picardy,  France,  about  1725 ;  d.  near  the
site  of  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  27  May,  1754.  He  was  edu-
cated as  a  soldier,  and,  coming  to  this  country  to
join  his  brother,  Coulon  de  Villiers,  who  held  the
rank  of  captain  in  the  French  army,  he  was  sent
in  the  spring  of  1754  in  charge  of  a"  small  force  to
summon  Washington  to  surrender  the  fort  that  he
had  built  at  Great  Meadows,  on  the  bank  of  the
Ohio.  The  latter,  being  warned  of  his  approach,
joined  forces  with  his  Indian  allies,  and  came  upon
the  French  suddenly  at  night.  An  action  lasting
a  quarter  of  an  hour  ensued.  On  the  side  of  the
English  one  man  was  killed  and  three  wounded,
while  ten  of  the  French  were  killed,  including  De
Jumonville,  and  twenty-one  made  prisoners.  The
dead  were  scalped  by  the  Indians,  and  a  scalp  and
a  hatchet  sent  to  each  of  the  tribes  of  the  Miamis,
with  an  invitation  to  join  the  Six  Nations  as  allies
of  the  English.  The  killing  of  Jumonville,  who
bore  a  summons  to  surrender,  was  considered  in
France  and  Canada  as  a  violation  of  the  law  of
nations.  Jumonville's  death  was  avenged  early
in  the  following  July  by  his  brother,  Coulon  de
Villiers,  who,  at  the  head  of  600  French  and  100
Indians,  appeared  before  the  rude  stockade  that
had  been  built  at  Great  Meadows  by  Washing-
ton, and  named  Fort  Necessitv.  After  an  engage-
ment in  which  three  of  the  French  and  thirty  of
the  Virginians  were  killed,  the  American  officer
accepted  terms  of  capitulation,  by  which  he  agreed
to  retire  from  the  basin  of  the  Ohio.

JUNCKER,  Henry  Dainian,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Fenetrange,  Lorraine,  France,  about  1810 :  d.  in
Alton,  111.,  2  Oct.,  1868.  He  came  to  the  United
States  at  an  early  age,  studied  for  the  priesthood,
and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Purcell,  16  March,
1834.  He  was  then  appointed  pastor  of  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Trinity,  the  first  German  church  in
Cincinnati.  At  the  end  of  two  years  he  was  trans-
ferred to  Canton,  Ohio,  and  in  1846  appointed  pas-
tor of  the  Church  of  Emanuel  at  Dayton.  He  also
ministered  to  several  English  congregations  and
over  a  dozen  German  settlements.  In  1857  he  was
appointed  bishop  of  the  newly  created  see  of  Alton,
and  consecrated  by  Archbishop  Purcell  on  26  April.
His  diocese  embraced  the  greater  part  of  Illinois,
and  it  contained  only  eighteen  priests.  He  went
to  Europe  early  in  1858,  returning  in  July  with
four  ecclesiastical  students,  whom  he  ordained,
and  within  a  little  over  a  year  he  had  increased
the  number  of  priests  to  forty-two.  During  the
same  period  he  built  eight  new  churches.  In  1859
he  completed  his  cathedral  of  St.  Peter  and  St.
Paul,  which  is  among  the  finest  churches  in  the
United  States.  His  visitations  of  his  diocese  were
long  and  severe  journeys,  during  which  he  founded
congregations  to  which  he  afterward  sent  clergy-
men, and  performed  every  duty  of  a  simple  priest.
He  gave  especial  attention  to  education,  founded
two  colleges  for  boys  and  six  academies  for  girls,
erected  an  ecclesiastical  seminary  near  his  cathe-
dral, and  built  two  hospitals,  as  well  as  an  or-
phan asylum. In  1868  the  number  of  priests  had


488


JUNEAU


JUNIPERO


increased  to  100,  besides  25  clerical  students,  the
churches  to  125,  and  the  parochial  schools  to  56.
He  also  introduced  into  his  diocese  various  relig-
ious fraternities.  Bishop  Juncker  was  a  fluent
speaker  in  the  French,  German,  and  English  lan-
guages, and  an  able  controversialist.  His  per-
sonal friendships  went  beyond  persons  of  his  own
religious  denomination.  To  those  with  whom  he
was  familiar  he  declared  himself  an  agent  in  be-
half of  law  and  order,  deeming  the  ministration
of  the  Roman  Catholic  church  the  most  powerful
agency  to  control  the  evil  tendency  of  the  masses.
JUNEAU,  Laurent  Solomon,  pioneer,  b.  in
L'Assumption  parish,  near  Montreal,  Canada,  9
Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Shawano,  Wis.,  14  Nov.,  1856.
He  was  of  Alsatian  descent.  In  1816  he  went  to
Mackinaw  and  became  clerk  to  Jaques  Vieau,  a
fur-trader. In  1821  he  was  the  first  white  settler

in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,
and  erected  a  house
and  store  of  tama-
rac- poles,  near  the
present  intersection
of  Wisconsin  and
East  Water  streets.
He  continued  to
trade  in  furs,  and
was  one  of  the  most
trusted  friends  of
John  Jacob  Astor,
Ramsay  Crooks,  and
other  members  of
the  American  fur
company,  of  which
he  was  for  years  the
agent.  During  his
residence  of  fifteen
years  among  the  In-
dians he  acquired
much  influence  over
them.  When  he
died  they  cared  for
his  remains  and
buried  them.  He  was  the  first  postmaster  of  Mil-
waukee, its  first  mayor,  and,  with  Morgan  L.  Mar-
tin, the  builder  of  the  first  court-house  that  was
erected  in  Wisconsin,  which  he  presented  to  Mil-
waukee. He  was  unable  to  retain  possession  of  his
property,  and  died  in  poverty  and  debt.  His  re-
mains have  been  recently  removed  to  Milwaukee,
and  in  1887  a  heroic  statue,  presented  to  the  city
of  Milwaukee,  was  erected  in  Juneau  park  through
the  munificence  of  the  firm  of  Bradley  and  Met-
calf,  of  that  city.  See  accompanying  illustration.
JUNGER,  jEgidius,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Burt-
scheid,  near  Aix-la-Chapelle,  Rhenish  Prussia,  6
April,  1883.  He  studied  theology,  was  ordained  to
the  Roman  Catholic  priesthood  on  26  July,  1862,
and  in  October  of  that  year  came  to  this  country
as  a  missionary,  and  was  stationed  at  Walla  Walla,
Washington  territory.  In  1864  he  was  attached  to
the  cathedral  at  Vancouver,  and  on  the  resignation
of  Bishop  Blanchet  became  second  bishop  of  the
diocese  of  Nesqually,  being  consecrated  on  28  Oct.,
1879.  In  1884  his  diocese  contained  30  churches
and  62  stations  and  Indian  missions.

JUNGMANN,  Bernhardt  (yung'-man),  German
botanist,  b.  in  Ronneburg  in  1671 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in
1747.  He  studied  in  Leipsic,  and  was  professor  of
botany  and  chemistrv  in  the  University  of  Gottin-
gen  in  1702,  and  that  of  Kiel  in  1709.  In  1712  he
went  to  Leyden,  and  was  sent  by  the  Dutch  gov-
ernment on  a  scientific  mission  to  America.  He
visited  successively  Canada,  New  England,  Mexico,
Cuba,  and  Porto  Rico  in  1715-24,  and  lived  several


years  in  Saint  Eustache  and  Saint  Lucia,  returning
in  1727  to  Leyden.  He  went  again  to  Mexico  in
1744,  but  was  persecuted  and  imprisoned  for  his
faith.  He  died  of  yellow  fever  a  few  days  before
his  intended  departure  for  Europe.  He  published
"Fasciculus  plantarum  rariarum  et  exoticarum,
(Leyden,  1728);  "Naturalis  dispositio  echinoder-
matum"  (1731);  "Historia  piscium  naturalis'
(1732) ;  "  Historia  adium  "  (1733) ;  "  Tantamen  me-
thodi  astrocologicae,  sive  dispositio  naturalis  coch-
lidum  et  concharum  "  (2  vols.,  1741);  "  Methodus
plantarum  genuina"  (1743);  "Enumeratio  plan-
tarum circa  Mexico  sponte  provenientium  "  (Mexi-
co, 1746);  and  "Thesaurus  plantarum  americana-
rum  "  (2  vols.,  1747).  He  also  contributed  papers  to
the  academies  of  sciences  of  Paris  and  Vienna,  on
Mexican  antiquities,  which  were  inserted  in  the
"Recueil  des  memoires  de  Facademie,"  and  re-
printed in  the  "  Blatter  fur  literarische  Unterhal-
tung  "  (Brunswick,  1837).

JUNGMANN,  John  George,  missionary,  b.  in
Hockenheim,  Palatinate,  19  April,  1720;  d.  in
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  17  July,  1808.  In  1732  he  came
with  his  father  to  this  country,  and  settled  at
Oley,  Berks  co.,  Pa.  At  that  place  he  witnessed,
in  1742,  the  baptism  of  the  first  three  Moravian
converts  from  the  Indian  nation,  and  was  so  deep-
ly impressed  that  he  resolved  to  devote  himself
to  missionary  work  among  the  aborigines.  He
labored  with  zeal  and  distinguished  success  at
Gnadenhuetten,  Pa.,  at  Pachgatgoch,  Conn.,  at
Wyalusing.  Pa.,  at  Friedenstadt,  on  Beaver  river,
Pa.,  and  in  the  Tuscarawas  valley,  Ohio,  first
as  a  lay  evangelist,  and  after  1770  as  an  ordained
deacon  of  the  Moravian  church.  In  consequence
of  the  complications  that  were  produced  along  the
western  border  by  the  Revolutionary  war  he  re-
tired in  1777  to  Bethlehem  for  a  few  years,  but  in
1781  resumed  his  work  in  Ohio.  It  was  of  but
short  duration.  Jungmann  and  all  the  other  mis-
sionaries were  taken  prisoners  by  the  Huron  half-
king  and  his  band  of  British  Indians,  carried  with
the  whole  body  of  converts  to  Sandusky,  and  even-
tually brought  to  Detroit  by  order  of  the  command-
ant of  that  post.  The  massacre  of  nearly  one  hun-
dred Christian  Indians  in  1782  broke  up  the
flourishing  mission  in  Ohio,  the  converts  scattering
in  every  direction.  When  at  last  they  returned  to
their  teachers,  Jungmann  helped  to  found  a  new
station  on  Clinton  river,  in  Michigan,  and  then,
in  1785,  after  thirty-five  years  in  the  service  of  the
Indian  mission,  retired  to  Bethlehem.

JUNIPERO,  Miguel  Jos6  Serra  (hoo-ne-
pay-ro),  missionary,  b.  in  the  island  of  Majorca.  24
Nov.,  1713;  d.  in  Monterey,  Cal.,  28  Aug.,  1784.
When  a  boy  he  was  employed  as  a  chorister  in  the
convent  of  San  Bernardino,  and  at  the  age  of  six-
teen was  admitted  a  member  of  the  order  of  St.
Francis.  In  due  time  he  received  the  degree  of
doctor  of  theology  and  became  professor  in  one  of
the  colleges  of  his  brethren.  He  joined  a  band  of
missionaries  that  set  out  from  Cadiz  in  1749,  and,
after  a  narrow  escape  from  shipwreck,  reached  the
city  of  Mexico,  1  Jan.,  1750.  After  a  short  rest,
Father  Junipero  was  sent  to  labor  among  the
wandering  tribes  of  the  Sierra  Gorda,  and  in  this
mission  he  spent  nineteen  years.  In  1767  the
Jesuits  were  expelled  from  Lower  California  by  the
Spanish  government.  The  Franciscans  were  ordered
to  take  charge  of  the  vacant  missions,  and  in  1769
Father  Junipero  was  appointed  superior  of  the
band  of  priests  that  were  sent  to  that  province.
As  soon  as  he  had  organized  the  missions,  he  joined
the  expedition  of  Don  Jose  de  Galvez  with  three
Franciscans,  and  after  some  sailing,  and  a  land


JUNKIN


JUSTINIANO


489


journev  of  fortv-six  days,  chiefly  on  foot,  he  reached
the  site  of  San  Diego,  Cal.,  16  .July,  1769.  Here  he
founded  his  first  mission  in  Upper  California,  set-
ting up  a  bower  of  reeds  and  green  branches  as  a
chapel,  and  erecting  a  wooden  cross  on  the  sea-
shore. He  attracted  the  Indians  by  presents,  and
gradually  gathered  them  in  villages  around  the
mission  church.  He  taught  them  to  cultivate  the
land,  to  sow  wheat,  grind  corn,  and  bake,  introduced
the  olive,  vine,  and  apple,  and  showed  them  how
to  weave,  to  yoke  oxen,  and  prepare  leather  from
hides,  as  well  as  instructing  them  in  the  rudiments
of  commerce.  In  the  following  winter  provisions
began  to  fail,  several  of  the  colonists  died,  Father
Junipero  fell  sick,  and  an  order  was  issued  to
abandon  the  settlement  in  March,  1770,  in  spite  of
the  entreaties  of  the  missionary.  At  length  the
"  San  Antonio  "  arrived  laden  with  supplies,  and
Father  Junipero  sailed  at  once  for  Monterey,  where
he  founded  the  mission  of  San  Carlos  on  3  June.
He  then  went  to  the  south  with  a  train  of  soldiers
and  mules,  and,  coming  to  a  pleasant  valley,  halted,
and,  hanging  on  a  tree  the  bell  that  he  had  brought
with  him.  began  to  ring  it,  crying :  "  Give  ear,  0  ye
Gentiles!  Come  to  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ!"
There  were  no  Indians  in  sight,  but  he  continued
ringing  until  a  native  appeared,  in  evident  aston-
ishment. Soon  hundreds  were  attracted  to  the
spot,  and  here  he  founded  the  mission  of  San  An-
tonio on  14  July,  1771.  On  8  Sept.,  1771,  he  be-
fan  the  mission  of  San  Gabriel,  twelve  miles  from
ios  Angeles,  among  Indians  of  a  superior  race,
and  he  founded  the  mission  of  San  Luis  Obis-
po on  1  Sept..  1772.  The  date  that  is  assigned
for  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  San  Francisco
is  27  June,  1776.  In  October  of  the  same  year
he  began  the  mission  of  San  Francisco  (Do-
lores). San  Juan  Capistrano  followed  on  1  Nov.,
1776,  Santa  Clara,  18  Jan.,  1777,  and  San
Buenaventura,  31  March,  1782.  Settlements  grew
up  around  these  missions,  numbering  thousands  of
Indians,  who  were  industrious,  well-clothed,  and
well-fed,  with  flocks  and  herds,  gardens,  orchards,
vineyards,  and  fields  of  wheat.  Father  Junipero's
zeal  was  untiring.  When  hostile  Indians  attacked
his  mission  of  San  Diego,  he  began  at  once  to  re-
build the  houses,  working  himself  as  laboriously  as
his  Indians.  He  then  went  to  Mexico  in  search  of
supplies,  walking  240  miles,  attended  only  by  an
Indian  boy.  He  is  said  to  have  baptized  over  a
thousand  with  his  own  hand.  The  .death  of  his
friend,  Father  Crespi,  1  Jan.,  1782,  was  a  blow
from  which  he  never  recovered.  In  the  next  year
he  paid  a  farewell  visit  to  the  missions,  travelling
from  one  to  another  on  foot,  as  was  his  custom.  He
returned  to  Monterey,  1  Jan.,  1783,  and  from  that
time  his  health  rapidly  declined.

JUNKIN,  George,  clergyman,  b.  near  Carlisle,
Pa.,  1  Nov.,  1790;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  20  May,
1868.  His  father  was  an  officer  in  the  Revolution-
ary army.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  col-
lege, Pa.,  in  1813,  studied  theology  in  New  York
city,  and  in  1819  became  pastor  of  the  Associate
Reformed  church  at  Milton,  Pa.,  where  he  was
active  in  establishing  the  Milton  academy,  and  in
1828-'9  edited  the  •'  Religious  Farmer."  In  1822,
with  the  body  of  his  church,  he  entered  the  Pres-
byterian church.  He  was  principal  of  the  Manual
labor  academy  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  in  1830.  and  in
1832  founded  and  became  president  of  Lafayette
college,  Easton,  Pa.  In  1841-'4  he  was  president  of
Miami  university,  Ohio,  returning  to  Lafayette  as


its  president  a  second  time  in  1845.  From  1848  till
1861  he  was  president  of  Washington  college,  Lex-
ington, Va.,  but  resigned  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  after  vigorous  efforts  to  maintain  the
Union,  and  at  a  great  sacrifice  of  property  returned
to  Philadelphia,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.
He  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  1844.  Among  his  numer-
ous works  are  "  The  Vindication,  a  Reply  to  the
Defence  of  Albert  Barnes"  (Philadelphia,  1836);
"  Treatise  on  Justification  "  (1839) ;  "  Lectures  on
the  Prophecies"  (1844);  "Political  Fallacies"
(1862) ;  "  Treatise  on  Sanctification  "  (1864) ;  '•  Two
Commissions,  the  Apostolic  and  Evangelical "
(1864);  and  "The  Tabernacle"  (1865).  A  biog-
raphy of  him  was  published  by  his  brother.  David
X.  Junkin  (Philadelphia,  1871).  — His  brother,
David  X.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mercer,  Pa.,  8  Jan.,
1808 ;  d.  in  Martinsburg,  Pa.,  22  April,  1880,  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in  1831.  After
teaching  a  short  time,  he  was  a  student  at  Princeton
theological  seminarv,  and  was  licensed  to  preach,
17  Oct.,  1833.  From  1835  till  1849  he  was  pastor
of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Greenwich,  N.  J.,
and  in  1837-'42  was  also  professor  of  literature  in
Lafayette  college,  Pa.  In  1851-'60  he  was  pastor
of  a  church  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  Hollidaysburg,  Pa.,  becoming
chaplain  in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  May  of  the  last-
named  year.  In  1869  he  became  pastor  of  a  church
in  Chicago,  111.,  and  from  1876  till  his  death  offici-
ated at  New  Castle,  Pa.  He  published  "  The  Oath
a  Divine  Ordinance  and  an  Element  of  the  Social
Constitution  "  (New  York,  1845),  and  "  Memoir  of
Rev.  George  Junkin,  D.  D."  (Philadelphia,  1871). —
George's  son,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Milton,  Pa.,  18
March,  1827,  studied  at  Lafayette,  and  at  Miami
university,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1842.  He
then  studied  law,  and  in  1848  was  admitted  to  the
Philadelphia  bar.  at  which  he  has  attained  high
rank  as  a  practitioner  before  the  civil  courts.  In
1882  he  was  an  independent  Republican  candidate
for  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania.
He  is  active  in  the  affairs  of  the  Presbyterian
church,  has  been  a  director  of  Princeton  theologi-
cal seminary  since  1869.  and  served  on  the  com-
mittee that  was  appointed  to  prepare  a  hymnal
for  his  denomination.

JUSTINIANO,  Bartolome  (hoos-teen-yah'-
no),  Spanish  explorer,  d.  in  Asuncion,  Paraguay,
late  in  the  16th  century.  He  went  to  Rio  de  la
Plata  as  treasurer  of  the  expedition  of  Juan  de  Sa-
lazar  de  Espinosa  in  1552,  but  was  shipwrecked  near
the  coast  of  Brazil.  There  was  now  a  division  be-
tween the  captains  Juan  de  Salazar  and  Hernando
de  Frejo,  and  the  friends  of  the  former  remained
with  him  in  the  place  that  afterward  was  known  as
San  Vicente.  There  they  passed  two  years,  and  at
the  end  of  this  time  Capt.  Salazar  sent  Justiniano,
as  the  most  capable  man  among  them,  to  ask  as-
sistance from  Domingo  de  Irala,  who  sent  Capt.
Nuflo  de  Chavez  to  their  rescue,  in  1555.  On
reaching  Asuncion,  Justiniano  gave  to  Irala  the
stores  and  ammunition  which  he  brought  with  him
for  the  government  of  the  country.  In  executing
the  orders  of  the  king,  they  met  with  much  oppo-
sition by  the  settlers,  many  of  whom  wrote  letters
to  the  court  against  Irala  and  treasurer  Justiniano.
Justiniano  seems  to  have  been  exonerated,  and
settled  at  Asuncion,  acting  with  ability  in  the  wars
against  the  natives.  After  he  served  for  several
years,  he  resigned  his  post  of  treasurer.


490


KAERCHER


KALB


K


KAERCHER,  George  Ringgold,  lawyer,  b.  in
Pottsville,  Pa.,  in  November,  1845.  His  father,
Franklin  B.  Kaereher,  published  the  "Anthracite
Gazette"  at  Pottsville,  served  as  lieutenant  of
Pennsylvania  volunteers  in  the  Mexican  war,  and
was  subsequently  treasurer  of  Schuylkill  county.
The  son  took  a  special  course  in  Lafayette  college,
studied  law,  and  in  1874  was  elected  district  at-
torney of  Schuylkill  county.  He  took  an  active
part  in  checking  official  corruption  and  in  prose-
cuting violators  of  the  election  laws,  and  to  his
efforts  were  largely  due  the  detection  and  convic-
tion of  the  "  Mollie  Maguire  "  murderers.  In  1883
he  became  general  solicitor  of  the  Philadelphia
and  Reading  railroad,  but  in  1886  resigned  and
resumed  his  private  practice.

KAIN,  John  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Mar-
tinsburg,  Berkeley  co.,  W.  Va..  31  May,  1841.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Preparatory  seminary  of  St.
Charles,  went  through  a  course  of  theology  and
philosophy  in  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  and
was  ordained  by  Archbishop  Spalding,  2  July,
1866.  He  was  then  stationed  at  Harper's  Ferry,
but  for  several  years  also  had  charge  of  the  Roman
Catholics  living  in  eight  counties  of  West  Virginia
and  four  of  Virginia.  During  his  pastorate  he
restored  the  churches  of  Harper's  Ferry  and  Mar-
tinsburg,  and  rebuilt  those  that  had  been  destroyed
at  Winchester  and  Berkeley  Springs  during  the
civil  war.  He  was  nominated  bishop  of  Wheeling,
21  Feb.,  1875,  and  consecrated  by  Archbishop
Bayley  in  the  following  May.  Bishop  Kain  has
now  (1887)  thirty-four  priests  under  his  jurisdic-
tion, ministering  to  a  Roman  Catholic  population
of  over  20,000.  There  are  sixty-two  churches  and
eight  chapels  in  his  diocese,  and  forty  stations.
There  are  four  convents,  one  college  for  boys,  six
academies  for  girls,  an  orphan  asylum,  and  a  hos-
pital. The  total  number  of  pupils  in  the  parochial
schools  reaches  nearly  2,000.

KALAKAUA,  David,  king  of  Hawaii,  b.  16
Nov.,  1836 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  20  Jan.,  1891.
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  a  chief,  and  received  a
good  education,  including  a  familiar  knowledge  of
the  English  language.  When  King  Kamehameha
died  in  1872,  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  throne,
but  his  opponent,  William  Lunalilo,  was  elected  by
the  people,  and  confirmed  by  the  legislature.  The
latter  died  within  a  year,  and  in  February,  1874,
Kalakaua  was  elected  to  the  vacant  throne  by  a
legislature  that  had  been  convened  for  the  pur-
pose. Ex-Queen  Emma,  the  rival  candidate,  re-
ceived six  votes  in  the  assembly,  to  thirty-six  for
him.  The  partisans  of  Queen  Emma  provoked  dis-
orders, which  were  quelled  by  the  intervention  of
English  and  American  marines.  In  the  autumn  of
1874  the  king  set  out  on  a  tour  of  the  United
States  and  Europe.  He  was  conveyed  to  San
Francisco  in  a  steam  frigate,  placed  at  his  disposal
by  the  American  government,  arriving  in  that
city  on  28  Nov.  On  10  July,  1887,  after  some  po-
litical excitement,  he  signed  a  new  constitution,
limiting  the  prerogatives  of  the  crown. — His  wife,
Kapiolani,  b.  31  Dec,  1835,  received  a  native  edu-
cation, and  adheres  to  the  national  customs.  She
founded  in  Honolulu  a  home  for  the  children  of
lepers.  In  the  spring  of  1887  she  visited  the
United  States,  and  in  the  summer  was  a  guest
of  the  queen  of  England  on  the  occasion  of  the

i"ubilee memorial.  —  His sister, Lydia Kama-
iaeha  Lilinokalani,  was  nominated  to  be  his  suc-


cessor by  Kalakaua,  who  has  no  children.  In  1879
the  princess,  who  speaks  the  English  language
fluently, visited San Francisco. She  is accom-

Elished  in  music,  and  has  composed  some  native
ymns.  She  is  married  to  Col.  John  O.  Dominis,
an  American,  b.  in  1830,  who  was  formerly  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  Hawaiian  military  forces
and  governor  of  the  island  of  Oahu.  The  princess
and  her  husband  accompanied  Queen  Kapiolani
on  her  visit  to  the  United  States  in  1887. — The
queen-dowager,  Emma  Kaleleonalani,  b.  in
Honolulu,  2  Jan.,  1836 ;  d.  there,  25  April,  1885,
was  the  granddaughter  of  an  Englishman  who
married  a  chiefess  of  high  rank,  and  was  adopted
by  Dr.  Rooke,  an  English  physician,  settled  in  the
islands,  who  had  married  her  aunt.  She  received
a  good  English  education,  and  married  King
Kamehameha  on  June  19,  1856.  In  1865-'6,  after
the  death  of  her  husband,  she  visited  the  United
States  and  Europe.  Her  only  child  died  at  the
age  of  four  years.  She  founded  the  Kamehameha
hospital  in  Honolulu,  and  left  her  large  estate  in
trust  for  the  benefit  of  the  Anglican  mission.

KALB,  Johann  de,  soldier,  b.  in  Hiittendorf,
Bavaria,  29  July,  1721 ;  d.  near  Camden,  S.  C,  19
Aug.,  1780.  He  served  in  the  French  army  in  1743
as  lieutenant,  and  in  1747  he  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  brigadier-general  under  Marshal  Broglie.
He  took  part  in  the  Seven  Years'  war,  and  obtained
the  order  of
military  mer-
it in  1761.
After  peace
was  declared
he  married  the
daughter  of  a
millionaire  of
Holland.  In
1768  he  visit-
ed the  Ameri-
can colonies
as  a  secret
agent  of  the
French  gov-
ernment. He
was  a  briga-
dier in  the
French  ser-
vice when  he
made  an  en-
gagement with  Franklin  and  Silas  Deane  to  join
the  Continental  army.  He  accordingly  accom-
panied Lafayette  to  America,  arriving  in  the  Bay
of  Georgetown  on  3  June,  1777,  and  in  that  year
was  appointed  by  congress  to  be  major-general.
He  began  his  service  under  the  immediate  com-
mand of  Washington,  and  was  with  him  at  Val-
ley Forge.  He  served  in  New  Jersey  and  Mary-
land until  April,  1780,  when  he  was  sent  to  re-en-
force Gen.  Lincoln,  but  arrived  too  late.  When
Cornwallis  heard  news  of  the  gathering  storm  on
the  borders  of  South  Carolina,  he  decided  to  join
Lord  Rawdon,  who  was  stationed  at  Camden.  He
arrived  there  13  Aug.,  and  found  to  his  dismay
that  many  of  the  British  troops  were  ill,  and  the
whole  force  would  amount  to  but  little.  He  there-
fore planned  to  march  forward  and  meet  Gen.
Gates  before  the  arrival  of  the  Virginia  troops,
which  were  known  to  be  advancing.  Gen.  Gates
was  joined  by  Kalb,  who  commanded  the  Dela-
ware and  Maryland  forces,  and  they  decided  to  at-


^JUS?&£^


KALBFLEISCH


KALM


491


tack  Camden.  While  the  American  army  was  ap-
proaching, Cornwallis  struck  his  tents  and  marched
toward  Rugeley's.  Neither  party  was  aware  of  the
close  proximity  of  its  opponent  until  the  advanced
guards  met,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.
In  the  battle  that  ensued  soon  after  sunrise,  Kalb
commanded  on  the  American  right  and  was  driving
his  adversary,  Lord  Rawdon,  before  him,  when  the
defeat  of  our  left  wing  exposed  his  flank  and  rear
to  the  assaults  of  Webster  and  Tarleton.  Kalb  was
thus  attacked  on  all  sides,  but  remained  during  the
whole  encounter,  fighting  bravely  to  the  last.  Bare-
headed and  dismounted,  with  sword  in  hand,  he
engaged  in  one  personal  encounter  after  another,
encouraging  his  men.  with  his  voice  as  well  as  his
example,  till  he  had  received  eleven  wounds.  His
lieutenant,  Du  Buysson,  saved  him  from  instant
death.  He  died  three  days  afterward,  and  was
buried  at  Camden.  A  marble  monument  was
erected  to  his  memory  by  the  citizens  of  that  town,
the  corner-stone  being  laid  by  Gen.  Lafavette  in
1825.  On  16  Aug.,  1886,  a  statue  of  Kalb,  exe-
cuted in  Rome  by  Ephraim  Keyser,  was  placed  in
front  of  the  court-house  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  the
address  being  delivered  by  Thomas  F.  Bayard,  of
Delaware.  See  "Leben  des  amerikanischen  Gen-
erals, Johann  Kalb,"  bv  Friedrich  Kapp  (Stuttgart,
1862 ;  English  translation,  New  York,  1870).

KALBFLEISCH,  Martin,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Flushing,  Holland,  8  Feb.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  12  Feb.,  1873.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  embarked
with  an  American  captain  to  engage  in  trading  in
Sumatra,  but  returned  on  account  of  cholera.  Form-
ing a  partnership  with  an  American,  he  carried  on
business  in  Havre,  France,  for  four  years.  In  1826
he  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  settled  in  New
York  city,  found  employment  as  clerk,  and  next  as
chemist,  and  in  1835  established  a  color-factory  in
Harlem,  afterward  removing  it  to  Norwalk,  Conn.,
where  his  building  was  destroyed  by  fire.  In  1842
he  founded  a  chemical  factory  at  Greenpoint,  L.  I.
He  was  elected  mayor  of  Brooklyn  in  1861,  and  in
1862  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat.  In
1867  and  1869  he  was  elected  by  the  Democrats
mayor  for  the  second  and  third  time,  and  in  1871
was  an  independent  candidate,  but  was  defeated
by  the  regular  Democratic  nominee.

KALER,  James  Otis,  journalist,  b.  in  Winter-
port,  Me.,  19  March,  1848.  He  was  educated  in  the
common  schools,  and  adopting  journalism  as  a  pro-
fession has  at  different  times  been  associate  editor
with  Frank  Leslie  and  Norman  Munro,  and  under
the  pen-name  of  "  James  Otis  "  has  published  teles
for  the  voung,  including  "  Tobv  Tyler  "  (New  York,
1880);  "Tim  and  Tip"  (1880);  "Left  Behind"
(1882) ;  "  Raising  the  Pearl "  (1883);  "  Mr.  Stubb's
Brother"  (1883) ;  and  " Silent  Pete"  (1885).

KALISCH,  Isidor,  clergyman,  b.  in  Krotosehin,
Posen,  Prussia,  15  Nov.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
11  May,  1886.  He  was  educated  at  the  universities
of  Berlin,  Breslau,  and  Prague,  and  while  pursu-
ing his  studies  in  theology  and  philosophy  con-
tributed to  German  periodicals.  In  1842  he  wrote
a  patriotic  poem,  entitled  "  Schlacht-Gesang  der
Deutschen,"  which  was  set  to  music  and  became
one  of  the  popular  songs  of  the  day.  In  1843  he
preached  the  first  German  sermon  ever  delivered
m  his  native  town.  He  came  to  the  United  States
in  1849,  and  in  1850  was  called  to  the  Tifireth
Israel  congregation  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he
labored  in  the  interest  of  reformed  Judaism.  In
1855  the  first  conference  of  rabbis  was  held  in
Cleveland,  and  a  ritual  and  common  prayer-book
was  agreed upon, entitled "  Minhag  America,"


(j/^W^  yji*t£*'<KA


which  he  edited  and  which  is  now  in  use  in  many
synagogues.  In  1855  he  was  requested  by  Prof.
Josiah  W.  Gibbs,  of  Yale,  to  decipher  a  Phoenician
inscription  that  had  been  found  in  Sidon,  Asia,  his
rendering  of  which  was  read  before  the  Syro-
Egyptian  society  of  London,  13  Nov.,  1855.  In
1856-'9  he  had  charge  of  a  congregation  in  Mil-
waukee, Wis.,  where  he  united  the  two  factions  of
Israelites,  and  or-
ganized Die  treue
Sch  western,  a  benev-
olent society  of  Jew-
ish ladies.  He  then
held  charges  in  In-
dianapolis, Detroit,
Leavenworth,  Kan.,
Newark,  N.  J.,  and
Nashville,  Tenn.,
where  he  erected  a
synagogue.  He  re-
turned to  Newark,
N.  J.,  in  1875,  and
devoted  himself  to
literary  work  and
to  lecturing,  taking
part  in  polemical
discussions  in  be-
half of  the  ultra-reform  element  in  Judaism.  His
controversies  with  Rev.  Isaac  Leeser.  arising  from
Dr.  Kalisch's  criticism  of  Leeser's  English  version
of  the  Bible,  and  on  the  "  Jewish  Belief  in  a  Per-
sonal Messiah,"  have  become  famous  in  the  his-
tory of  Jewish  literature.  From  1853  till  1878  he
edited  the  "Guide,"  and  contributed  a  great  num-
ber of  essays  and  discourses  to  German  and  Eng-
lish religious  periodicals.  He  was  the  author  of
poetrv  in  Hebrew  and  German,  including  "  Tone
des  Morgen-Landes,"  "  Die  letzten  Lebensmomente
Moses,"  "  Die  mystische  Harfe,"  "  Der  Teufel-
stein,"  and  "  Gesicht  der  Seele."  and  several  hymns
which  are  contained  in  the  "Reformed  Hebrew
Prayer-Book."  In  addition  to  lectures,  miscella-
neous works,  and  translations,  he  published  "  Weg-
weiserfui  rationelle  Forsehungen  in  den  biblischen
Schriften  "  (1853  ;  English  translation  bv  Dr.  M.
Mayer,  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  1857):  and"  English
translations  of  Lessing's  "  Nathan  der  Weise "
(New  York,  1869) ;  of  "  Sepher  Yezirah.  a  Book
on  Creation,  or  the  Jewish  Metaphysics  of  Remote
Antiquitv,"  with  notes  and  glossary,  together  with
a  "Sketch  of  the  Talmud"  (1877);  of  the  Hebrew
autobiography  of  Rabbi  Jom  Tow,  or  Lipman
Heller  (in  the  "Jewish  Record,"  Philadelphia,
1878) ;  of  Prof.  Munk's  celebrated  "  History  of  the
Philosophy  and  Philosophical  Authors  of  the
Jews,"  from  the  French  (1881) ;  and  of  the  "  Ha-
Tapnach,"  an  imitation  of  Plato's  "Phaedor,"
ascribed  to  Aristotle  the  Stagyrite,  from  the  He-
brew (New  York,  1885).  His  contributions  to  Tal-
mudical  lexicography  were  published  in  the  "  Lon-
don Jewish  Chronicle  "  (1867) ;  and  in  the  "  Litera-
tur-Blatt"  (Magdeburg,  Germany,  1880).  See
"  Der  deutsehe  Pioneer  "  (Cincinnati.  1873).

KALM,  Peter,  botanist,  b.  in  Ostro  Bothnia,
Sweden,  in  1715  ;  d.  in  Abo,  Sweden,  16  Nov..  1779.
He  was  educated  at  Upsala  and  Abo,  and  after
travelling  extensively  in  Russia,  was  sent  by  the
Swedish  government,  at  the  suggestion  of  Linna?us,
to  investigate  the  botany  and  natural  history  of
North  America.  Landing  in  Philadelphia  in  1748,
he  spent  three  years  in  Pennsylvania,  New  York,
and  Canada,  and  returning  to  Abo  became  a  pro-
fessor of  natural  history  there.  He  was  afterward
elected  a  member  of  the  Stockholm  academy  of
sciences,  and  created  knight  -of  the  Order  of  V  asa.


492


KALOPOTHAKES


KANE


The  evergreen  plant  kalmia  was  named  in  his
honor.  Besides  several  scientific  works,  he  wrote
"  A  Voyage  to  North  America,"  an  account  of  the
soils  and  the  natural  curiosities  of  this  country
(Abo,  1753-61 ;  English  translation,  London,  1772).

KALOPOTHAKES,  Martha  Hooper  Black-
ler,  missionary,  b.  in  Marblehead,  Mass.,  1  June,
1830 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Greece,  16  Dec,  1871.  She  be-
came interested  in  missions,  and  in  1858  married
M.  D.  Kalopothakes,  who  studied  medicine  and
theology  in  New  York  city.  He  returned  to  Greece,
his  native  land,  as  a  Protestant  missionary,  accom-
panied by  his  wife,  who  acquired  the  Greek  lan-
guage, and  assisted  him  in  editing  a  weekly  paper.
She  labored  as  a  missionary,  and  exercised  a  wide
influence  among  the  Greek  women.  During  the
last  three  years  of  her  life  she  translated  books
from  the  English,  and  edited  a  juvenile  paper  that
was  published  in  Greek.

KANE,  Elias  Kent,  senator,  b.  in  New  York
city,  7  June,  1796 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  11
Dec,  1835.  He  was  a  cousin  of  John  Kintzing
Kane.  He  studied  law,  practised  in  Nashville,
Tenn.,  and  in  1815  removed  to  Kaskaskia,  Illinois
territory.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention
that  framed  the  state  constitution  of  Illinois  in
1818,  and  was  the  first  secretary  of  state,  and  after-
ward a  member  of  the  legislature.  He  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Jacksonian  Democrat,  and
re-elected  for  a  second  term,  serving  from  5  Dec,
1825,  until  his  death.

KANE,  George  Proctor,  merchant,  b.  in  Balti-
more, 21  Aug.,  1817 ;  d.  there,  23  June,  1878.  His
parents  came  from  fhe  north  of  Ireland.  He  be-
came a  grain-merchant  in  Baltimore,  and  during  the
famine  in  Ireland  was  active  in  sending  food  to  the
suffering  peasantry.  He  held  various  local  offices,
and  during  the  administration  of  Presidents  Taylor
and  Fillmore  was  collector  of  the  port  of  Baltimore.
While  marshal  of  police  in  1861  he  endeavored  to
protect  the  6th  Massachusetts  regiment  from  the
assaults  of  the  mob,  but  resisted  the  demand  of
Gen.  Butler  for  the  surrender  of  arms  in  the  pos-
session of  the  city  authorities.  As  a  suspected
protector  of  contraband  traffic  in  arms,  and  head
of  an  armed  force  hostile  to  the  United  States,-  he
was  arrested  in  June,  1861,  and  confined  in  Fort
McHenry,  and  subsequently  in  Forts  Warren  and
Lafayette.  When  released  at  the  end  of  fourteen
months  he  went  to  the  south,  where  he  remained
till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  sheriff  of  Balti-
more in  1873,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  mayor.

KANE,  John  Kintzing,  jurist,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  16  May,  1795 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21
Feb.,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1814,
studied  law  with  Joseph  Hopkinson,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1817,  and  practised  in  Philadelphia.
At  an  early  period  of  his  life  he  manifested  an  in-
terest in  public  affairs  as  a  member  of  the  Feder-
alist party.  He  was  sent  to  the  legislature  in
1823,  but  shortly  afterward  joined  the  Democratic
party. He  filled  the  office  of  solicitor  of  Philadel-

Ehia  in  1828-'30.  In  the  electoral  canvass  of  1828
e  ably  supported  Andrew  Jackson.  He  was  ap-
pointed in  1832  one  of  the  three  commissioners
under  the  convention  of  indemnity  with  France  of
4  July  of  the  preceding  year.  He  prepared  the
report  of  that  commission,  and  was  the  author  of
"  Notes  "  on  questions  decided  by  the  board,  which
were  published  after  the  conclusion  of  its  labors  in
1836.  The  first  printed  attack  on  the  TJ.  S.  bank
was  written  by  him,  and  passages  in  the  messages
and  public  utterances  of  President  Jackson  were
supposed  to  have  been  of  his  composition.  His
enjoyment  of  the  friendship  of  the  president  led


to  his  being  for  a  brief  period  subjected  to  social
proscription  in  Philadelphia,  the  stronghold  of
the  bank  party.  A  memorable  letter  addressed  by
Jackson  to  James  K.  Polk  during  the  campaign  of
1844  was  written  by  Kane,  and  during  what  is
known  as  the  "  Buckshot  war  "  in  Pennsylvania  he
was  the  effective  manoeuvrer  of  the  Democratic
party.  He  became  attorney-general  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1845,  but  resigned  in  1846  on  being  ap-
pointed U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of  Pennsyl-
vania. He  was  distinguished  for  his  attainments
in  the  Roman  and  continental  law,  and  his  judicial
decisions,  especially  in  the  admiralty  and  in  the
patent  law,  were  much  cited.  His  action  in  the
case  of  Passmore  Williamson,  who  was  committed
for  contempt  of  court  in  a  proceeding  under  the
fugitive-slave  law,  was,  however,  violently  assailed
by  the  Abolition  party.  He  led  in  the  struggle  of
the  first  board  of  trustees  to  open  Girard  college,
and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  controversy
which  divided  the  Presbyterian  church  into  the
new  and  old  schools.  He  was  one  of  the  trustees
and  legal  advisers  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in
the  United  States. From  1856  until  he  died  he  was

g resident  of  the  American  philosophical  society. —
[is  son,  Elisha  Kent,  arctic  explorer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  20  Feb.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  16
Feb.,  1857,  was  obliged,  owing  to  illness,  to  leave,
in  his  seventeenth  year,  an  elective  course  at  the
University  of  Virginia.  Improving  in  health,  he
applied  himself  so
diligently  to  study
that  while  but
twenty- two  years  of
age  he  graduated  in
medicine  at  the  head
of  his  class  at  the
University  of  Penn-
sylvania. Kane  en-
tered the  U.  S.  navy,
21  July,  1843.  as  as-
sistant surgeon,  and
was  promoted  to  be
passed  assistant  sur-
geon, 14  Sept.,  1848.
He  served  as  sur-
geon in  China,  on
the  coast  of  Africa,
in  Mexico,  where  he  was  wounded  while  on  special
service,  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  on  coast-survey
duty  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  from  which  he  was  re-
lieved, at  his  urgent  request,  for  duty  with  the  first
Grinnell  arctic  expedition.  In  all  his  service  he
eagerly  sought  opportunity  for  travel,  exploration,
and  adventure,  and  once,  in  descending  into  the
crater  of  Teal,  in  the  Philippines,  he  barely  escaped
with  his  life.  His  experiences  included  six  months
of  practice  as  a  physician  in  China,  an  encounter
with  Bedouin  robbers  in  Egypt,  and  a  visit  to  the
king  of  Dahomey  in  Africa.  Kane  prepared  for  his
arctic  voyage  in  two  days'  time,  and  sailed  as  sur-
geon of  the  "  Advance "  under  Lieut.  Edwin  J.
DeHaven,  who  commanded  the  squadron,  the  "  Ad-
vance "  and  "  Rescue."  These  vessels,  purchased,
strengthened,  and  fitted  out  through  the  liberality
of  Henry  Grinnell,  were  accepted  by  the  United
States,  under  the  joint  resolution  of  congress,  ap-
proved 5  May,  1850,  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  in
the  search  for  the  English  expedition  under  Sir  John
Franklin.  The  squadron  discovered  "Grinnell
Land,"  an  island  north  of  Cornwallis  island,  which
should  not  be  confounded  with  the  better  known
Grinnell  Land  bordering  on  the  frozen  sea.  Failing
to  reach  an  advantageous  point  for  further  search,
DeHaven  decided  to  return  home  the  same  year,


— ^. ^t^Z^L^eJ)


KANE


KANE


493


but  his  vessels  were  closely  beset  by  the  ice  in
Wellington's  channel,  and  drifted  from  September,
1850,  till  June  1851,  southeasterly  into  Baffin  bay,
where  they  finally  escaped  from  the  pack.  Kane's
exertions  and  medical  skill  did  much  to  mitigate
the  ills  of  the  scurvy-stricken  squadron,  and  bring
back  the  party  with  undiminished  numbers.  His
reputation  as  an  arctic  explorer  depends  almost
entirely  on  his  second  expedition,  which  was  under-
taken at  the  solicitation  of  Lady  Franklin  in  a  search
for  Franklin  and  his  companions.  The  expedition
contemplated  an  overland  journey  from  Baffin  bay
to  the  shores  of  the  polar  sea.  Kane  sailed  30  May,
1853,  from  New  York,  in  command  of  the  brig
"  Advance,"  which  Henry  Grinnell  had  placed  at
his  disposal.  George  Peabody  contributed  liberally,
while  various  scientific  societies  of  the  country  also
fostered  the  undertaking.  Kane  not  only  spent
much  of  his  private  means,  but  through  strenuous
exertions  succeeded  in  sailing  under  the  auspices
of  the  U.  S.  navy  department,  although  congress
failed  to  aid  him.  Dr.  Isaac  I.  Hayes  (q.  v.)  went
as  surgeon  of  the  expedition.  The  "  Advance  "
touched  at  various  Greenland  ports,  where  Esqui-
mau recruits  were  obtained,  and  finally,  by  follow-
ing the  bold  coast  of  Smith  sound,  reached  78°  43'
N.,  the  highest  latitude  ever  attained,  even  to  this
day,  by  a  sailing-vessel  in  that  sea.  Unable  to  pro-
ceed farther,  Kane  wintered  in  Van  Rensselaer
harbor,  78°  37'  N.,  70°  40'  W.  Short  journeys  that
autumn  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  Humboldt
glacier,  which,  issuing  at  its  southern  edge  from
the  great  mer-de-glace  of  Greenland  in  79°  12',  ex-
tends northward  many  miles.  An  attempt  to  push
northward  along  this  glacier  in  the  spring  of  1854
resulted  only  in  the  loss  of  two  lives  and  the  maim-
ing of  two  other  persons.  Later,  Morton,  with
Esquimau  Hans,  reached,  by  dog-sledge,  Cape  Con-
stitution in  80°  35'  N.,  21  June,  1854,  from  which
point  the  southwesterly  part  of  Kennedy  channel
was  seen  to  be  entirely  open  and  free  from  ice.
Dr.  Hayes,  with  dog-sledge,  crossed  Kane  sea,  and,
reaching  Cape  Hawkes,  Grinnell  Land,  pushed
northward  to  the  vicinity  of  Cape  Frazier,  79°
45'  N.  The  ice  remaining  unbroken  near  his  win-
ter-quarters, Dr.  Kane,  in  July,  1854,  made  an  un-
successful attempt  by  boat  to  visit  Beechy  island,
about  400  miles  distant,  whence  he  hoped  to  obtain
assistance.  Later  that  year  half  of  the  party,  under
the  command  of  Petersen,  a  Dane,  abandoned  Dr.
Kane  and  the  brig  in  an  attempt  to  reach  Uper-
navic,  but,  after  three  months  of  extreme  hardship
and  suffering,  were  obliged  to  return  to  Kane,  who
received  them  kindly.  In  1855  Kane  was  reluc-
tantly forced  to  abandon  the  '*  Advance,"  which  was
yet  frozen  in.  By  indefatigable  exertions  he  suc-
ceeded in  moving  his  boats  and  sick  some  sixty
miles  to  the  open  sea,  losing  one  man  on  the  way.
During  this  journey  he  received  much  aid  and
kindness  from  the  Etah  Esquimaux.  He  reached
Cape  York,  21  July,  and,  crossing  Melville  bay  suc-
cessfully, arrived  at  Upernavik,  6  Aug.,  1855.
This  second  voyage  of  Kane's  greatly  enlarged  the
world's  knowledge  of  the  Etah  Esquimaux,  and
added  to  geography  the  most  northern  lands  of
that  day,  while  the  scientific  observations  were
more  accurate  and  valuable  than  those  of  any  pre-
ceding polar  expedition.  The  explorer  and  his
companions  were  received  with  enthusiasm  on  their
return.  Arctic  medals  were  authorized  by  congress,
and  the  queen's  medal  was  presented  to  officers  and
men.  Kane  received  the  founder's  medal  of  1856
from  the  Royal  geographical  society,  and  the  gold
medal  of  1858  from  the  Societe  de  geographie.
His  health  had  been  much  impaired  by  the  suffer-


ings of  his  second  expedition.  In  the  hope  of  re-
covering it  he  visited  England,  and  then  went  to
Havana,  Cuba,  where  he  died.  His  remains  were
taken  to  Philadelphia,  and  accorded  civic  and  mili-
tary honors.  Dr.  Kane  published  "  The  U.  S.  Grin-
nell Expedition  "  (New  York,  1854) ;  and  "  The  Sec-
ond Grinnell  Expedition  "  (Philadelphia,  1856).  See
William  Elder's  "Biography  of  E.  K.  Kane"
(Philadelphia,  1858).— Another  son,  Thomas  Leip-
er,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  Jan.,  1822;
d.  there,  26  Dec,  1883,  was  educated  in  Paris,  where
he  associated  with  Auguste  Comte  and  French  Re-
publicans, and  contributed  to  "Le  National,"  a
democratic  organ.  After  his  return  to  Philadel-
phia he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1846,  and  held  for  several  years  the  office  of  clerk
of  the  U.  S.  district  court,  but  resigned  it  on  ac-
count of  the  passage  of  the  fugitive-slave  law.  In
1847  he  visited  the  Mormon  settlements,  and  se-
cured their  confidence  to  such  an  extent,  by  be-
friending them  during  the  miseries  of  their  pil-
grimage to  Utah,  that  in  1858,  after  Brigham
Young  had  called  the  people  of  Utah  to  arms  to
prevent  the  entrance  of  U.  S.  troops,  and  Gov.  Al-
fred Cumming  (q.  v.)  had  issued  a  proclamation  de-
claring the  territory  to  be  in  a  state  of  rebellion,
he  went  to  Utah  at  his  own  expense  with  letters
from  President  Buchanan,  and  arranged  the  basis
of  the  settlement  that  was  afterward  concluded  by
peace  commissioners.  He  founded  and  laid  out
the  town  of  Kane  in  the  northwestern  part  of
Pennsylvania,  where  he  raised,  in  April,  1861,  a
regiment  of  hunters  and  loggers  known  as  the
"  Bucktails,"  which  became  famous  for  valor  and
endurance.  He  was  wounded  at  Dranesville,  where
he  led  the  advance,  and  at  Harrisonburg  he  was
sent  to  the  rescue  of  a  regiment  that  had  fallen
into  an  ambuscade,  with  104  picked  riflemen  en-
countered three  regiments  of  the  enemy,  and  was
wounded  and  taken  prisoner.  He  was  released  on
parole,  and  in  August,  1862,  exchanged.  On  7
Sept.,  1862,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general  for
gallant  services  in  the  field.  At  the  beginning  of
the  battle  of  Gettysburg  he  was  absent  on  sick
leave,  yet  he  hastened  to  Washington  for  orders,
took  to  Gen.  Meade  the  information  that  the  Na-
tional telegraphic  cipher  was  known  to  the  Con-
federates, joined  his  brigade  on  the  morning  of  the
second  day,  and  held  an  important  position  on  the
extreme  right.  He  resigned  on  7  Nov.,  1863,  being
disabled  by  wounds  and  exposure.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "The  Mormons"  (Philadelphia,  1850);
'•Alaska"  (1868);  and  "Coahuila"  (1877).

KANE,  Paul,  Canadian  artist,  b.  in  Toronto
in  1810;  d.  there  in  1871.  He  early  evinced  a
love  of  art,  and  after  studying  in  Upper  Canada
college  he  visited  the  United  States  in  1836,  and
followed  his  profession  there  till  1840,  when  he
went  to  Europe.  There  he  studied  in  Rome,
Genoa,  Naples,  Florence,  Venice,  and  Bologna.
He  finally  returned  to  Toronto  in  the  spring  of
1845,  and  after  a  short  rest  went  on  a  tour  of  art
exploration  through  the  unsettled  regions  of  the
northwest.  He  travelled  many  thousands  of  miles
in  this  country  from  the  confines  of  old  Canada  to
the  Pacific  ocean,  and  was  eminently  successful  in
delineating  the  physical  peculiarities  and  appear-
ance of  the  aborigines,  as  well  as  the  wild  scenery
of  the  far  north.  He  returned  to  Toronto  in  De-
cember, 1848,  having  in  his  possession  one  of  the
largest  collections  of  Indian  curiosities  that  was
ever  made  on  the  continent,  together  with  nearly
four  hundred  sketches.  From  these  he  painted  a
series  of  oil-pictures  which  are  now  in  the  pos-
session of  George  W.  Allan,  of  Toronto,  and  em-


494


KANNEGIESER


KAULBACH


brace  views  of  the  country  from  Lake  Superior  to
Vancouver's  island.  Mr.  Kane  is  the  author  of
"  Wanderings  of  an  Artist "  (London,  1858).

KANNEGIESER,  Sigismund  (kan-na-ge-zer),
German  explorer,  b.  in  Freiberg  in  170(5;  d.  in
Ratisbon  in  1759.  He  studied  in  Vienna,  and  was
appointed  a  clerk  in  the  state  department  in  1728,
but  soon  resigned  his  post  to  follow  his  tastes  for
adventure  and  science.  He  travelled  in  North  and
South  America  and  the  West  Indies  for  fifteen
years,  and  was  offered  the  appointment  of  pro-
fessor of  history  in  the  College  of  Santiago,  Chili,
but  refused  it,  and,  returning  in  1744,  settled  in
Ratisbon.  He  published  "  Briefe  aus  Si'id-
Amerika  "  (Ratisbon,  1746) ;  "  Menschen  und  Lan-
der" (1747);  "Tagebuch  der  Reisen"  (Stuttgart,
1749);  "Reisen  im  siidlichen  Amerika"  (3  vols.,
Leipsic,  1750) ;  "  Neueste  Reisen  durch  Louisiana  "
(2  vols.,  Ratisbon,  1751) ;  "  Das  Leben  der  Incas
Prinzen  von  Peru"  (3  vols.,  Vienna,  1755);  and
"Ansichten  ilber  die  Peruanischen  Alterthumer
und  Peru  iiberhaupt  "  (3  vols.,  Ratisbon,  1758).

KAPP,  Friedrich,  German  author,  b.  in  Hamm,
Prussia,  13  April,  1824 ;  d.  in  Berlin,  27  Oct.,  1884.
He  was  at  the  University  of  Heidelberg  from
1842-5,  and  studied  law  in  Berlin,  practising  his
profession  in  Hamm  and  Unna  till  1848,  when  he
removed  to  Frankfort-on-the-Main.  He  then  spent
some  time  in  Belgium  and  Paris,  and  translated
two  works  of  Alexander  Herzen,  who  entrusted
him  with  the  charge  of  his  son.  In  1850  he  came
to  New  York,  where  he  practised  law  till  1870.
In  1860  he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  in  1867
he  was  appointed  commissary  of  emigration,  which
office  he  held  till  his  return  to  Germany  in  1870.
In  1871  he  became  a  member  of  the  German  diet.
He  received  the  degree  of  doctor  of  philosophy
from  the  University  of  Bonn  on  4  Aug.,  1868.  He
was  the  author  of  "  The  Slave  Question  in  the
United  States "  (Gottingen,  1854) ;  "  Life  of  the
American  General  Friedrich  Wilhelm  von  Steu-
ben" (Berlin,  1858;  New  York,  1859);  "History
of  Slavery  in  the  United  States  of  America  "  (New
York,  1858);  "The  Trading  in  Soldiers  of  the
German  Princes  with  America,  1775-'83  "  (Berlin,
1864) ;  "  A  History  of  the  German  Migration  into
America "  (New  York,  1867) ;  "  On  Immigration
and  the  Commission  of  Emigration  "  (1870) ;  "  Life
of  the  American  General  Johann  Kalb"  (Stutt-
gart, 1862 ;  New  York,  1870) ;  and  "  Frederick  the
Great  and  the  United  States  "  (Berlin,  1871).  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  in  writing  a
history  of  the  German  book-trade,  which  was  sub-
sequently published  (1886).

KASSON,  John  Adams,  lawyer,  b.  near  Bur-
lington, Vt.,  11  Jan.,  1822.  After  graduation  in
the  University  of  Vermont  in  1842,  he  studied  law
in  Massachusetts,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  practised  law  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  until  1857,
when  he  removed  to  Des  Moines.  Iowa.  He  was
chairman  of  the  Republican  state  committee  from
1858-60.  when  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican
national  convention  at  Chicago.  In  1861  he  was
appointed  by  President  Lincoln  first  assistant
postmaster-general,  which  office  he  resigned  in
1862,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
serving  from  1863-7.  He  was  U.  S.  postal
commissioner  to  Paris  in  1863,  and  again  in  1867,
when  he  negotiated  postal  conventions  with  Great
Britain  and  other  nations.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Iowa  house  of  representatives  from  1868-'73,
when  he  was  again  elected  to  congress,  serving  from
1  Dec,  1873,  till  3  March,  1877.  He  was  appointed
U.  S.  minister  to  Austria  in  1877,  having  first
ieclined  the  mission  to  Spain,  and  remained  in


Vienna  until  1881,  when  he  was  again  elected  to
congress,  serving  from  4  March.  1881,  till  his  ap-
pointment on  4  July,  1884,  as  minister  to  Germany,
where  he  was  succeeded  in  1885  by  George  II.  Pen-
dleton. He  was  president  of  the  committee  on  the
centennial  celebration  of  the  adoption  of  the  con-
stitution, held  in  Philadelphia  in  September,  1887.

KATTE,  Walter,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  London,
England,  14  Nov.,  1830.  He  was  educated  at
King's  college  school,  and  in  1846-'9  served  his
pupilage  in  a  civil  engineer's  office.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1850,  entered  the  American
railway  service,  and  in  1857-'8  was  resident  engineer
of  the  state  canals  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  resi-
dent engineer  of  the  western  division  of  the  Pitts-
burg, Fort  Wayne  and  Chicago  railroad  in  1858-9,
and  in  1859-'61  chief  assistant  engineer  of  the  Pitts-
burg and  Steubenville  railroad.  In  1861-'2  he
was  connected  with  the  U.  S.  military  railway  ser-
vice in  Washington,  Virginia,  and  Maryland,  and
in  1863  he  became  chief  engineer  of  the  Lewiston
branch  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad,  and  in  1863-'5
resident  engineer  and  engineer  of  bridges  and
buildings  on  the  Northern  Central  railroad.  Mr.
Katte  held  in  1865-'75  the  offices  of  engineer,  sec-
retary, and  general  western  agent  of  the  Keystone
bridge  company  of  Pittsburg,  closing  this  service
as  superintending  engineer  of  the  erection  of  the
St.  Louis  steel  arch  bridge.  After  two  years  in
St.  Louis  he  came  to  New  York  as  chief  engineer
of  the  New  York  elevated  railroad,  which  office  he
held  in  1877-'80,  and  in  1880-'6  he  was  chief  en-
gineer of  the  New  York,  West  Shore,  and  Buffalo
railroad  and  its  branches,  and  of  the  North  river
construction  company.  In  1886  he  became  chief
engineer  of  the  New  York  Central  and  Hudson
river,  New  York  and  Harlem,  and  West  Shore  rail-
roads with  their  branches.  Mr.  Katte  is  a  member
of  various  societies  of  civil  engineers.

KAUFMAN,  David  Spangler,  lawyer,  b.  in
Boiling  Springs,  Cumberland  co.,  Pa.,  18  Dec,
1813 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  13  Jan.,  1851.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1833,  and  studied
law  in  Natchez,  Miss.  In  1835  he  began  practice
in  Natchitoches,  La.,  but  removed  to  Nacogdoches,
Tex.,  in  1837.  He  served  as  a  volunteer  against
the  Indians,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Texas  house
of  representatives  from  1839-'43,  when  he  became
a  member  of  the  state  senate,  serving  till  1845.
In  1844  he  presented  a  report  in  favor  of  annex-
ation, and  took  an  active  part  in  its  consummation.
In  1845  he  was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  in  the
United  States,  but  that  office  was  superseded  by
the  act  of  annexation,  and  he  was  elected  one  of
the  first  members  of  congress  from  Texas,  serving
from  1846  till  his  death,  which  took  place  suddenly.

KAUFMAN,  Theodore,  artist,  b.  in  Nelsen,
Hanover,  18  Dec,  1814.  He  served  for  several
years  as  a  mercantile  apprentice,  and  studied
painting  in  Hamburg  and  Munich.  He  took  part
in  the  revolution  at  Dresden  in  1848,  came  to  this
country  in  1855,  and  fought  in  the  National  army
during  the  civil  war.  Subsequently  he  resided  in
Boston.  His  works  include  "  Gen.  Sherman  near
the  Watchfire,"  "On  to  Liberty,"  "A  Pacific
Railway  Train  attacked  by  Indians,"  "Slaves
seeking  Shelter  under  the  Flag  of  the  Union,"
"  Admiral  Farragut  entering  Harbor  through
Torpedoes,"  and  "  Farragut  in  the  Rigging."

KAULBACH,  Henry  Adolphus  Newman,
Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Lunenburg,  Nova  Scotia,
in  1830.  He  was  educated  at  the  grammar-school
of  his  native  town,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1855.  He  afterward
was  graduated  at  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1857.


KAUTZ


KAVANAUGH


495


&<-^^t^c>#~~&Z&u<sy£


He  was  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  1873,  repre-
sented Lunenburg  in  the  provincial  legislature
from  1863-7,  was  defeated  in  1867.  and  was
called  to  the  senate  in  March,  1872.  He  is  a  large
land  -  proprietor  and  ship-owner.  —  His  brother,
Charles  Edwin,  Canadian  member  of  parliament,
b.  in  Lunenburg,  13  July,  1834,  was  educated  in
his  native  place.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Dominion  parliament  in  1878  and  re-elected  in
1882.  but,  his  seat  having  been  declared  vacant  and
a  new  election  ordered,  he  was  again  chosen  in
October.  1883. He  was  sheriff  for  several  years.

KAUTZ,  August  Valentine,  soldier, b. in
Ispringen,  Baden, Germany, 5  Jan., 1828. His
parents  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1828,  and  set-
tled in Brown  county,  Ohio,  in  1832. The  son
served  as  a  private  in
the 1st regiment of
Ohio  volunteers  in  the
Mexican  war,  and  on
his  discharge  was  ap-

Eointed  to  the  United
tates  military  acad-
emy, where  he  was
graduated  in  1852  and
assigned  to  the  4th
infantry.  He  served
in  Oregon  and  Wash-
ington territory  till
the  civil  war,  and  in
the  Rogue  river  wars
of  1853-'5,  and  was
wounded  in  the  latter,
and  in  the  Indian  war
on  Puget  sound  in  1856,  in  which  he  was  also
wounded.  In  1855  he  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,
and  in  1857  commended  for  gallantry  by  Gen.
Scott.  In  1859-60  he  travelled  in  Europe.  He
was  appointed  captain  in  the  6th  U.  S.  cavalry  in
1861,  and  served  with  the  regiment  from  its  organi-
zation through  the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862,
commanding  it  during  the  seven  days  until  just
before  South  Mountain,  when  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  2d  Ohio  cavalry.  His  regiment  was
ordered  to  Camp  Chase,  Ohio,  to  re-mount  and  re-
fit, and  he  commanded  that  post  from  Decem-
ber, 1862,  till  April,  1863,  when  he  led  a  cavalry
brigade  in  Kentucky,  forming  a  part  of  Gen.  Car-
ter's division  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio.  He  took
part  in  the  capture  of  Monticello,  Ky.,  1 May,

1863,  and  on  9  June  was  brevetted  major  for  com-
manding in  an  action  near  there.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  pursuit  and  capture  of  John  Mor-
gan in  July,  1863,  preventing  him  from  cross-
ing the  Ohio,  and  afterward  served  as  chief  of
cavalry  of  the  23d  corps.  On  7  May,  1864,  he  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  cavalry  division  of  the
Army  of  the  James.  He  entered  Petersburg  with
his  small  cavalry  command  on  9  June,  1864,  for
which  attack  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,
and  he  led  the  advance  of  the  Wilson  raid,  which
cut  the  roads  leading  into  Richmond  from  the
south,  for  more  than  forty  days. On  28  Oct.,

1864,  he  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volun-
teers, and  in  March,  1865,  was  assigned  to  the
command  of  a  division  of  colored  troops,  which
he  marched  into  Richmond  on  3  April.  He  was
brevetted  colonel  in  the  regular  service  for  gallant
and  meritorious  service  in  action  on  the  Darby-
town  road,  Virginia,  7  Oct.,  1864.  Also  brigadier
and  major-general  for  gallant  and  meritorious  ser-
vices in  the  field  during  the  war,  13  March,  1865.
Gen.  Kautz  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  34th infantry  in 1866,  transferred  to the


15th  in  1869,  and  commanded  the  regiment  on  the
New  Mexican  frontier  till  1874.  He  organized  sev-
eral successful  expeditions  against  the  Mescalero
Apaches,  who  had  fled  from  their  reservation  in
1864,  and  in  1870-1  succeeded  in  establishing  the
tribe  on  their  reservation,  where  they  have  since  re-
mained. In  June,  1874,  he  was  promoted  colonel
of  the  8th  infantry,  and  in  1875  was  placed  in
command  of  the  department  of  Arizona.  He
served  in  California  from  1878  till  1886,  and  is
now  (1887)  in  Nebraska.  Gen.  Kautz  is  the  author
of  "The  Company  Clerk"  (Philadelphia,  1863);
"  Customs  of  Service  for  Non-Com  missioned  Offi-
cers and  Soldiers "  (1864);  and  "Customs  of  Ser-
vice for  Officers"  (1866). — His  brother,  Albert,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Georgetown,  Ohio,  29  June,
1839,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in

1861.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant,  21  April,
1861 ;  lieutenant-commander,  31  May,  1865 ;  com-
mander, 3  Sept.,  1872;  and  captain  in  1885.  In
June,  1861,  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  prize
brig  "  Hannah  Balch,"  off  Charleston.  S.  O,  or-
dered to  Philadelphia,  and  was  captured  near  Cape
Hatteras  by  privateer  "  Winslow."  For  two  months
he  was  on  parole  in  North  Carolina,  and  then  was
imprisoned  in  Richmond  as  a  retaliatory  measure
consequent  on  the  imprisonment  of  privateers  in
New  \ork  city.  In  October,  1861,  he  was  released
on  parole  and  went  to  Washington  to  negotiate  an
exchange,  by  means  of  which  Admiral  John  L.
Worden,  Lieut.  George  L.  Selden,  and  himself
were  released  from  prison  and  restored  to  duty,  on
condition  that  Lieutenants  Stevens,  Loyal,  and
Butt  should  be  sent  south  under  a  flag  of  truce.
There  were  also  350  prisoners,  captured  at  Hatteras
Inlet  in  August,  1861,  sent  south  under  the  same
negotiation,  for  which  they  received  350  Union
prisoners,  who  were  captured  at  Hatteras  Inlet  in
July,  1861.  This  was  the  first  exchange  author-
ized by  President  Lincoln.  He  served  in  the  flag-
ship "  Hartford  "  at  the  passage  of  Fort  Jackson
and  Fort  St.  Phillip,  at  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,
24  April,  1862,  and  in  the  various  engagements
with  the  Vicksburg  batteries  in  June  and  July,

1862,  being  highly  commended  in  the  official  de-
spatches for  "  gallantry  and  ability."  He  is  now
(1887)  stationed  at  the  Boston  navy-yard.

KAVANAGH,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  New-
castle, Me.,  27  April,  1795;  d.  there,  21  Jan.,  1844.
His  father,  James  Kavanagh,  came  from  Wexford,
Ireland,  to  Boston  in  1780,  and  settled  in  Damaris-
cotta  Mills,  where  he  engaged  extensively  in  the
lumber  business  and  built  several  vessels.  The
son  was  educated  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  and  gradu-
ated at  the  Montreal  seminary  in  1820.  He  then
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
to  practise  in  Damariscotta,  Me.  .  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Maine  legislature  in  1826-'8,  and  again
in  1842-'3.  In  1830  he  was  secretary  of  the  state
senate,  and  he  was  afterward  for  a  short  time  its
president.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Jack-
son Democrat,  serving  from  1831  till  1835,  and
then  became  charge  d'affaires  in  Portugal,  where
he  remained  till  1842.  He  was  afterward  a  mem-
ber of  the  commission  to  settle  the  northeastern
boundary  of  Maine.  On  the  election  of  Gov.  John
Fairfield  to  the  U.  S.  senate  he  served  as  acting
governor  of  Maine  in  1842-'3.

KAVANAUGH,  Hubbard  Hinde,  M.  E.  bish-
op, b.  in  Clarke  countv.  Kv.,  14  Jan.,  1802 ;  d.  in
Columbus,  Miss.,  19  March,  1884  His  father,
Rev.  William  Kavanaugh,  of  Irish  descent,  was
one  of  the  pioneer  ministers  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  The  son  was  educated  in  pri-
vate schools  until  he  was  thirteen  years  of  age,


496


KEAGY


KEARNY


when  he  was  placed  in  an  office  at  Paris  to  learn
the  printing  business.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  years
he  united  with  the  Methodist  church.  He  was
licensed  to  exhort  in  the  country  pulpits  in  1822,
assigned  to  the  Little  Sandy  circuit  in  1823,  where
he  labored  several  years,  and  afterward  became
pastor  of  various  congregations  in  the  state.  In
1839  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  public  in-
struction for  twe  state.  In  1854,  he  was  elected  a
bishop,  and  in  that  office  ranked  as  one  of  the
ablest  divines  of  his  day.  His  appearance  in  the
pulpit  was  impressive.  His  voice  was  strong  and
full,  and  it  was  always  distinct,  sonorous,  and  pleas-
ant. His  sermons  were  delivered  without  notes.

KEAGY,  John  M.,  physician,  b.  in  Martic
township,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  in  1795;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  30  Jan.,  1837.  He  received  a  classical
education,  studied  medicine,  and  was  graduated
in  1817.  He  was  principal  of  the  Harrisburg  acad-
emy about  two  years,  after  which  he  removed  to
Philadelphia  and  took  charge  of  the  Friends'  high-
school.  Shortly  before  his  death  he  was  appoint-
ed professor  of  languages  in  Dickinson.  He  was
one  of  the  first  to  advocate  the  mode  of  teaching
children  to  read  by  making  them  learn  to  recog-
nize the  words  without  knowing  the  letters  of
which  they  are  composed.  In  1830  he  published  a
series  of  educational  articles  in  the  "  Baltimore
Chronicle,"  which  were  afterward  reprinted  in
book-form.  He  also  published  "  The  Pestalozzian
Primer,"  a  book  that  was  made  up  largely  of  so-
called  "  thinking  lessons  "  (1827).

KEAN,  John,  patriot,  b.  in  South  Carolina
about  1756 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  May,  1795.
He  fought  against  the  British,  was  taken  prisoner,
and  suffered  on  the  prison  ship  in  1 781.  He  was
a  delegate  to  congress  from  South  Carolina  from
1785  till  1787,  and  voted  against  the  extension  of
slavery  to  the  northwestern  territory.  He  was  a
commissioner  to  settle  accounts  between  the  Unit-
ed States  and  individual  states,  and  was  a  cashier
in  the  U.  S.  bank,  Philadelphia.

KEANE,  John,  Baron,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Belmont,  Ireland,  in  1781 ;  d.  in  Burton  Lodge,
Hampshire,  England,  24  Aug.,  1844.  He  entered
the  army  as  ensign  in  1792,  served  in  Egypt  as
aide-de-camp  to  Lord  Cavin,  and  took  part  in  the
campaign  of  Martinique  and  the  siege  of  Fort
Desaix.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  60th
foot  in  1812,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the
peninsular  war.  In  1814  he  became  major-general,
and  was  appointed  to  command  the  military  force
destined  to  co-operate  with  Admiral  Cochrane  in
the  attack  on  New  Orleans,  but  was  superseded
by  Sir  Edward  Pakenham  as  general-in-chief,
under  whom  he  served,  having  command  of  the
3d  brigade.  In  the  assault  on  the  American  lines
on  8  Jan.,  1815,  he  received  two  severe  wounds.
He  was  afterward  commander-in-chief  of  the  West
Indian  army,  and  during  a  part  of  that  period  ad-
ministered the  civil  government  of  Jamaica.  He
served  at  Bombay,  India,  in  l833-'9,  and  then  was
intrusted  with  the  operations  in  Afghanistan,  of
which  the  capture  of  Ghuznee  in  Cabool  was  his
greatest  achievement.  For  this  service  he  was
raised  to  the  peerage  as  Baron  Keane  in  December,
1839,  also  receiving  from  the  East  India  company
a  pension  of  £2,000.

KEANE,  John  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Bal-
lyshannon,  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  12  Sept.,  1839.
He  came  with  his  family  to  the  United  States  in
1846,  was  educated  at  St.  Charles's  college  and  at
St.  Mary's  seminary,  Baltimore,  and  in  1866  en-
tered the  Roman  Catholic  priesthood.  He  was
assistant  pastor  of  St.  Patrick's  church,  Washing-


ton, D.  C,  till  1878,  when  he  was  made  bishop  of
Richmond,  Va.,  being  consecrated  on  25  Aug.  Bish-
op Keane  has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  organiza-
tion of  Roman  Catholic  societies,  and  has  been  ap-
pointed rector  of  the  Roman  Catholic  university
that  is  to  be  established  at  Washington,  D.  C.

KEARNY,  Lawrence,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Perth
Amboy,  N.  J.,  30  Nov.,  1789 ;  d.  there,  29  Nov.,
1868.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  midship-
man in  1807,  and  served,  during  the  continuance
of  the  embargo  and  non-
intercourse  acts,  on  the
flotilla  of  gun-boats  un-
der Com.  John  Rodgers.
Subsequently  he  was  on
the  frigates  "  Constitu-
tion "  and  "  President "
until  1810,  when  he  was
transferred  to  the  "  En-
terprise," and  in  March,
1813,  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant. He  was  active-
ly employed  in  the  de-
fence of  the  coast  of
South  Carolina  and  ad-
jacent states  during  the
war  of  1812-'15,  and
after  its  close  distin-
guished himself  in  clear-
ing the  West  Indies  and  Gulf  coast  of  pirates.  In
1826  he  was  given  command  of  the  "  Warren,"  and
sent  to  the  Levant,  where  he  successfully  attacked
the  Greek  pirates,  broke  up  their  strongholds,  and
finally  dispersed  them,  frequently  capturing  several
vessels  in  a  day,  and  at  one  time  had  more  than
100  prisoners  on  board  his  vessel.  On  his  return  to
the  United  States  in  1832,  he  was  made  captain,  and
after  various  appointments  on  shore  duty  was
given  command  of  the  "  Potomac,"  and  in  1841  ad-
vanced to  the  command  of  the  East  India  squad-
ron. He  hoisted  his  broad  pennant  on  the  "  Con-
stitution" in  the  harbor  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  the
first  instance  of  that  act  being  performed  at  a
foreign  station.  While  in  the  east  he  was  active
in  the  suppression  of  opium  smuggling,  and  se-
cured the  rights  of  American  merchants  in  China.
Learning  that  a  commercial  treaty  was  about  to
be  concluded  between  the  English  and  Chinese
governments,  he  at  once  communicated  with  the
officials  and  secured  a  promise  on  the  part  of  the
Chinese  government  to  extend  similar  facilities  to
American  merchants.  In  consequence  of  this  ac-
tion, the  U.  S.  government  sent  Caleb  Cushing  as
special  envoy  to  China,  who  negotiated  the  treaty
that  was  ratified  in  July,  1845.  While  on  his
homeward  voyage  in  1843,  Capt.  Kearny  stopped
at  the  Hawaiian  islands,  and  there  protested
against  the  treaty  then  in  progress  of  settlement
leading  to  the  transfer  of  these  islands  to  the  Brit-
ish government.  He  afterward  held  various  shore
appointments,  including  the  command  of  the  New
York  station,  the  presidency  of  one  of  the  naval
boards  of  inquiry,  and  membership  in  the  light-
house board.  In  April,  1867,  he  was  made  com-
modore on  the  retired  list,  and  he  was  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  New  Jersey  board  of  pilot  commission-
ers.— Lawrence's  second  cousin,  Stephen  Watts,
soldier,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  30  Aug.,  1794 ;  d.  in
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  31  Oct.,  1848,  was  a  student  at  Co-
lumbia, but  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  of  1812
entered  the  army  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  13th  in-
fantry. At  the  assault  on  Queenstown  heights,
on  13  Oct.,  1812,  he  distinguished  himself  by  his
bravery,  and  on  13  April,  1813.  was  made  captain.
He  was  retained  in  the  army  after  the  war,  and  by


KEARNY


KEARSLEY


497


successive  promotions  became  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  1st  dragoons,  4  March,  1833,  and  brigadier-

feneral  on  30  June,  1846.  At  the  beginning  of  the
lexican  war  he  had  command  of  the  Army  of  the
West,  which  set  out  from  Bent's  fort  on  the  Arkan-
sas, crossed  the  country,  and  took  possession  of
New  Mexico.  He  established  a  provisional  civil
government  in  Santa  Fe,  and  then  continued  his
march  to  California,  when,  on  6  Dec,  1846,  he
fought  the  engagement  at  San  Pasqual,  where  he
was  twice  wounded.  Subsequently  he  commanded
the  sailors  and  marines  and  a  detachment  of  dra-
goons at  the  passage  of  San  Gabriel  river  and  the
skirmish  on  the  plains  of  Mesa,  8  and  9  Jan.,  1847.
For  his  services  in  this  campaign  he  received  the
brevet  of  major-general  on  6  Dec,  1846,  and  was
made  governor  of  California,  holding  that  office
from  March  till  June,  1847.  He  then  joined  the
army  in  Mexico,  and  was  military  and  civil  gov-
ernor of  Vera  Cruz  in  March,  and  of  the  city  of
Mexico  in  May,  1848.  Illness,  caused  by  disease
contracted  in  Mexico,  resulted  in  his  death.  Gen.
Kearny  published  a  "  Manual  of  the  Exercise  and
Manoeuvring  of  U.  S.  Dragoons"  (Washington,
1837)  and  "  Laws  for  the  Government  of  the  Terri-
tory of  New  Mexico  "  (Santa  Fe,  1846). — Stephen
Watts's  nephew,  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city,  2  June,  1815 ;  d.  near  Chantilly,  Va.,  1  Sept.,
1862,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1833,  and  then
studied  law  under  Peter  A.  Jay,  but  in  1837  ac-
cepted a  commission  in  the  1st  dragoons,  and  was
stationed  at  Jefferson  barracks,  Mo.,  serving  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Henry  Atkinson.  He  was  sent  to
Europe  by  the  war  department  in  1839  to  examine
the  tactics  of  the  French  cavalry  service,  and  for
the  thorough  accomplishment  of  this  purpose  en-
tered the  cavalry-school  in  Saumur.  After  six
months  of  this  experience  he  went  to  Algiers  as  a
volunteer  with  the  1st  chasseurs  d'Afrique,  and
served  with  Col.  Le  Pays  de  Bourjolli.  He  made
the  passage  of  the  Atlas  mountains,  and  participated
in  the  engagements  at  the  plains  of  Metidjah  and
of  the  Chelif,  at  the  siege  of  Milianah,  and  passage
of  the  Mousaia.  His  daring  exploits  during  these
campaigns  attracted  the  attention  of  the  French
army.  In  the  autumn  of  1840  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  was  almost  immediately  ap-
pointed aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Alexander  Macomb,
holding  this  appointment  until  the  death  of  the
commander-in-chief.  For  some  months  he  was  then
stationed  at  the  cavalry  barracks  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  but
he  was  soon  recalled  to  Washington  to  serve  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.  In  1845  he  accom-
panied his  uncle,  Gen.  Kearny,  on  the  march  to  the
bouth  Pass,  which  was  the  first  expedition  that
penetrated  so  far  from  settlements  into  the  Indian
country.  During  the  Mexican  war.  at  the  head  of
a  magnificently  equipped  company  of  cavalry,  he
operated  at  first  along  the  Rio  Grande,  but  later
joined  Gen.  Scott  on  his  march  to  Mexico.  His
command  served  as  the  body-guard  of  the  general-
in- chief,  and  Kearny  was  promoted  captain  in
December,  1846.  He  took  part  in  the  battles  of
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  at  the  close  of  the
latter,  as  the  Mexicans  were  retreating  into  the  capi-
tal, Kearny,  at  the  head  of  his  dragoons,  charged
the  enemy  and  followed  them  into  the  city  of
Mexico  itself ;  but  as  he  fell  back  he  was  shot  in  the
left  arm,  which  necessitated  amputation.  When
Gen.  Oliver  0.  Howard  lost  his  right  arm  at  the
battle  of  Fair  Oaks,  Kearny  happened  to  be  pres-
ent when  the  amputation  was  performed,  and
Howard,  looking  up,  said :  "  We'll  buy  our  gloves
together  hereafter.  A  month  later  Gen.  Scott
with  his  army  entered  the  city  of  Mexico,  but  the
vol.  hi. — 32


first  man  who  had  entered,  sword  in  hand,  the  gate
of  the  captured  capital  was  Capt.  Kearny,  who
was  rewarded  with  the  brevet  of  major.  On  his
recovery  he  was  stationed  in  New  York  on  recruit-
ing service,  and  was  presented  with  a  sword  by  the
members  of  the
Union  club.  Ear-
ly in  1851  he  went
to  California,  and
was  engaged  in  the
campaign  against
the  Rogue  river
Indians,  but  re-
signed from  the
army  in  October,
1851.  He  then
went  around  the
world  by  way  of
China  and  Ceylon,
and,  after  spend-
ing some  time  in
Paris,  settled  at
Belle  Grove,  oppo-
site Newark,  N.  J.
In  1859  he  returned  to  France,  and,  joining  his  old
comrades  of  the  chasseurs  d'Afrique,  participated
in  the  war  in  Italy.  At  Solferino  he  was  in  the
charge  of  the  cavalry  under  Gen.  Louis  M.  Morris,
which  penetrated  the  Austrian  centre,  capturing  the
key-point  of  the  situation.  He  is  described  on  this
occasion  as  charging  "  holding  his  bridle  in  his
teeth,  with  his  characteristic  impetuosity."  He  re-
ceived the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  honor,  being  the
first  American  that  had  ever  been  thus  honored  for
military  service.  In  1861,  soon  after  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war,  he  returned  to  the  United
States,  and  tendered  his  services  to  the  National
government.  After  their  rejection  by  these  authori-
ties and  those  of  New  York  state,  his  claims  were
pressed  by  New  Jersey,  and  he  was  made  brigadier-
general  on  17  May,  1861,  and  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  1st  New  Jersey  brigade  in  Gen.  William
B.  Franklin's  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac. Gen.  Kearny  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Williamsburg,  where  his  timely  arrival  changed
the  repulse  into  a  victory,  and  served  through  the
engagements  in  the  peninsula,  then  with  the  Army
of  Virginia  from  the  Rapidan  to  Warrenton.  In
May,  1862,  he  was  given  command  of  the  3d  divis-
ion, and  his  commission  as  major-general  bears
date  7  July,  1862,  but  was  never  received  by  him.
At  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run  he  was  on  the
right,  and  forced  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson's  corps
back  against  Gen.  Longstreet's  men.  A  few  days
later,  at  Chantilly,  while  reconnoitering,  after  plac-
ing his  division,  he  penetrated  into  the  Confed-
erate lines,  and  was  shot.  His  remains  were  sent
by  Lee  under  a  flag  of  truce  to  Gen.  Hooker,  and
found  their  last  resting-place  in  Trinity  church-
yard, New  York  city.  Gen.  Scott  referred  to  Gen.
Kearny  as  "  the  bravest  man  I  ever  knew,  and  the
most  perfect  soldier."  See  "Personal  and  Mili-
tary History  of  Philip  Kearnv,"  by  J.  Watts  De
Peyster  (New  York.  1869).

KEARSLEY,  John,  physician,  b.  in  England
about  1684;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  January,
1772.  He  was  educated  in  England  for  the  medi-
cal profession,  and  before  1719  emigrated  to  Phila-
delphia, where  he  became  eminent.  He  served
for  many  years  in  the  assembly  of  Pennsylvania,
became  a  vestryman  of  Christ  church  in  1719,  and
continued  to  serve  in  this  capacity  or  as  warden
until  his  death.  Being  known  to  possess  skill  and
taste  in  architecture,  he  was  selected  by  this  church
in  1727  to  direct  the  remodelling  and  enlarging  of


498


KEATING


KEEFER


their  edifice,  which  work  he  performed  under  plans
that  were  drawn  by  himself.  The  building  at  the
time  of  its  erection  surpassed  anything  of  the  kind
in  this  country.  In  1729  he  was  one  of  a  com-
mittee that  was  appointed  by  the  assembly  to
select  a  site  and  prepare  plans  for  a  state-house
(afterward  Independence  hall),  and  direct  its  con-
struction. He  was  the  founder  of  Christ  church
hospital,  having  by  his  will  bequeathed  a  large
estate  for  this  purpose.  He  was  the  author  of  "  A
Letter  to  a  Friend;  containing  Remarks  on  a
Discourse  proposing  a  Preparation  of  the  Body  for
the  Small-Pox,  etc."  (Philadelphia.  1751) ;  and  "  The
Case  of  Mr.  Thomas  "  (1760).  See  Dorr's  "  History
of  Christ  Church  "  (1841).

KEATING.  William  Hypolitns,  chemist,  b.
in  Wilmington,  Del.,  11  Aug.,  1799;  d.  in  London,
England,  about  1844.  His  ancestors  removed
from  Ireland  to  France  to  escape  religious  per-
secution, and  were  ennobled  by  Louis  XVI.  His
father,  Baron  John  Keating,  was  colonel  in  the
French  army,  and  was  stationed  with  his  regi-
ment in  the  West  Indies  at  the  beginning  of
the  Revolution.  Resigning  his  commission,  he
came  to  this  country  and  settled  in  Wilmington,
after  which  he  removed  to  Philadelphia.  The
eldest  son,  John,  who  died  at  the  age  of  twenty-
five,  attained  distinction  at  the  Philadelphia  bar,
served  in  the  state  legislature,  and  married  the
granddaughter  of  Francis  Hopkinson,  one  of  the
signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  (q.  v.).
William  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1816,  and  received  his  scientific  train-
ing in  polytechnic  and  mining  schools  of  France
and  Switzerland.  On  his  return  to  Philadelphia
he  was  elected  to  the  newly  organized  chair  of
chemistry  and  mineralogy  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  which  post  he  held  from  1822  till
1827.  He  delivered  several  courses  of  lectures,
and  opened  a  laboratory  in  the  old  university
building.  His  efforts  for  an  institution  of  higher
aims  in  scientific  instruction  ultimately  led  to
the  founding  of  the  Franklin  institute  in  1824,
in  which  he  was  professor  of  chemistry. He  was

feologist and historiographer of Maj.  Stephen
[.  Long's  second  expedition  in  1823. Subsequent
to  his  scientific  studies  he  had  read  law,  and  was

{wactising  with  success  when  he  was  sent  to  Eng-
and  to  negotiate  the  first  mortgage  loan  of  the
Reading  railroad  company.  He  was  the  author  of
a  "  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  to  the  Source  of  St.
Peter's  River,  etc.,  in  1823  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1824;  London,  1825).  — His  nephew,  William
Valentine,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4
April,  1823,  was  graduated  at  St.  Mary's  college,
Baltimore,  in  1840,  and,  after  receiving  his  medical
degree  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1844,
began  to  practise  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  has
since  remained.  In  1860  he  was  elected  professor
of  obstetrics  in  Jefferson  medical  college,  which
chair  he  resigned,  owing  to  impaired  health,  and
was  clinical  lecturer  there  for  several  years.  He
was  also  physician  at  St.  Joseph's  hospital  and  at
St.  Joseph's  orphan  asylum,  and  acting  surgeon  in
the  U.  S.  army.  After  the  battle  of  Gettysburg
he  was  medical  director  of  the  U.  S.  army  hospital
on  Broad  and  Cherry  streets.  Philadelphia,  and
previously  he  had  been  connected  with  the  staff  of
the  Satterlee  hospital.  He  edited  Churchill  on
"  Diseases  of  Children  "  (Philadelphia,  1856)  and
Ramsbotham's  "  Obstetrics  "  (1856).  —  His  son,
John  M.,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30
April,  1852,  studied  at  Seton  hall  college,  South
Orange,  N.  J.,  and  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1873,  and  subsequently  at  the


Philadelphia  polytechnic  college.  In  1879  he  trav-
elled with  Gen.  Grant  to  India,  Burmah,  Siam,  and
China.  He  is  now  (1887)  medical  director  of  the
Pennsylvania  mutual  life  insurance  company.  In
addition  to  numerous  publications  in  the  medical
journals,  he  is  the  author  of  "  With  Gen.  Grant  in
the  East"  (Philadelphia,  1880);  " Mother's  Guide
for  Management  and  Feeding  of  Infants  "  (1881) ;
and  "Maternity.  Infancy,  and  Childhood"  (1887);
and  is  joint  author  of  "  Diseases  of  the  Heart  in
Infancv  and  Adolescence  "  (1887).

KEAYNE,  Robert,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1595 :  d.  in  Boston,  Mass..  23  March,  1656.
He  was  a  merchant  tailor  by  trade,  and,  possessing
considerable  estate,  aided  the  Plymouth  colony  by
donations  in  1624,  and  became  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Massachusetts  colony,  settling  in  Boston  in
1635.  Having  been  a  member  of  the  "  Honorable
artillery  company"  in  London,  he  organized  the
body  bearing  the  same  name  in  Boston.  He  was
frequently  a  representative  to  the  state  legislature
between  1638  and  1649,  a  liberal  donor  to  Harvard,
and  left  a  legacy  for  the  establishment  of  a  free
school  in  Boston,  which  is  now  the  Latin-grammar
school.  He  was  eccentric,  and  his  will,  which  is
reprinted  in  part  in  the  "  New  England  Histori-
cal and  Genealogical  Register  "  (vol.  vi.),  is  one  of
the  longest  on  record  in  the  United  States.

KEDNEY,  John  Steinfort,  clergyman,  b.  in
Essex  county,  N.  J.,  12  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  in  1838,  and  at  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1841,  and
entered  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  was  rector  of  St.  John's,  Salem,  N.  J.,
of  Bethesda,  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  of  Trinity,
Society  Hill,  S.  C,  of  Trinity,  Potsdam,  N.  Y.,  of
Grace,  Camden,  S.  C,  and  since  1871  professor  of
divinity  in  Seabury  divinity-school,  Faribault,
Minn.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Catawba  and  other
Poems"  (New  York,  1847);  "The  Beautiful  and
the  Sublime"  (1880);  and  "Hegel's  ^Esthetics"
(Chicago.  1885).  A  theological  work  entitled  "  Chris-
tian Doctrine  considered  from  the  Speculative
Standpoint "  is  now  (1887)  in  preparation.

KEEFER,  Samuel,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Thor-
old,  Canada,  22  Jan.,  1811.  His  father,  George,
removed  from  New  Jersey  to  Canada  in  1792  after
his  property  had  been  confiscated  by  congress.
He  was  afterward  the  first  president  of  the  Wel-
land  canal  company.  The  son  was  educated  as  an
engineer,  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  board  of
works  for  Lower  Canada  in  1839,  from  1841  till
1853  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Government  board
of  public  works,  and  in  1852  made  a  survey  for  the
Sault  St.  Marie  canal.  In  1853  he  resigned  his
place  under  government  to  become  resident  engi-
neer of  the  Grand  trunk  railway,  and  established
the  line  between  Montreal  and  Kingston.  He  was
appointed  government  inspector  of  railways  in
1857,  and  soon  afterward  deputy  commissioner  of
public  works,  and  held  both  places  till  1864.  His
report  upon  the  plans  for  the  new  parliament
buildings  at  Ottawa  was  approved  of  by  the  gov-
ernor-general in  1859,  and  in  1869  he  completed
the  suspension-bridge  at  Niagara  falls,  which  was
at  that  time  the  longest  single-span  bridge  in  the
world.  He  received  a  diploma  and  gold  medal  for
the  design  and  description  of  this  work  at  the  Paris
exposition  of  1878.  In  June,  1880,  he  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of  a  royal  commission  to  inquire
into  the  conduct  and  prosecution  of  the  Canadian
Pacific  railway. — His  brother,  Thomas  Coltrain,
Canadian  engineer,  b.  in  Thorold,  4  Nov.,  1821,
was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto,
and  in  1838  began  his  career  as  an  engineer. After


KEELER


KEEN


499


having  been  employed  in  various  capacities,  he
was  ordered  by  the  government  in  1850  to  survey
the  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence  with  a  view  to  their
improvement,  and  also  to  explore  the  country  be-
tween the  head-waters  of  the  St.  John  in  New
Brunswick  and  the  St.  Lawrence,  opposite  Sague-
nay  river,  for  the  purpose  of  opening  intercolonial
communication  by  canal  or  railway.  In  1851  he
resigned  from  the  government  service  and  was  ap-
pointed chief  engineer  of  the  Toronto  and  Kingston
section  of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway,  and  made  pre-
liminary surveys  for  a  bridge  over  the  St.  Law-
rence, the  present  Victoria  bridge  being  the  out-
come of  his  plans.  He  constructed  water-works
for  Montreal,  Hamilton,  Ottawa,  and  other  cities.
In  1878  he  was  sent  to  Paris  as  chief  commissioner
for  Canada  at  the  international  exhibition.  In
1849  he  was  the  successful  competitor  for  a  premi-
um that  was  offered  by  the  Earl  of  Elgin  for  an
"  Essay  on  the  Influence  of  the  Canals  of  Canada
upon  her  Agriculture."  He  published  "  The  Phi-
losophy of  Railways  "  (1849).

KEELER,  Ralph,  journalist,  b.  in  Ohio  in  1840 ;
d.  at  sea  near  Cuba.  16  Dec,  1873.  On  the  death
of  his  parents  Ralph  was  sent,  at  eight  years  of
age,  to  the  care  of  an  uncle  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  but
ran  away,  was  cabin-boy  on  a  lake  steamer,  train-
boy  on  a  railroad,  a  member  of  several  bands  of
strolling  minstrels,  and  finally  was  connected  with
the  "  Floating  Palace,"  a  large  steamboat  fitted  up
for  theatrical  purposes.  He  studied  at  St.  Vincent
college  in  1854-'6,  and,  after  serving  as  a  clerk  in
the  Toledo,  Ohio,  post-office,  spent  two  years  in
Kenyon  college.  He  visited  Europe  and  studied  in
Germany,  supporting  himself  by  correspondence
with  English,  Scotch,  and  American  journals.  He
then  spent  three  years  in  California,  writing  for
the  newspapers  and  occasionally  lecturing.  While
there  he  published  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly "
"  Three  Years  a  Negro  Minstrel,"  and  "  A  Tour  of
Europe  on  $181."  In  1870  he  became  art  editor
of  "  Every  Saturday,"  a  weekly  published  in  New
York,  and  in  the  following  year  he  revisited  Eu-
rope. In  1873  he  became  special  correspondent  of
the  "New  York  Tribune"  in  Cuba,  and  while  en-
gaged in  this  work  mysteriously  disappeared.  It
is  supposed  that  he  was  murdered  and  thrown
overboard  from  a  steamer.  He  published,  besides
numerous  magazine  and  newspaper  articles,  "  Glov-
erson  and  his  Silent  Partner"  (San  Francisco,
Cal.,  1868) ;  "  Vagabond  Adventures  "  (New  York,
1871) ;  a  translation  of  George  Sand's  "  Marquis
de  Villemer  "  (1873) ;  and  at  the  time  of  his  death
had  in  preparation  a  "  Life  of  John  Brown."

KEELY,  John  Worrall,  inventor,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  3  Sept.,  1837.  He  studied  in  the  Phila-
delphia public  schools  until  he  was  twelve  years  of
age,  when  he  became  a  carpenter's  apprentice,  and
continued  at  that  trade  until  1872.  Meanwhile,
with  inadequate  training,  he  had  become  interested
in  speculations  concerning  physical  forces,  and
originated  certain  theories  of  questionable  value.
His  object  was  the  liberation  of  primitive  atomic
motion,  and  its  application  to  the  uses  of  man ;
the  resolution  of  ether  in  which  the  waves  of  sound
and  light  are  supposed  to  be  produced  into  a  work-
ing "energy."  The  vibrations  of  windows  and
glass  dishes  in  response  to  the  sounding  of  various
musical  chords  first  set  his  mind  upon  the  subject
of  vibration,  and  the  curious  sympathy  between
distant  waves  vibrating  in  harmony.  His  efforts
were  unaided  until  1872,  when  a  company  was  or-
ganized, and  funds,  since  aggregating  $500,000,
were  placed  at  Mr.  Keely's  disposal.  This  work
resulted  in  the  invention  of  a  "hydro-pneumatic


pulsating  vacuo  machine,"  whose  action,  it  is
claimed,  is  produced  by  forces  obtained  from  water
and  air,  which  he  still  keeps  secret,  and  which
can  exert  a  pressure  of  500  pounds  to  the  square
inch.  Subsequently  he  constructed  124  different
engines,  and  has  at  present  (1887)  eliminated  the
use  of  water  entirely  in  developing  the  energy  that
he  claims  to  control.  Results  which  are  marvel-
lous in  their  effects  have  been  obtained  by  Mr.
Keely,  in  the  presence  of  reliable  experts;  but  all
exact  details  of  the  method  of  operation  have  thus
far  been  carefully  kept  secret.

KEEN,  George,  or  Joran  Kyn,  colonist,  b.  in
Sweden  about  1620 ;  d.  in  Chester,  Pa.,  about  1690.
He  accompanied  Gov.  Printz  to  New  Sweden  as  a
soldier  in  1643,  and  dwelt  with  him  for  several
years  on  Tinicum  island  in  the  Delaware.  After-
ward he  removed  to  Upland  (now  Chester,  Pa.),
where  he  bought  a  large  tract  of  land,  and  settled
his  two  sons  and  his  daughter.  He  is  described  as
of  a  singularly  pious  and  gentle  disposition,  and  is
the  ancestor  of  eleven  generations  of  descendants
that  have  been  born  on  American  soil. — His  grand-
son, Matthias,  legislator,  b.  at  Upland  in  1667;
d.  at  Tacony,  Pa.,  13  July,  1714,  was  a  vestryman
of  the  Swedish  Lutheran  congregation  of  Gloria
Dei  and  chairman  of  the  committee  on  building
their  church,  which  is  the  oldest  extant  in  Phila-
delphia. With  other  Swedes  he  presented  a  peti-
tion to  the  general  assembly  of  Pennsylvania  in
1709  for  redress  of  grievances  that  they  had  expe-
rienced at  the  hands  of  "  William  Penn  and  his
officers,"  charged  with  fraudulently  getting  posses-
sion of  their  deeds,  abstracting  their  lands,  and  in-
creasing their  quit-rents.  This  complaint  was  re-
ferred to  the  proprietor,  and  by  him  to  the  royal
council  of  Sweden.  In  1713  Mr.  Keen  was  elected
a  member  of  the  assembly,  and  held  that  office  at
his  death. — Morris  Lorigstreth,  inventor,  b.  in
West  Philadelphia.  Pa..  24  May,  1820 ;  d.  at  "  High-
land Grove,"  near  Stroudsburg,  Pa.,  2  Nov.,  1883,
was  a  grandson  of  John  Keen,  who  was  a  great-
grandson  of  Matthias.  After  receiving  a  private-
school  education  he  was  entered  as  apprentice  in
Norris's  locomotive  works.  Later,  with  his  younger
brother,  Joseph,  he  established  a  foundry  in  West
Philadelphia  for  the  manufacture  of  flat-irons  on
a  new  principle  of  his  invention.  Some  years  after-
ward he  gave  attention  to  the  making  of  paper  out
of  wood,  which  had  already  been  accomplished  un-
profitably  by  chemical  methods,  and  discovered  a
means  of  attaining  the  end  by  boiling  under  pres-
sure, which  has  completely  revolutionized  the  art  of
paper-making  and  reduced  the  cost  of  paper  about
one  half.  This  invention  was  first  carried  into  ef-
fect by  Mr.  Keen  in  the  old  engine-house  of  the
Wilmington  and  Philadelphia  railroad  at  Gray's
Ferry,  in  West  Philadelphia,  and  was  brought  to
perfection  by  him  in  a  paper-mill  at  Rover's  Ford,
Chester  co.,  Pa.,  in  1854.  This  led  to  the  forma-
tion in  1863  of  the  American  wood-paper  com-
pany, with  patent-rights  for  the  United  States  and
privileges  in  other  lands.  Mr.  Keen  made  many
improvements  in  various  departments  of  machinery
and  manufacture,  for  which  he  received  upward  of
forty  patents.— His  brother,  Gregory  Bernard,
clergyman,  b.  in  West  Philadelphia,  3  March,  1844,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1861,  and  at  the  Protestant  Episcopal  divinity-
school  of  Philadelphia  in  1866.  He  then  was  or-
dained to  the  ministry  of  that  church,  but  in  1868
became  a  Roman  Catholic.  In  1871  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  mathematics  in  the  theological
seminary  of  St.  Charles  Borromeo  at  Overbrook,
Pa. From  1873  till  1876  he  devoted  himself  to  the


500


KEENAN


KEEP


study  of  Greek  literature.  In  1887  he  was  elect-
ed librarian  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
Since  1880  Mr.  Keen  has  been  corresponding  sec-
retary of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society,  and
during  1883  and  1884  he  edited  the  "  Pennsyl-
vania Magazine  of  History  and  Biography."  He
has  contributed  to  this  periodical  translations  of
numerous  Dutch  and  Swedish  manuscripts  relat-
ing to  the  early  colony  on  the  Delaware  and  a  series
of  original  articles  on  "  The  Descendants  of  Joran
Kyn,  the  Founder  of  Upland."  He  also  wrote  the
chapters  on  "  New  Sweden  "  and  *  New  Albion  "  in
the  "  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America,"
edited  by  Justin  Winsor  (Boston,  1884). — His  cousin,
William  Williams,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  19  Jan.,  1837,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1859,  and  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1862.  He
was  a  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1862-'4,  and,
after  two  years  of  European  study,  returned  in
1866  and  established  himself  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  was  lecturer  on  pathological  anatomy  in
Jefferson  medical  college  for  nine  years,  and  also
conducted  the  Philadelphia  school  of  anatomy.
Since  1884  he  has  been  professor  of  surgery  in  the
Woman's  medical  college  of  Philadelphia,  and  he
is  also  professor  of  artistic  anatomy  in  the  Penn-
sylvania academy  of  fine  arts.  He  has  published
" Gunshot  Wounds  and  other  Injuries  of  Nerves"
(Philadelphia,  1864) ;  "  Reflex  Paralysis  "  (Washing-
ton, 1864);  "Clinical  Charts  of  the  Human  Body"
(1872) ;  "  Complications  and  Sequels  of  Continued
Fevers  "  (1876) ;  "  Early  History  of  Practical  Anat-
omy" (1875);  besides  which  he  has  edited  "Gray's
Anatomy  "  (1887),  and  other  works.

KEENAN,  Henry  Francis,  novelist,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  4  May,  1849.  He  was  educated
mainly  in  the  public  schools,  enlisted  in  the  Na-
tional service  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  wound-
ed in  action  at  Drury's  Bluff,  Va.  He  entered  upon
i'ournalism  in  1868  as  a  member  of  the  staff  of  the
tochester,  N.  Y.,  "  Chronicle,"  and  first  attracted
attention  by  a  remarkable  account  of  a  balloon
voyage  that  he  was  prevented  from  making.  After-
ward he  was  connected  with  various  newspapers  in
Rochester,  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  and  New  York  city,
and  as  a  correspondent  in  Washington  and  in  Paris.
In  1883  he  left  journalism  for  general  literature.
He  has  published  the  novels  "  Trajan  "  (New  York,
1884) ;  "  The  Aliens  "  (1886) ;  and  "  One  of  a  Thou-
sand" (1887);  and  the  anonymous  novel  "The
Money-Makers  "  (1886)  has  been  attributed  to  him.

KEENAN,  Peter,  soldier,  b.  in  York,  Living-
ston co.,  N.  Y.,  9  Nov.,  1834;  d.  at  Chancellors-
ville,  Va.,  2  May,  1863.  He  was  the  son  of  poor
Irish  parents,  but  was  adopted  into  a  wealthy  fam-
ily. He  was  a  resident  of  Philadelphia  when  the
war  began,  and  in  the  summer  of  1861  went  to
Williamsport,  and  assisted  in  recruiting  the  8th
Pennsylvania  cavalry,  in  which  he  was  made  a
captain,  19  Aug.  He  was  many  times  sent  out  as
a  scout.  At  Chancellorsville,  where  he  was  in
command  of  his  regiment,  holding  the  rank  of
major,  he  was  ordered  by  Gen.  Alfred  Pleasonton,
after  the  rout  of  the  11th  corps  on  the  right  wing,
to  charge  the  advancing  enemy  in  a  wood,  and
hold  them  in  check  until  the  artillery  could  be  got
into  position.  He  charged  with  his  regiment,
which  numbered  fewer  than  500  men,  so  impetu-
ously that  the  Confederates  were  startled,  and  hesi-
tated to  advance  from  the  wood,  until  the  guns
were  ready  to  rake  the  column  as  it  emerged.
Keenan  met  an  inevitable  death  at  the  head  of  his
men,  many  of  whom  fell  with  him,  but  the  sacrifice
enabled  Gen.  Pleasonton  to  hold  Stonewall  Jack-
son's corps  in  cheek  and  save  the  army  from  rout.


CZ>^>  yL^e^^z-,


KEENE,  Laura,  actress,  b.  in  England  in  1820;
d.  in  Montclair,  N.  J.,  4  Nov.,  1873.  At  an  early  age
she  developed  a  taste  for  the  stage.  Her  first  ap-
pearances were  made  in  London,  at  the  Lyceum,
while  that  theatre  was  under  the  management  of
Madame  Vestris.  She  was  most  successful  in
comedy.  In  October,  1851,  she  appeared  as  Pau-
line in  Bulwer's  "  Lady  of  Lyons,  and  achieved
a  marked  success.  She  came  to  the  United  States
in  1852,  and  on  20  Oct.  made  her  first  appearance
at  Wallack's  theatre,  New  York,  performing  in
her  favorite  parts  and  commanding  excellent
houses.  In  1854,  after  visiting  Boston,  Philadel-
phia, and  other  eastern  cities,  Miss  Keene  went  to
California,  and  thence  to  Australia.  In  a  pecuni-
ary sense,  as  well  as
otherwise,  her  visits
to  the  gold  regions
were  quite  successful ;
and  when  in  1855  she
returned  to  this  coun-
try, she  assumed  the
management  of  the
Varieties  theatre  in
New  York.  Soon  af-
terward she  estab-
lished a  new  theatre,
which  was  known  for
several  years  by  her
own  name,  but  later
as  the  Olympic,  and
continued  its  lessee
and  manager  until
1863.  In  this  house  she  brought  out,  18  Oct..  1858,
"  Our  American  Cousin,"  with  Joseph  Jefferson  as
Asa  Trenchard  and  Edward  A.  Sothern  as  Lord
Dundreary.  This  piece  had  an  immense  run.  On
26  Nov.,  1860,  she  produced  "  The  Seven  Sisters,"
which  had  a  run  of  169  nights.  Soon  afterward
Miss  Keene  married  a  Mr.  Lutz.  The  Laura  Keene
company  became  well  known  outside  of  New  York,
and  it  was  at  one  of  her  representations  of  "  Our
American  Cousin  "  at  Ford's  theatre,  Washington,
14  April,  1865,  that  President  Lincoln  met  his
death.  In  1868  she  visited  England.  On  her  re-
turn she  organized  a  travelling  company,  of  which
she  retained  the  management,  reappearing  in  New
York  in  1870,  and  occupying  the  stage  until  within
two  years  of  her  death.  Her  last  undertaking  was
the  publication  of  a  weekly. art  journal  in  New
York  city,  which  was  issued  for  about  one  year.
She  constructed  several  plays,  which  met  with
only  moderate  success.

KEENER,  John  Christian,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  7  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  graduated
at  Wesleyan  university  in  1835,  and  engaged  in
business  in  Baltimore  till  1841,  when  he  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
He  was  stationed  at  various  places  in  Alabama  till
1853,  when  he  went  to  New  Orleans,  and  was  pre-
siding elder  of  that  district  in  1858  and  1860.  In
1861-'4  he  was  superintendent  of  chaplains  in  the
Confederate  army  west  of  Mississippi  river,  and  in
1865-'70  he  was  again  presiding  elder,  and  also
edited  the  "  New  Orleans  Christian  Advocate."  He
was  elected  a  bishop  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church,  south,  in  1870,  and  in  1873  founded  a  mis-
sion in  Mexico.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1854  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1880.  He  has  published
"  The  Post  Oak  Circuit "  (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1857).

KEEP,  Henry,  financier,  b.  in  Jefferson  county,
N.  Y.,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30  July,  1869.
After  suffering  many  hardships  through  poverty,
he  worked  his  way  to  Honeoye  Falls,  near  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  was  employed  as  a  teamster,  and,  having


KEEP


KEIM


501


saved  a  small  sum  of  money,  invested  it  during
the  financial  crisis  of  1837  in  depreciated  currency,
which,  upon  its  subsequent  rise,  yielded  him  a
handsome  profit.  He  then  bought  Canadian  bank-
notes at  a  discount  from  residents  of  the  American
frontier,  and  cashed  them  at  par  in  Canada.  In
this  way  he  amassed  sufficient  capital  to  estab-
lish a  bank  at  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  and  afterward
founded  several  other  country  banks.  He  then  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  became  largely  interested
in  railroads  and  railroad  stocks.  In  1861-'3  he
was  treasurer  of  the  Michigan  Southern  railroad,
and  for  six  months  of  1866  was  president  of  the
New  York  Central  railroad.  From  June,  1868,
until  the  time  of  his  death,  he  was  president  of
the  Chicago  and  Northwestern,  controlling  mana-
ger of  the  North  Indiana,  and  president  of  the
Cleveland  and  Toledo  railroad.

KEEP,  John,  clergvman,  b.  in  Long  Meadow,
Mass.,  20  April,  1781 ;  d.  in  Oberlin,  Ohio,  11  Feb.,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,  studied
theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1805,  and  for
sixteen  years  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  Blanford,  Mass.  He  removed  to  Homer,
N.  Y.,  in  1821,  and  was  pastor  there  till  1833,  when
he  resigned.  The  year  following  he  organized  and
became  pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church,
Cleveland,  and  in  1835  became  agent  to  raise  funds
for  Oberlin  college,  leading  the  subscription  by  his
own  donation  of  $10,000.  Soon  after  his  election
as  a  trustee  of  Oberlin,  he  gave  as  president  of  the
board  the  casting  vote  that  admitted  colored  stu-
dents. In  1837  he  returned  to  pastoral  work,  then
went  on  a  mission  to  England  to  raise  funds  for
Oberlin,  and  in  1850  settled  in  Oberlin.  He  was
the  last  surviving  founder  of  the  American  board
of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions.

KEESE,  John,  auctioneer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  24  Nov.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  30  May,  1856.
He  received  an  academical  education,  and  at  the
age  of  eighteen  entered  as  clerk  with  a  book-pub-
lishing house  in  his  native  city.  Several  years
afterward  he  became  partner  in  the  concern,  and
from  1842  until  1853  he  was  engaged  in  the  book-
auction  business.  In  1854  Mr.  Keese  received  the
appointment  of  appraiser  of  books  in  the  New
York  custom-house,  which  office  he  filled  until  his
death.  While  in  office  he  devoted  many  evenings
to  his  former  vocation  of  book  auctioneer.  During
his  career  Mr.  Keese  became  widely  known  among
literary  men  and  booksellers  as  a  humorous  off-
hand speaker,  editor,  and  wit.  He  was  the  author
of  many  verses  that  appeared  anonymously  in  the

Kriodicals  of  his  time.  In  1852  "he  delivered  a
:ture  on  "  The  Influence  of  Knowledge "  at  the
Broadway  tabernacle  in  New  York  city.  After
the  formation  of  the  auction  firm  of  Cooley,  Keese
and  Hill  he  began  his  opening  address  at  the  book-
trade  sales,  saying:  "Gentlemen:  You  have  a
right  to  know  something  about  our  methods  and
plans  of  business.  First,  we  shall  on  all  occasions
take  evervthing  Cooley.  As  for  the  security  of
your  goods,  they  will  always  be  under  the  pro-
tection of  excellent  locks  and  Keese ;  and  you  may
rely  on  our  stability,  for  we  rest  upon  one  of  the
granite  Hills  of  New  Hampshire."  At  another
time  he  offered  a  collection  of  poems  by  some  un-
known author,  remarking :  "  This  is  a  book  by  a
poor  and  pious  girl,  who  wrote  poor  and  pious
poetry."  Again  a  parcel  of  books  was  knocked
down  to  one  Owen  Phalen,  with  the  remark:  "  Don't
know  about  selling  to  a  man  who  is  always  Owen
and  Phalen."  Mr.  Keese  edited  "The  Poets  of
America"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1839-'40);  "The
Poetical Remains of Lucy Hooper" (1842);


"Poems  by  Elizabeth  Oakes  Smith"  (1843);  "The
Mourner's  Chaplet "  (Boston,  1844) ;  "  The  Winter-
Green,"  an  annual  (1844) ;  "  The  Opal,"  an  annual
(2  vols.,  1846-'7) ;  "  The  Forest  Legendary  "  (1848) ;
and  "  The  Floral  Keepsake  "  (1850).  He  also  fur-
nished a  large  part  of  the  text  for  "  North  Ameri-
can Scenery,"  by  Whitefield  (1845).  See  "John
Keese — Wit  and  Litterateur,"  bv  William  L.  Keese
(New  York,  1884).— His  son,  William  Linn,  b.
in  New  York  city,  25  Feb.,  1835,  was  educated  at
schools  in  Brooklyn  and  New  York,  and  received  a
mercantile  training.  He  has  frequently  written  in
prose  and  verse  for  newspapers  and  magazines,  and
contributed  articles  to  "Actors  and  Actresses  of
Great  Britain  and  the  United  States"  (5  vols.,
New  York,  1886).  He  has  published,  l>esides  the
memoir  of  his  father,  mentioned  above,  "  William
E.  Burton — Actor,  Author,  and  Manager  "  (1885).

KEHR,  Gnstav  Herman  (kair).  German  bota-
nist, b.  in  Freysingen  in  1581 ;  d.  in  Magdeburg
in  1639.  He  was  professor  in  the  universities  of
Tubingen  and  Halle,  and  afterward  librarian  of
the  Prince  of  Lippe-Detmold,  who  sent  him  in  1621
to  America  to  study  the  plants  of  that  country.
Kehr  went  first  to  New  Spain,  and  after  several
years  crossed  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  and,  sailing
for  Patagonia,  studied  the  plants  of  the  country
that  is  now  the  Argentine  Republic  from  1624  till
1629.  visiting  afterward  Chili,  Brazil,  and  Peru.  On
his  return  he  published,  among  other  works,  "  De
Sexu  plantarum  "  (Magdeburg,  1631) ;  "  Aphorismi
botanicae"  (Tubingen,  1633);  "Historia  generalis
plantarum  Americanarum  "  (3  vols.,  Halle,  1635);
"  Grundlehren  der  Anatomie  und  Physiologie  der
Pflanzen  von  Amerika"  (Magdeburg,  1636);  "Ser-
tum  Patagonicum  et  florula  peruviensis  "  (2  vols.,
Dresden,  1636) ;  "  Criptogaraae  Brasilienses  ab
Gustavius  Kehr  collectae"  (Magdeburg,  1632);
and  "Reisen  in  Amerika"  (2  vols.,  1639).

KEIFER,  Joseph  Warren,  lawyer,  soldier,  and
politician,  b.  in  Clark  county.  Ohio,  30  Jan..  1836.
He  was  educated  at  Antioch  college.  Yellow
Springs,  Ohio,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1858,  and  began -practice  in  Springfield.  On  19
April,  1861,  he  enlisted  in  the  National  service,
and  was  commissioned  major  of  the  3d  Ohio  infan-
try on  27  April.  He  was  prompted  lieutenant-colo-
nel on  12  Feb.,  1862,  and  on  30  Sept.  was  made  colo-
nel of  the  110th  Ohio  infantry.  During  the  war  he
was  four  times  wounded.  He  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general on  19  Oct.,  1864,  and  major-general
on  being  mustered  out  in  June,  1865.  He  returned
to  the  practice  of  his  profession  at  Springfield,
Ohio,  declining  a  lieutenant-colonel's  commission
in  the  regular  army,  which  was  offered  him  in  No-
vember, 1866.  In  1868-'9  he  was  a  member  of  the
Ohio  senate.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National
Republican  convention  in  1876,  and  was  elected  a
member  of  congress  from  Ohio  the  same  year,
serving  from  15  Oct.,  1877,  till  3  March,  1885.  He
was  speaker  of  the  house  during  the  47th  congress,
from  5  Dec,  1881,  till  3  March,  1883,  and  was  the
orator  at  the  unveiling  of  the  Garfield  statue  in
Washington,  in  May,  1887.

KEIM,  William  High,  soldier,  b.  near  Read-
ing, Pa.,  25  June,  1813 ;  d.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  18
May,  1862.  He  was  educated  at  Mount  Airy  mili-
tary academy,  Pa.,  was  mayor  of  Reading  in  1848,
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  to  fill  a  va-
cancy, and  served  in  1858-'9,  and  then  became
surveyor-general  of  the  state.  In  1861  he  was
commissioned  major-general  of  the  Pennsylvania
volunteers  that  were  sent  by  order  of  the  governor,
under  Gen.  Robert  Patterson,  to  defend  the  towns
of  Chambersburg,  Pa.,  Hagerstown,  Md.,  Harper's


502


KEIMER


KEITH


Perry,  Va.,  and  the  upper  Potomac.  In  the  au-
tumn of  this  year,  Keim  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general  of  volunteers,  and,  joining  the  army
under  Gen.  McClellan,  he  commanded  a  Pennsyl-
vania brigade  in  the  peninsular  campaign.  His
death  was  the  result  of  camp  fever.

KEIMER,  Samuel,  printer,  b.  in  England;  d.
in  liarbadoes  after  1738.  He  learned  the  trade  of
a  printer  in  London,  was  a  member  of  the  sect
known  as  the  "  French  Prophets,"  and  came  to  this
country  in  1722,  accompanied  by  his  sister,  a
prophetess  of  the  same  sect.  He  brought  with
him  printing  materials,  consisting  "of  an  old
damaged  press  and  a  small  cast  of  worn-out  Eng-
lish types  contained  in  one  pair  of  cases,"  and  es-
tablished himself  in  business  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Probably  the  first  printer  that  he  employed  to
assist  him  was  Benjamin  Franklin,  who,  in  1723,
found  employment  in  Philadelphia  in  Keimer's
office.  Shortly  afterward  he  published  a  pam-
phlet called  "  A  Parable,"  which  was  said  to  be  the
joint  work  of  himself  and  Franklin,  and  which  so
offended  the  Quakers  that,  by  order  of  their  month-
ly meeting  in  September,  1723,  he  was  denounced
and  disowned.  On  Franklin's  return  from  Europe
he  engaged  again  with  Keimer,  and  on  the  latter's
hearing  that  Franklin  intended  to  publish  a  news-
paper, Keimer  issued  a  prospectus  announcing  his
intention  to  begin  the  publication  of  one  of  his
own,  and  on  24  Dec,  1728,  appeared  the  first  issue
of  the  "  Universal  Instructor  in  all  Arts  and  Sci-
ences, and  Pennsylvania  Gazette."  Through  the
covert  opposition  of  Franklin,  Keimer  was  unable
to  make  his  paper  a  success,  and  in  nine  months
from  its  first  issue  he  sold  the  "  Gazette  "  to  Frank-
lin and  Hugh  Meredith.  Shortly  thereafter  he  re-
moved to  Barbadoes,  where  in  1731,  at  Bridgetown,
he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Barbadoes  Ga-
zette," the  first  newspaper  that  was  issued  in  the
Caribbean  islands,  and  the  first  that  was  published
twice  a  week,  for  any  considerable  time,  in  any
part  of  America.  He  continued  its  publication
until  1738.  Selections  from  this  paper  were  after-
ward published  under  the  title  "  Caribbeana,  a
Collection  of  Essays,"  arranged  in  imitation  of
the  "  Tattler  "  (2  vols.,  London,  1741).  He  was  also
the  author  of  "  A  Brand  plucked  from  the  Burn-
ing, exemplified  in  the  Unparalleled  Case  of  Sam-
uel Keimer"  (London,  1718).

KEISAR,  Mauritius  van,  Dutch  physician,
b.  in  Essequibo,  Guiana,  in  1663:  d.  in  Demerara
in  1725.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Leyden,  and  was  for  some  time  a  military  surgeon ;
but  his  father  having  died  in  1695  and  left  him  a
large  estate  in  Guiana,  the  son  tendered  his  resigna-
tion,and,  returning  to  America, settled  in  Demerara,
where  he  divided  his  time  between  the  exercise  of
his  profession  and  agricultural  schemes.  He  made
experiments  on  his  own  estate,  and  urged  the
adoption  of  artificial  guano.  The  country  greatly
benefited  by  his  exertions  and  his  experiments,  as
he  established  at  his  own  expense  a  model  farm  in
which  a  practical  agricultural  education  was  given
free  to  those  who  were  willing  to  learn.  Keisar
published  many  books,  some  of  which  are  yet
standard  works.  These  include  "Expose  des
moyens  de  mettre  en  valeur  et  d'administrer  la
Guiane "  (Amsterdam,  1709);  "Notions  sur  la
culture  des  basses  terres  dans  la  Guiane  Hollan-
daise"  (Leyden,  1706);  "Land  und  Leute  von
Guiana"  (Demerara,  1719);  "Traite  du  cafe"
(Amsterdam,  1720);  "Traite  du  tabac"  (1721):
"  System  der  Medicin"  (Leipsic  and  Amsterdam,
1721) ;  and  "  Grundlage  der  Pathologie  und  Thera-
pie  des  Menschen"  (1723).


KEITH,  Alexander,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Falkirk,  Caithness-shire,  Scotland,  5  Oct.,  1795;
d.  in  Halifax  14  Dec,  1873.  He  was  educated  in
Scotland,  and  in  1817  came  with  his  father's  family
to  Halifax,  N.  S.,  where  he  engaged  in  the  brewing
and  malting  business.  He  became  commissioner
of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  served  as  mayor  of
Halifax  in  1843,  1853,  and  1854,  and  was  also  for
a  long  period  a  director  of  the  Bank  of  Nova
Scotia.  He  became  a  member  of  the  legislative
council  in  1843,  sat  in  that  body  for  thirty  years,
and  when  the  Nova  Scotian  legislature  was  consti-
tuted in  1867  became  president  of  the  upper  house.
In  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  to  the  Domin-
ion senate,  but  declined  the  office.

KEITH,  Charles  Penrose,  lawyer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  15  March,  1854.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1873,  and
taught  for  a  year,  after  which  he  studied  law  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1877.  For  a  few  years
he  acted  as  librarian  of  the  Historical  society  of
Pennsylvania.  He  is  the  compiler  of  "  The  Pro-
vincial Councillors  of  Pennsylvania  who  held
office  between  1733  and  1776,  and  those  Earlier
Councillors  who  were  some  time  Chief  Magistrates
of  the  Province,  and  their  Descendants  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1883),  and  has  contributed  historical  and  ge-
nealogical articles  to  periodicals.

KEITH,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Aberdeen,
Scotland,  about  1645 ;  d.  in  Sussex,  England,  in
1715.  He  was  educated  in  the  schools  of  the
Church  of  Scotland  and  at  the  University  of  Aber-
deen. Becoming  a  Quaker  in  1664,  he  suffered
confiscation  and  imprisonment,  and  in  1675  was
engaged  with  Robert  Barclay  in  a  discussion  be-
fore the  students  of  Aberdeen  university  concern-
ing Quaker  doctrines.  A  continuance  of  persecu-
tions induced  Keith  to  emigrate  to  the  United
States  in  1684.  He  became  a  surveyor  in  New
Jersey,  and  was  engaged  to  determine  the  bound-
ary-line between  the  eastern  and  western  parts  of
the  state.  He  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1689,
and  took  charge  of  a  Friends'  school,  but  left  it  to
travel  in  New  England,  where  he  engaged  in  con-
troversy with  John  Cotton  and  Increase  Mather.
On  his  return  to  Philadelphia  he  became  involved
in  disputes  with  his  own  sect.  He  then  went  to
London  and  met  William  Penn  in  controversy,
who  pronounced  him  an  apostate  and  dismissed
him  from  the  society.  Keith  responded  in  an  able
argument,  and  formed  a  society  of  his  own  known
as  the  Christian  or  Baptist  Quakers,  or  Keithians.
Becoming  again  dissatisfied,  he  was  ordained  in
the  Church  of  England,  and  in  1702  was  sent  by
the  Society  for  propagating  the  gospel  on  a  mission
to  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey.  He  was  signally
successful  in  this  work,  700  Quakers  under  his  in-
fluence receiving  baptism  in  the  Episcopal  church.
He  subsequently  returned  to  England,  and  became
rector  of  Edburton,  Sussex.  Bishop  Burnet,  who
was  his  fellow-student  at  Aberdeen,  says  of  him  in
his  "  History  of  My  Own  Times  " :  "  Keith  was  the
most  learned  man  ever  in  the  Quaker  sect,  well
versed  both  in  the  Oriental  tongues  and  in  phi-
losophy and  mathematics."  Besides  theological
works,  he  published  "  Journal  of  Travels  from
New  Hampshire  to  Caratuck "  (London.  1706) ;
"  Standard  of  the  Quakers  "  (1702 :  republished  in
Janney's  "  History  of  Friends,"  Philadelphia,  1867) ;
and  "  New  Theory  of  Longitude  "  (1709).

KEITH,  Isaac  Stockton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newton,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  20  Jan.,  1755  ;  d.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  13  Dec,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1775,  entered  the  ministry  in  1778,
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church


KEITH


KEITH


503


Alexandria,  Pa.,  in  1780. From  1788  until  his
ieath  he  was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  of
Charleston,  S.  C. His  sermons  and  addresses  were
»ublished  by  Andrew  Flynn  (Charleston,  1810).

KEITH,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Scotland  in

1643;  d.  in  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  23  July,  1719. He

ras  educated  at  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  came  to  Bos-

JB,  Mass.,  about  1662,  and  became  the  first  or-

lined  minister  of  the  church  at  Bridgewater  on

18  Feb.,  1664. Mather,  in  the  "  Magnolia,"  places

lim  in  the  third  class,  "  who  were  all  such  minis-

ers  as  came  over  after  the  re-establishment  of  the

Spiscopal  church  government  in  England,  and  the

onsequent  persecution  of  the non-conformists."

lis  pastorate  continued  until  his  death,  a  period  of

iver  a  half-century. In  1717,  at  the  dedication  of

le  new  meeting-house  in  South  Bridgewater,  he

lelivered  the  dedicatory  sermon,  which  was  pub-

ished  in  the  "  Bridgewater  Monitor,"  and  in  which

le  spoke  on  the  subject  of  intemperance. He

)wned  a  one  fifty-sixth  proprietary  interest  in  all

le  lands  at  Bridgewater. Mr.  Keith  had  much  to

lo  with  saving  the  life  of  the  wife  and  son  of  the

Indian  chief  King  Philip  in  1676. His  letter  on

King  Philip's  family  is  printed  in  the  "  History

ot  Bridarewater,"  by  Nahum  Mitchell  (1840).

KEITH,  Renel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pittsford.  Vt.,
26  June,  1792;  d.  in  Sheldon,  Vt.,  3  Sept.,  1842.
After  serving  as  a  merchant's  clerk  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,
le  entered  Middlebury  college,  where  he  was  gradu-
ited  in  1814,  and  after  teaching  studied  theology
id  was  ordained  a  priest  of  the  Protestant  Episco-
il  church.  His  first  charge  was  as  an  assistant  at
>t.  John's,  Georgetown,  D.  C.  This  he  resigned  in
1820  to  accept  the  chair  of  humanity  and  history  in
William  and  Mary  college,  where  he  also  instructed
candidates  for  holy  orders.  A  theological  seminary
was  soon  afterward  organized  at  Alexandria,  with
which  institution  he  became  connected  as  professor
af  pulpit  eloquence  and  pastoral  theology.  Here
he  remained  until  1840,  when  his  health  began  to
iecline.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Mid-
llebury  in  1827.  His  publications  include  a  trans-
lation of  Hengstenberg's  "  Christology  of  the  Old
Testament  "  (Alexandria,  1836 ;  abridged  by  Thos.
K.  Arnold,  London,  1847).

KEITH,  Sir  William,  bart.,  lieutenant-gover-
nor of  Pennsylvania  and  Delaware,  b.  near  Peter-
head, England,  in  1680;  d.  in  London,  18  Nov.,
1749.  He  was  the  son  of  Sir  William  Keith,  of
Ludquhairn  in  Aber-
deenshire, Scotland,
the  third  baronet  of
the  line,  and  was  bap-
tized, 16  Feb.,  1680.
The  son  was  sent  in
his  youth  to  the  court
of  the  exiled  Stuarts
at  St.  Germains,  where
he  remained  for  sev-
eral years,  and,  being
treated  with  favor  by
the  Pretender  and  his
mother,  he  expected,
if  the  former  should
succeed  Queen  Anne,
to  be  appointed  under-
secretary for  Scotland.
He  returned  to  the
British  isles  about  the  time  of  Simon  Fraser's  in-
trigue, and  was  arrested,  and  narrowly  escaped  be-
ing tried  for  treason.  Before  the  close  of  Queen
Anne's  reign,  the  Tories  coming  into  power,  he  was
appointed  surveyor-general  of  the  customs  for  the
southern  district  of  North  America,  and  in  this


capacity  he  resided  in  Virginia,  but  after  the  acces-
sion of  the  Whigs  under  George  I.  he  was  re-
moved. His  deportment  had  been  agreeable  to  the
colonists,  and  as  Pennsylvania  and  the  three  lower
counties  (now  Delaware),  of  which  William  Penn
was  titular  governor,  had  long  suffered  under
lieutenant-governors  who  were  persons  of  neither
character  nor  ability,  the  principal  inhabitants
were  delighted  at  Keith's  applying  for  the  position.
For  this  purpose  he  went  to  England,  and  while
there  presented  the  address  of  the  assembly  of
Pennsylvania  to  George  L,  expressing  joy  at  his
accession  and  the  suppression  of  the  rebellion.
After  nearly  two  years'  negotiation.  Keith  returned
duly  commissioned,  arriving  in  Philadelphia,  31
May,  1717.  For  a  long  time  he  had  the  good-will
and  admiration  of  all  classes.  The  assembly
granted  him  a  fair  salary,  which  he  spent  in  keep-
ing up  a  style  that  had  not  been  attempted  by  his
Sredecessors.  His  country  house  in  Horsham,
lontgomery  co.,  is  still  standing.  He  accomplished
the  organization  of  a  militia  in  the  Quaker  colony,
and  the  establishment  of  a  high  court  of  chancery,
in  which  he  sat  as  chancellor  ex  officio,  and  which
is  the  only  court  of  that  kind  that  ever  has  existed
in  Pennsylvania.  The  court  was  abolished  in  1735.
Keith  held  several  conciliatory  conferences  with
the  Indians,  and  under  his  administration,  and  to
a  certain  extent  at  his  suggestion,  several  useful
laws  were  passed  which  are  still  in  force,  notably,
that  by  which  the  wives  of  persons  away  at  sea  can
become  femme  sole  traders.  He  early  showed  himself
independent  of  his  council.  As  time  went  on,  he
followed  the  wishes  of  the  people  as  opposed  to  the
widow  Penn's,  as  an  instance  of  which  he  issued
the  first  paper  money  of  the  province.  He  is
said  to  have  built  the  first  iron-furnace  in  Dela-
ware. On  his  father's  death,  at  the  close  of  the
year  1720,  he  succeeded  to  the  baronetcy.  His
father  had  died  insolvent,  and  he  too  sank  into
debt.  His  circumstances  now  led  him  into  dis-
honorable conduct.  He  played  desperately  for
popularity,  but  he  was  unfaithful  to  the  proprietary
family  in  matters  where  he  could  not  allege  the
public  interest  as  the  excuse.  Yet  he  had  devoted
partisans,  being  the  only  lieutenant-governor  before
the  Revolution  that  espoused  the  cause  of  the
common  people.  The  legal  complications  follow-
ing the  death  of  the  founder  of  the  province,  and
the  order  of  the  lords  justices  that  the  lieutenant-
governor  continue  to  act  until  further  order,  ren-
dered him  independent  of  any  one  part  of  the  Penn
family,  and  enabled  him  to  act  as  if  directly  under
the  crown.  The  widow  wrote  him  a  letter  of  in-
structions which  she  intended  to  be  confidential,
requiring  him  to  submit  to  the  council  in  legisla-
tion, and  all  other  matters  of  importance;  but
Keith,  refusing  to  be  so  bound,  laid  this  before  the
assembly,  and  so  stirred  up  the  populace  as  to
threaten  the  destruction  of  the  proprietary  author-
ity. Finally,  the  widow  and  the  heir-at-law  of  Penn
united  in  the  nomination  of  a  new  lieutenant-
governor,  who  obtained  the  royal  confirmation.
Thus  superseded,  Keith  published  a  vindication,
and  undertook  to  lead  an  opposition  party.  He
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  assembly  at  the  first
election  following,  but  failed  to  obtain  the  speaker-
ship, at  which  he  had  aimed.  He  was  re-elected  to
the  house  the  next  year,  but  in  March.  1728.  left
the  province,  embarking  surreptitiously  at  New
Castle  to  avoid  his  creditors.  In  November,  1728,
he  presented  to  the  king  a  "  Short  Discourse  on  the
Present  State  of  the  Colonies  in  America  with  re-
spect to  the  Interest  of  Great  Britain."  He  is
said  to  have  first  suggested  to  the  British  crown


504


KEITT


KELLEY


the  taxation  of  the  American  colonies.  He  finally
became  very  poor,  passed  some  time  in  prison  for
debt,  and  died  in  the  Old  Bailey,  London.  Sir
William  was  the  author  of  various  essays,  several
of  which  were  published  in  one  volume  (London,
1740).  He  projected  writing  a  series  of  colonial
histories,  but  only  one  appeared,  that  of  Virginia,
which  was  published  by  the  Society  for  the  en-
couragement of  learning  (1738).

KEITT,  Laurence  Massillon  (kit),  congress-
man, b.  in  Orangeburg  district,  S.  C,  4  Oct.,  1824 ;
d.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  4  June.  1864.  Pie  was  grad-
uated at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in  1843,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845.  He  was
in  the  legislature  in  1848,  was  chosen  to  congress
in  1852  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,  and  served  until
his  withdrawal  in  December,  1860,  to  become  a
delegate  to  the  secession  convention  of  South  Caro-
lina. He  was  a  member  of  the  provisional  Con-
federate congress  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,  in  1861,
and  was  conspicuous  in  forming  the  provisional
and  permanent  Confederate  constitution.  In  1862
he  joined  the  Confederate  army  as  colonel  of  the
20th  South  Carolina  volunteers,  and  was  mortally
wounded,  at  the  head  of  his  regiment,  at  the  battle
of  Cold  Harbor,  dying  in  Richmond  the  next  day.

KELLAR,  Ezra,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middleton
valley,  Md.,  12  June,  1812  ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Ohio,
29  Dec,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania
college,  Gettysburg,  in  1835,  licensed  to  preach  two
years  afterward  in  the  Lutheran  ministry,  and  be-
came an  itinerant  missionary  in  the  western  states.
He  was  subsequently  in  charge  of  churches  in
Tarrytown  and  Hagerstown,  Md.,  and  in  1844  es-
tablished Wittenberg  college,  Springfield,  Ohio,
serving  as  its  president  till  his  death.  Jefferson
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1848.
Michal  Diehl  wrote  his  life  (Springfield,  Ohio,  1859).

KELLER,  Christian  Arnold,  Swiss  explorer,
b.  in  Friburg  in  1711 ;  d.  in  Basle,  11  Oct.,  1790.
He  received  his  early  education  in  Switzerland,
but  finished  it  in  Paris,  and  was  employed  in  1734
in  the  physical  cabinet  of  the  Paris  Academie  des
sciences.  In  1735  he  accompanied  Charles  Marie
de  la  Condamine  to  South  America.  In  1740  he
followed  La  Condamine  again  during  his  explora-
tion of  the  Amazon,  but  parting  with  him  in
Columbia,  he  travelled  extensively  in  South  Amer-
ica, and  returning  in  the  spring  of  1749,  after  an
absence  of  fourteen  years.  In  1751  he  was  given  the
chair  of  physics  and  chemistry  in  the  University  of
Basle,  which  he  occupied  till  his  death.  Keller's
works  include  "  Discours  du  voyage  des  astro-
nomes  La  Condamine,  Bouguer  et  Godin,  pour
mesurer  un  arc  du  meridien  a  l'equateur,  suivi
d'un  traite  et  description  des  plantes  et  des
animaux  qui  habitent  les  Cordillieres  du  Perou  "
(2  vols.,  Geneva,  1771) ;  "  La  pression  atmospherique
dans  les  Cordillieres  des  Andes  et  du  Perou"
(Paris,  1756);  "Observations  astronomiques  faites
dans  les  Cordillieres  du  Perou "  (1758) ;  "  Reise
auf  dem  Amazonenflusse "  (1773);  "Neue  Ameri-
kanische  Beitrage  "  (1776) ;  "  Reisen  im  Innern  von
Sud-Amerika"  (Basle,  1781);  "Land  und  Leute
von  Peru "  (2  vols.,  1784) ;  and  "  Grand  atlas  de
l'Amcrique  du  Sud  "  (6  vols.,  1788).

KELLER,  Joseph  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in
Kandel,  Bavaria,  in  1827 ;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  4  Feb.,
1886.  He  was  brought  by  his  parents  to  St.  Louis
when  a  child,  and  studied  in  the  university  of  that
city.  He  joined  the  Jesuit  order  in  1844,  was  or-
dained priest,  and  afterward  was  professor  succes-
sively in  the  Jesuit  colleges  of  Cincinnati,  Flores-
sant,  Bardstown,  and  St.  Louis.  He  was  elected  to
represent  his  order  at  the  convention  that  was  held


in  Rome  in  1868,  and  in  1869-'77  he  was  provin-
cial of  the  Maryland  province.  He  was  made
president  of  St.  Louis  university  in  1877,  and  after-
ward of  Woodstock  seminary.  Md.  He  went  to
Rome  in  1883  as  delegate  of  the  society,  and  was
retained  there  as  assistant  to  the  Jesuit  general
for  all  the  English-speaking  peoples  of  the  world.
He  was  an  ardent  advocate  of  higher  education,
and  founded  in  the  University  of  St.  Louis  the

Eost-graduate  and  scientific  courses  of  studies.  He
eld  high  rank  as  a  linguist,  and  was  the  author
of  various  publications,  but  never  affixed  his  name
to  any,  except  "  The  Life  and  Acts  of  Leo  XIII."
(New  York,  1885).

KELLETT,  Sir  Henry,  British  naval  officer,  b.
in  England  in  1807;  d.  in  China,  1  March,  1875.
He  entered  the  British  navy  when  he  was  four-
teen years  old,  participated  in  the  coast  survey  of
America  in  1835-'40,  under  Admiral  Frederick  W.
Beechey  and  Sir  Edward  Belcher,  and  continued
this  work  from  1845  till  1848,  when  he  was  ordered
to  Bering  straits  to  take  part  in  the  search  for
Sir  John  Franklin.  He  discovered  Herald  (now
Wrangell)  Land  in  1849,  was  with  Belcher  in  the
arctic  expedition  of  1852  as  commander  of  the
"  Resolute,"  and  found  Sir  Robert  J.  McClure  with
the  crew  of  the  "  Investigator."  He  was  appoint-
ed commodore  in  1854,  admiral  superintendent  of
Malta  in  1864,  and  in  1869  became  commander  of
the  naval  station  in  China.

KELLEY,  Alfred,  lawyer,  b.  in  Middletown,
Conn.,  7  Nov.,  1787;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  2  Dec,
1859.  He  studied  law,  and  in  1810  removed  to
Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he  practised  his  profession.
He  was  one  of  the  first  to  advocate  the  internal
improvement  of  the  state  by  means  of  canals,  and
was  afterward  appointed  a  commissioner  to  carry
that  policy  into  effect.  By  his  exertions  in  1836-43,
and  chiefly  on  his  personal  responsibility,  he  raised
a  large  sum  of  money  for  the  discharge  of  the  pub-
lic debt,  and  thus  saved  the  state  from  bankruptcy.
He  was  also  active  in  railroad  matters,  and  was  re-
peatedly a  member  of  the  Ohio  legislature,  in  which
he  originated  important  measures.

KELLEY,  Benjamin  Franklin,  soldier,  b.  in
New  Hampton,  N.  H.,  10  April,  1807 ;  d.  in  Oak-
land, Md.,  17  July.  1891.  He  removed  in  1826  to
Wheeling,  engaged  in  merchandise  till  1851,  when
he  became  freight-agent  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio
railroad.  In  May,  1861,  he  raised  the  first  Virginia
regiment  for  the  National  army,  and  was  commis-
sioned its  colonel.  He  was  engaged  at  Philippi,
near  Grafton,  W.  Va.,  and  severely  wounded,  was
appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  17  May,

1861,  captured  Romney  on  26  Oct.,  and  was  again
victorious  at  Blue's  Gap.  He  was  then  given  the
command  of  the  Department  of  Harper's  Ferry
and  Cumberland,  but  was  relieved  at  his  own  re-
quest, in  consequence  of  his  wounds,  in  January,

1862.  In  the  following  summer  he  resumed  com-
mand of  the  railroad  district  under  Gen.  John  0,
Fremont,  and  in  July,  1863,  he  was  assigned  to  the
Department  of  West  Virginia.  He  was  engaged  in
the  pursuit  of  Lee  after  his  passage  of  the  Poto-
mac, and  in  November,  1863,  destroyed  the  camp
of  the  Confederates  under  Gen.  John  D.  Imboden,
near  Morefield,  Va.  In  August,  1864,  he  repulsed
the  Confederate  forces  at  Cumberland,  Md.,  New
Creek,  and  Morefield.  Va.,  and  on  13  March,  1865,
he  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers.  At
the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  col-
lector of  internal  revenue  for  the  1st  district  of
West  Virginia,  in  1876  became  superintendent  of
Hot  Springs  reservation,  Ark.,  and  after  1883  he
was  an  examiner  of  pensions.


KELLEY


KELLOGG


505


KELLEY,  Hall  Jackson,  colonist,  b.  in  North-
wood,  N.  H,  28  Feb.,  1790;  d.  in  Palmer,  Mass.,
17  Jan.,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury
in  1813,  became  principal  of  a  public  school  in
Boston,  Mass.,  and  was  interested  in  various  edu-
cational enterprises,  writing  several  text-books,
founding  the  Boston  young  men's  educational  so-
ciety, and  organizing  the  first  Sunday-school  in
New  England.  He  was  subsequently  engaged  as
a  surveyor  on  railroads  in  Maine,  and  projected  a
canal  from  Boston  to  the  Connecticut  river,  and  a
railroad  from  the  city  of  Mexico  to  Vera  Cruz.
For  many  years,  beginning  about  1817,  he  was  in-
terested in  the  settlement  of  the  country  west  of
the  Rocky  mountains.  In  1829  he  procured  from
the  legislature  of  Massachusetts  an  act  of  incor-
poration of  the  "  American  society  for  encouraging
the  settlement  of  the  Oregon  territory."  He  pub-
lished a  "  Geographical  Memoir  of  Oregon  "  (Bos-
ton, 1830),  accompanied  by  the  first  map  of  that
territory  that  ever  was  compiled,  and  a  manual  of
the  Oregon  expedition  for  the  guidance  of  emi-
grants. In  1831  he  completed  arrangements  for
sending  out  a  party  of  several  hundred  persons,
but  the  plan  was  abandoned  at  the  last  moment.
A  few  months  later  he  set  out  with  a  smaller  com-
pany that  reached  New  Orleans,  but  disbanded
there,  to  Kelley's  great  personal  loss.  He  then
went  to  Mexico,  and,  after  many  adventures  and
hardships,  organized  a  party  of  Americans  who  had
settled  at  Monterey,  and  with  them  finally  arrived
in  Oregon,  but  was  almost  at  once  evicted  by  the
Hudson  bay  company.  He  then  returned  to  Bos-
ton, broken  in  health  and  fortune,  and  during  his
later  life  resided  in  Palmer,  Mass.  Harvard  and
Middlebury  colleges  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.
in  1820.  He  published,  in  addition  to  the  writ-
ings already  mentioned,  "  A  History  of  the  Set-
tlement of  Oregon  and  of  the  Interior  of  Upper
California,  and  of  Persecutions  and  Afflictions  of
Forty  Years'  Continuance  endured  by  the  Author  "
(Springfield,  Mass.,  1868).

KELLEY,  William  Darrah,  congressman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12  April,  1814;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  9  Jan.,  1890.  His  grandfather,  John,  was  a
Revolutionary  officer,  of  Salem  county,  N.  J.  Will-
iam was  apprenticed  first  to  a  printer  and  subse-
quently to  a  jeweller  in  Boston,  where,  while  fol-
lowing his  trade,  he  acquired  a  reputation  as  a
writer  and  speaker.  Returning  to  Philadelphia  in
1840  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  the
next  year,  and  while  practising  his  profession  de-
voted much  time  to  literary  pursuits.  He  was
attorney-general  of  the  state  in  1845-'6,  and  a  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Philadelphia  from
1846  till  1856.  Until  1848  Mr.  Kelley  was  a  Demo-
crat and  free-trader,  but  in  1854  he  joined  the
Republican  party,  became  a  protectionist  and  an
ardent  abolitionist,  and  delivered  in  Philadelphia
in  1854  an  address  on  "  Slavery  in  the  Territories,"
that  became  widely  known.  In  1860  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  National  Republican  convention,  and
was  elected  to  congress,  where  he  was  for  many
years  before  his  death  the  senior  member  of  the
house  in  continuous  service.  He  was  a  member
of  numerous  committees,  such  as  those  on  naval
affairs,  agriculture,  and  Indian  affairs,  was  chair-
man of  that  on  weights  and  measures  in  the  40th
congress,  and  of  that  on  the  Centennial  celebra-
tion. He  was  often  called  the  "  Father  of  the
House,"  and  was  popularly  known  as  "  Pig-iron
Kelley."  In  addition  to  many  political  speeches
and  literary  essays,  he  published  "  Address  at  the
Colored  Department  of  the  House  of  Refuge "
(Philadelphia, 1850);  "Reasons  for abandoning


the  Theory  of  Free  Trade  and  adopting  the  Prin-
ciple of  Protection  to  American  Industry  "  (1872) ;
"Speeches,  Addresses";  "Letters  on  Industrial
and  Financial  Questions"  (1872);  "Letters  from
Europe  "  (1880) ;  and  "  The  New  South  "  (1887).

KELLOGG,  Edward,  economist,  b.  in  Norwalk,
Conn.,  18  Oct.,  1790 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  29  April,
1858.  He  had  little  early  education,  arid  soon  af-
ter coming  of  age  engaged  in  business  on  his  own
account  in  Norwalk.  In  1820  he  removed  to  New
York  city,  and  established  the  firm  of  Edward
Kellogg  and  Co.  In  the  financial  crisis  of  1837
his  attention  was  turned  to  the  evils  that  resulted
from  the  existing  monetary  system.  After  much
thought  he  concluded  that  all  money  should  be
issued  by  the  government,  and  so  managed  that
usury  could  not  be  exacted  nor  losses  be  incurred
in  exchange  between  foreign  countries.  To  effect
this  he  proposed  to  establish  a  National  safety
fund,  and  issue  notes  bearing  interest  at  the  rate
of  two  per  cent  per  annum,  payable  half-yearly  in
gold  or  silver.  In  1843,  with  "the  encouragement
of  Horace  Greeley,  he  published  his  views  in  news-
paper-form under  the  title  of  "  Usury,  the  Evil  and
Remedy,"  a  few  months  later  printing  them  in  a
pamphlet,  with  some  additions,  under  the  title  of
11  Currency,  the  Evil  and  the  Remedy,  by  Godek
Gardwell 5'  (New  York,  1844).  He  subsequently
retired  from  active  business  and  devoted  himself
to  the  study  of  finance.  He  also  published  "  Labor
and  Other  Capital  "  (1849 ;  new  ed.,  by  his  daugh-
ter, Mary  Kellogg  Putnam,  entitled  "A  New
Monetary  System,"  1861).

KELLOGG,  Elijah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Portland,
Me.,  20  May,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Bow-
doin  in  1840,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1843.  The  next  year  he  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  in  Harpswell,  Me.,  and
in  1855-65  he  was  chaplain  of  the  Boston  seaman's
friend  society.  Since  the  latter  date  he  has  for
the  most  part  been  engaged  in  writing  juvenile
books.  He  has  also  delivered  various  lectures,  and
is  the  author  of  the  popular  "  Address  of  Sparti-
cus  to  the  Gladiators."  His  books  include  "  The
Elm  Island  Series  "  (Boston,  1868-'70) ;  "  Pleasant
Cove  Series"  (1870-'4);  "Whispering  Pine  Series"
(1871-'3);  "Good  Old  Times  Series"  (1877-'82);
and  "  The  Forest  Glen  Series  "  (1878).

KELLOGG,  Francis  W.,  congressman,  b.  in
Washington,  Hampshire  co.,  Mass.,  30  May,  1810 ;
d.  in  Alliance,  Ohio,  in  November,  1878.  After  re-
ceiving a  limited  education  he  removed  to  Grand
Rapids,  Mich.,  and  engaged  in  the  lumber  business.
In  1856-'7  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and
from  1859  till  1865  served  in  congress,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Republican.  During  the  civil  war
he  raised  six  regiments  of  cavalry  for  the  Na-
tional army.  In  1865  he  was  appointed  collector
of  internal  revenue  for  the  southern  district  of
Alabama,  and  was  a  member  of  congress  from  22
July,  1868,  till  3  March,  1869.

KELLOGG,  George,  inventor,  b.  in  New  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  19  June,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university  in  1837,  and  after  engaging
in  the  manufacture  of  machinery  was  principal  of
Sumter  academy,  Sumterville,  S.  C.  in  1838-'41.
He  then  became  a  manufacturer  at  Birmingham,
Conn.,  and  in  1855  removed  to  New  York  to  edu-
cate his  daughter.  In  1863-'6  he  was  a  U.  S.  reve-
nue officer,  and  afterward  engaged  in  manufactur-
ing and  in  various  experiments,  removing  to  Cold
Spring,  N.  Y.  He  has  testified  as  an  expert  in
noted  patent  cases,  and  has  made  many  inventions,
including  a  machine  to  make  jack-chain  at  the
rate  of  a  yard  a  minute  (1844) ;  a  dovetailing-ma-


506


KELLOGG


chine  (1849) ;  a  type-distributor  (1852) ;  an  obstet-
rical forceps  (1853) ;  and  an  adding  apparatus
(1869).  In  1845  he  established  a  manufactory  of
hooks  and  eyes,  with  American  machinery,  at  Red-
ditch,  England,  and  in  1868,  while  in  Europe  with
his  daughter,  he  began  to  make  hats  in  London
under  a  patent  that  had  been  issued  to  his  brother.
— His  brother,  Albert,  botanist,  b.  in  New  Hartford,
Conn.,  6  Dec,  1813;  d.  in  Alameda,  Cal.,31  March,
1887,  was  educated  at  Wilbraham  academy,  Mass.,
and  subsequently  received  his  degree  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  Transylvania  university,  Lex-
ington, Ky.  The  first  accurate  description  of  the
big  trees  of  California  was  made  by  him  and  pub-
lished by  John  C.  Fremont  in  his  "  Report  of  the
Exploring  Expedition  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  in
1842,  and  to  Oregon  and  North  California  in  the
years  1843-4"  (Washington,  1845).  Dr.  Kellogg
was  associated  with  Audubon  in  his  exploration  of
Texas  at  the  time  of  the  annexation  of  that  coun-
try to  the  United  States.  Afterward  he  made  bo-
tanical excursions  along  the  western  coast  of  the
American  continent  from  Tierra  del  Puego  in  the
south  to  Alaska  in  the  north.  He  accompanied,
as  botanist,  in  1867,  the  first  government  expedi-
tion that  was  sent  to  Alaska  under  the  auspices
of  the  IT.  S.  coast  survey.  He  began  his  work
at  the  northern  end  of  Vancouver's  island,  and
continued  through  Alexander  archipelago,  then
on  part  of  Kodiak  island,  and  finally  at  Una-
laska  island.  Dr.  Kellogg  was  a  large  contributor
of  articles  on  botanical  subjects  to  the  periodi-
cal press,  and  also  to  various  state  and  national
reports.  Many  of  his  papers  are  given  in  the
"  Proceedings  of  the  California  Academy  of  Sci-
ences," of  which  society  he  was  a  member.  He
left  -a  botanical  manuscript  on  the  natural  trees
of  California,  illustrated  by  500  large  pen-and-
ink  drawings. — George's  daughter,  Clara  Louise,
singer,  b.  in  Sumterville,  S.  C.,  12  July,  1842,  was
named  after  Clara  Novello,  the  singer.  From  her
earliest  childhood,  which  was  passed  in  Birming-
ham, Conn.,  she
showed  an  extra-
ordinary talent
for  music.  It
is  said  that  at
nine  months  she
hummed  a  tune,
and  the  quick-
ness and  accu-
racy of  her  ear
have  often  aston-
ished musicians.
Miss  Kellogg  re-
ceived the  great-
er part  of  her
musical  educa-
tion in  New  York
from  French  and
Italian  masters,
which  was  com-
pleted abroad,
bhe  made  her
first  appearance  as  Gilda  in  "  Rigoletto  "  at  the
Academy  of  music,  New  York,  in  1861,  but  did  not
make  her  greatest  success  until  1864.  This  was  as
Marguerite  in  Gounod's  "  Faust,"  a  part  that  had
never  been  played  here  before,  and  with  which
she  has  so  identified  herself  that  many  competent
judges  regard  her  impersonation  of  it  as  the  finest
ever  seen  in  this  country.  After  singing  with  great
success  in  her  own  country,  Miss  Kellogg  went  to
Her  Majesty's  theatre,  London,  in  1867.  She  made
her  debut  there  as  Marguerite,  and  won  instant


C^^^.-^j^-^c^i^^^x


KELLOGG

and  enthusiastic  recognition.  Tn  other  characters
she  was  no  less  successful.  She  sang  at  the  Han-
del festival  at  the  Crystal  palace  in  1867,  and  of
her  rendering  of  "  Oh,  had  I  Jubal's  Lyre "  the
"  Times "  said :  "  The  old  Handelian  fire  was
mainly  felt  when  Mile.  Kellogg  sang  the  noble  air
from  '  Joshua.' "  In  1868  she  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  made  her  first  concert-tour
under  the  management  of  Max  Strakosch.  In
1869-'71  she  appeared  again  in  Italian  opera  at  the
Academy  of  music,  New  York.  She  afterward
organized  an  English  opera  company,  and  did
more  for  American  musical  art  than  had  been
done  before.  Her  organization  was  the  best  that
had  been  heard  in  English  opera,  and  she  gave
employment  to  a  large  number  of  young  Ameri-
cans, who,  beginning  their  careers  in  her  chorus;
soon  advanced  to  higher  places  in  the  musical
world.  In  1876  she  organized  an  Italian  opera
company,  and  appeared  in  "  Aida  "  and  "  Carmen. "
After  the  dissolution  of  this  company  she  retired
from  the  operatic  stage  in  this  country,  but  was
heard  in  concerts  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States.
In  1880  she  received  an  offer  to  appear  in  Austria,
where  she  sang  in  Italian,  the  other  performers
singing  in  German,  and  she  afterward  sang  in
Italian  opera  in  St.  Petersburg.  Miss  Kellogg's
list  of  operas  includes  forty-five,  and  among  those
with  which  she  has  most  closely  identified  her
name  are  "  Faust,"  "  Crispino,"  •'  Traviata,"  "Ai'da,"
and  "  Carmen."  As  an  actress  she  possesses  an
ability  that  is  quite  unusual  among  singers.  Miss
Kellogg's  voice  covers  a  wide  range.  It  was  at
first  a  high  soprano  with  a  compass  reaching  from
C  to  E  flat.  As  she  grew  older  it  changed,  losing
some  of  its  higher  notes,  but  gaining  in  richness.
As  an  artist  she  will  be  remembered  as  the  first-
American  to  win  musical  recognition  for  her  coun-
try from  the  Old  World.

KELLOGG,  Samuel  Heury,  clergyman,  b.  in
Westhampton.  N.  Y.,  6  Sept.,  1839.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1861,  entered  the  theological
seminary  there,  was  ordained  an  evangelist  in  1864,
and,  under  an  appointment  of  the  board  of  foreign
missions  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  sailed  for
India  in  December  of  that  year,  arriving  in  Cal-
cutta, 5  June,  1865.  In  1872  he  removed  to  Alla-
habad, and  became  instructor  in  the  theological
training-school  there.  Resigning  his  office  as  mis-
sionary, he  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1876,
the  next  year  was  elected  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian
church  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  in  1879  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  didactic  and  polemic  theology,  and  lec-
turer on  comparative  religion  in  Western  theologi-
cal seminary,  and  since  1886  has  been  pastor  of  St.
James  square  church,  Toronto.  In  1872  he  was
elected  corresponding  member  of  the  American
oriental  society,  and  in  1885  became  an  associate
of  the  Philosophical  society  of  Great  Britain.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1877.
He  has  translated  the  larger  catechism  of  the
Presbyterian  church  into  Hindi,  rendered  valuable
service  in  the  revision  of  the  Scriptures,  and  pub-
lished "  A  Grammar  of  the  Hindi  Language  "  (Cal-
cutta and  London.  1876) ;  "  The  Jews,  or  Prediction
and  Fulfilment "  (New  York,  1883) ;  •'  The  Light  of
Asia  and  the  Light  of  the  World "  (1885) ;  "From
Death  to  Resurrection  "  (1885) ;  "  Are  Premillen-
nialists  Right?"  (Chicago,  1885).

KELLOGG,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Ashtabula
county,  Ohio,  8  July,  1814.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  and,  removing  to  Illinois  in
1837,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Can-
ton, and  acquired  an  extensive  practice  in  cases  of
disputed land-titles. He  was  a  member  of  the


KELLOGG


KELLY


507


legislature  in  1849-'50,  was  three  years  a  judge  of
the  circuit  court  of  Illinois,  and  in  1856  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving  till  1868.  In
1864  he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  min-
ister to  Guatemala,  but  declined  to  serve,  and  in
1866  he  became  chief  justice  of  Nebraska  territory.

KELLOGG,  William  Pitt,  senator,  b.  in  Or-
well, Vt.,  8  Dec,  1831.  He  removed  to  Illinois  in
1848,  studied  law  in  Peoria,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1854,  beginning  practice  in  Pulton
county.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican
national  conventions  of  1856  and  1860,  and  a  presi-
dential elector  in  both  these  years,  and  in  1861
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  Nebraska,  which
office  he  resigned  later  in  the  year  to  become  colo-
nel of  the  7th  Illinois  cavalry.  He  served  under
Pope  in  Missouri,  and  commanded  a  brigade  until
the  evacuation  of  Corinth,  but  left  the  army  on
account  of  feeble  health,  and  in  April,  1865,  was
appointed  collector  of  the  port  of  New  Orleans.
On  the  reorganization  of  the  state  government  in
Louisiana  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a
Republican,  and  served  from  1868  till  1871.  On
19  June,  1872,  he  was  nominated  for  governor  by
the  "  custom-house  "  branch  of  the  party,  and  in
August,  by  an  agreement  with  the  branch  that
had  nominated  P.  B.  S.  Pinchback,  became  the  can-
didate of  the  whole  party.  The  various  wings  of
the  Democratic  party  united  on  John  McEnery.
The  election  was  held  on  4  Nov.,  and  Kellogg,  on
16  Nov.,  obtained  a  temporary  injunction  in  a  IJ.  S.
court,  restraining  the  returning-board  from  an-
nouncing the  result,  alleging  among  other  things
that  changes  had  been  illegally  made  in  the  board
for  the  purpose  of  declaring  McEnery  elected.
Judge  Edward  H.  Durell  rendered  a  final  decision
in  Kellogg's  favor;  but  both  the  rival  boards  were
organized,two  legislatures  con vened,each  candidate
was  declared  elected,  and  both  were  inaugurated
on  14  Jan.,  1873.  A  committee  of  congress  inves-
tigated the  matter,  and  advised  that  a  new  election
be  held ;  but  a  bill  to  that  effect  was  lost,  and  the
administration  recognized  Mr.  Kellogg  as  legal
governor  of  the  state.  The  McEnery  party  finally
appealed  to  arms,  alleging  that  the  Kellogg  admin-
istration was  a  usurpation,  and  after  a  conflict
with  the  metropolitan  police,  in  the  streets  of  the
city,  seized  the  state  and  city  buildings  and  prop-
erty on  14  Sept.,  and  compelled  Gov.  Kellogg  to
take  refuge  in  the  custom-house.  President  Grant
immediately  issued  a  proclamation  ordering  the
insurgents  to  disperse,  and  by  20  Sept.  order  had
been  restored  by  U.  S.  troops,  and  the  Kellogg
government  was  re-established.  The  political  ex-
citement continued,  and  civil  war  was  prevented
only  by  the  presence  of  the  U.  S.  forces ;  but  in
1875  there  was  a  second  congressional  investigation,
and  an  agreement  was  made  by  which  Gov.  Kellogg
remained  in  office,  while  a  compromise  legislature
was  recognized  as  the  legal  one.  On  25  Feb.,  1876,
Gov.  Kellogg  was  impeached  by  the  lower  house
of  the  legislature,  the  principal  accusation  being
that  he  had  used  for  other  purposes  money  that
had  been  set  apart  for  the  payment  of  interest ;  but
the  case  was  dismissed  by  the  senate.  On  8  Jan.,
1877,  his  term  expired,  and,  as  before,  both  the
Republicans  and  the  Democrats  organized  state
governments.  Mr.  Kellogg  was  chosen  to  the
U.  S.  senate  by  the  former,  and  admitted  to  his
seat  by  vote  of  the  senate  on  30  Nov.,  1877.  He
was  elected  to  the  lower  house  of  congress  in  1882,
and  served  from  1883  till  1885.

KELLUM,  John,  architect,  b.  in  Hempstead,
N.  Y.,  27  Aug.,  1809  ;  d.  there,  25  July,  1871.  He
began  life  as  a  house-carpenter  in  his  native  vil-


lage, but  after  a  few  years  went  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
worked  at  his  trade,  studied  architecture,  and  was
subsequently  foreman  in  the  workshop  of  Gamaliel
King,  of  New  York,  who  in  1846  took  him  into  part-
nership. He  was  fertile  in  invention,  and  particu-
larly successful  in  adopting  the  renaissance  style  of
architecture  to  business  purposes.  Among  the  build-
ings that  were  designed  by  him  in  New  York  city
are  the  "  Herald  "  building,  Alexander  T.  Stewart's
building  at  10th  street  and  Broadway  and  his
residence  on  Fifth  avenue,  the  Park  avenue  hotel,
the  Stock  exchange,  the  Mutual  life  insurance
company's  buildings  on  Broadway,  and  the  New
York  city  court-house.  Mr.  Kellum  was  also  the
superintendent  of  all  the  buildings  that  were  erected
by  Alexander  T.  Stewart  at  Garden  City,  N.  Y.

*  KELLY,  James  Edward,  sculptor,  b.  in  New
York  city.  30  July,  1855.  He  studied  at  the  Na-
tional academy  of  design  and  at  the  Art  students'
league,  and  also  acquired  a  knowledge  of  wood-en-
graving. In  1875  he  opened  a  studio  with  Edwin
A.  Abbey,  and  there  made  numerous  drawings  for
the  magazines  and  Bryant  and  Gay's  "  History  of
the  United  States."  In  1878  he  was  commissioned
by  a  publishing-house  to  prepare  a  series  of  por-
traits of  the  distinguished  generals  of  the  civil
war.  Among  these  were  Grant,  Sherman,  Sheridan,
Hooker.  Hancock,  and  Ord.  In  addition  to  mak-
ing portrait  studies,  sketches  and  studies  were
made,  from  life  in  each  case,  for  pictures  of  re-
markable incidents  in  the  careers  of  these  officers,
the  models  themselves  furnishing  all  details.  Dur-
ing the  progress  of  this  work  he  made  the  statuette
of  "  Sheridan's  Ride,"  which  was  shown  in  the  ex-
hibition of  the  National  academy  in  1879.  He  now
determined  to  devote  his  attention  to  sculpture.
In  1883  he  was  chosen  from  among  many  competi-
tors to  make  the  five  bass-reliefs  which  surround
the  base  of  the  Monmouth  battle  monument.  The
subjects  selected  were  "  Council  of  War  at  Hope-
well," "  Washington  rallying  the  Troops,"  "  Ramsay
defending  his  Guns."  "  Molly  Pitcher,"  and
"  Wayne's  Charge."  Later  he  obtained  the  first
prize  in  the  competition  for  the  Paul  Revere  monu-
ment in  Boston,  but  the  work  was  subsequently
assigned  to  a  local  artist.  In  1886  he  modelled  the
panel  "  Schuyler  surrendering  his  Plans  to  Gen.
Gates  before  the  Battle  of  Saratoga,"  for  the  Sara-
toga monument.  At  present  (1887)  he  is  engaged
on  an  equestrian  statue  of  "  Gen.  Grant  at  Donel-
son,"  made  from  sittings  given  by  Grant  himself
in  1880,  and  also  on  similar  statues  of  Gen.  William
T.  Sherman  and  Gen.  John  A.  Logan.

KELLY,  James  Kerr,  senator,  b.  in  Centre
county.  Pa..  16  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1839,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  Pennsylvania  bar  in  1842.  He  went  to  Cali-
fornia in  1849,  and  in  1851  to  Oregon,  where  in
1852  he  was  selected  by  the  assembly  one  of  a
commission  of  three  to  prepare  a  code  of  laws  for
the  territory.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislative
council  in  1853-'7,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  a
member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the  consti-
tution of  Oregon.  He  had  been  chosen  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  1st  regiment  of  Oregon  mounted
volunteers  in  1855,  and  in  1855-'6  served  in  the
war  against  the  Yakima  Indians.  He  declined  the
office  of  U.  S.  district  attorney  in  1860,  and  from
that  year  till  1864  sat  in  the  state  senate.  In
1871-7  he  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  on  the
committees  on  post-offices,  mines  and  mining,  and
military  affairs.

KELLY,  James  Madison,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington county,  Ga.,  in  January,  1795 ;  d.  in  Perry,


508


KELLY


KELLY


Ga.,  17  Jan.,  1849.  He  studied  law,  and  in  1827
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  several  times  a
member  of  the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature,  and
in  1839  served  in  the  state  senate.  On  the  estab-
lishment of  the  Georgia  supreme  court  he  became
its  first  reporter  in  1846,  and  published  '•  Georgia
Reports  "  (5  vols.,  1846-'8).

KELLY,  John,  antiquarian,  b.  in  "Warner,  N.  H.,
7  March,  1786 ;  d.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  3  Nov.,  1860.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1804,  admitted
to  the  bar.  and  practised  in  Henniker  and  North-
wood,  N.  H.  Mr.  Kelly  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature, clerk  of  the  house  in  1828,  and  state  coun-
cillor in  1846.  He  removed  to  Exeter  in  1831,  and
for  many  years  edited  the  "  News  Letter."  He  was
the  author  of  many  articles  in  the  "  Proceedings  "
of  the  State  historical  society,  and  the  "  New  Eng-
land Historical  and  Genealogical  Register."

KELLY,  John,  politician,  b.  in  New  York  city,
21  April,  1821 ;  d.  there,  1  June,  1886.  He  received
a  public-school  education,  was  apprenticed  to  the
mason's  trade,  and  engaged  in  business  for  himself
at  the  age  of  twenty-four.  In  1854  he  was  elected
an  alderman,  and  from  this  time  until  his  death  he
was  active  as  a  Democratic  politician.  In  1855  and
1857  he  was  elected  to  congress,  during  his  last
term  was  elected  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New  York,
and  in  1876  succeeded  Andrew  H.  Green,  by  ap-
pointment, as  comptroller.  In  1871  he  aided
Charles  O'Conor,  Samuel  J.  Tilden.  and  their  asso-
ciates in  the  struggle  against  the  Tweed  ring.

KELLY,  Jonathan  Falconbridge,  author,  b.
in  Philadelphia  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in
1854.  He  was  educated  in  a  private  school  in  his
native  city,  became  a  printer  and  publisher  of
theatrical  criticisms,  and  afterward  removed  to  the
west,  where  he  lectured  and  wrote  on  humorous
subjects.  He  published  the  "  Arena  "  in  New  York
city,  the  Boston  "  Traveller,"  and  the  "  Aurora
Borealis,"  and  was  the  author  of  "  The  Humors  of
Falconbridge  "  (Philadelphia,  1856).

KELLY,  Patrick,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Ireland ;
d.  there,  8  Oct.,  1829.  He  was  educated  in  St.
Patrick's  college,  County  Kildare,  and was  ap-

fiointed  president  of  Birchfield  college,  Kilkenny,
n  1820  Virginia  was  made  a  Roman  Catholic  dio-
cese, and  Dr.  Kelly  was  nominated  its  first  bishop.
He  arrived  in  the  United  States  in  January,  1821,
making  Norfolk  his  place  of  residence.  His  pov-
erty was  so  great  that  he  was  obliged  to  teach.
There  were  seven  Roman  Catholic  churches  in  the
state,  which  were  only  occasionally  visited  by  priests
from  other  dioceses.  In  the  endeavor  to  attend  al-
most singly  to  the  need  of  the  Roman  Catholics  of
Virginia,  Bishop  Kelly  impaired  his  health,  and
was  translated  to  the  see  of  Waterford  and  Lis-
more  in  Ireland  in  July,  1822.

KELLY,  Robert  Morrison,  journalist,  b.  in
Paris,  Ky.,  22  Sept.,  1836.  He  was  educated  in  his
native  town,  and  after  teaching  for  several  years
qualified  for  the  practice  of  law,  and  opened  an
office  at  Cynthiana  in  1860.  He  aided  in  recruit-
ing volunteers  for  the  National  army  at  Camp
Dick  Robinson,  was  made  captain,  and  successively
promoted  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  of
the  4th  Kentucky  infantry,  and  commanded  this
regiment  until  its  discharge,  1  Sept.,  1865,  nearly
all  of  the  time  in  active  duty  in  the  field.  In  1866
fie  was  appointed  collector  of  internal  revenue  for
the  7th  district,  but  in  1869  he  resigned  to  take
editorial  charge  of  the  "  Louisville  Daily  Com-
mercial," at  the  head  of  which  he  continued  until
1886.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  pension-agent  at
Louisville,  which  office  he  held  until  he  was  re-
moved by  President  Cleveland.


KELLY,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Tennessee
about  1770 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  about  1832.
He  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,
and  afterward  in  Elyton,  near  what  is  now  Bir-
mingham, Ala.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Jackson  Democrat,  in  place  of  John  W.  Walker,
resigned,  and  served  from  21  Jan.,  1823,  till  3
March,  1825.  About  1831  he  removed  with  his
family  to  New  Orleans.

KELLY,  William,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  4  Feb.,  1807;  d.  in  Torquay.  England,
14  Jan.,  1872.  His  father,  a  political  exile  from
Ireland,  who  had  become  a  successful  merchant,
died  in  1825,  leaving  three  sons,  John,  William,  and
Robert,  all  of  whom  were  under  age.  The  business
was  continued  by  the  two  first  mentioned,  and
after  1826  by  the  three  together,  who  were  known
as  the  "  boy  merchants."  After  the  death  of  John
in  1836,  the  remaining  brothers  retired  and  devoted
themselves  to  charitable  and  educational  work.
William  bought  the  estate  of  Ellerslie,  near  Rhine-
beck,  N.  Y.  (now  the  property  of  Levi  P.  Morton),
and  engaged  in  farming.  He  was  president  of  the
State  agricultural  society  in  1854,  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  State  agricultural  college  at  Ovid,  N.  Y.,
and  president  of  its  board  of  trustees.  He  was  also
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Vassar  college
from  its  foundation  till  his  death,  and  of  that  of
Rochester  university  for  many  years,  and  was  ac-
tive in  charitable  enterprises,  to  all  of  which  he
contributed  liberally.  He  was  a  state  senator  in
1855-'6,  and  the  unsuccessful  Democratic  candidate
for  governor  of  New  York  in  1860. — His  brother,
Robert,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New  York  citv,  10
Dec,  1808;  d.  27  April,  1856,  was  graduated  first  in
his  class  at  Columbia  in  1826,  and  in  the  same  year
became  a  member  of  the  firm  of  J.  and  W.  Kelly
and  Co.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  Free  academy
(now  College  of  the  city  of  New  York),  president  of
the  board  of  education,  a  regent  of  the  State  uni-
versity, and  a  founder  and  president  of  the  board
of  trustees  of  Rochester  university.  He  was  also
president  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  House  of
refuge,  and  was  identified  with  numerous  other  be-
nevolent associations.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
held  the  office  of  city  chamberlain.

KELLY,  William,  inventor,  b.  in  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  22  Aug..  1811 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  11  Feb.,
1888.  At  an  early  age  he  evinced  great  fondness
for  mechanics  by  constructing  a  tin  steam-engine
and  boiler.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  built  a  pro-
pelling water-wheel,  and  four  years  later  a  revolv-
ing steam-engine.  Subsequently  he  became  engaged
in  the  commission  business  in  Pittsburg,  and  also
owned  interests  in  steamboats;  but  in  1845,  his
property  having  been  destroyed  by  fire,  he  removed
to  Kentucky,  and  there  engaged  in  the  manufac-
ture of  iron.  The  property  known  as  the  Eddy-
ville  iron-works,  including  the  Suwanee  furnace
and  the  Union  forge,  situated  on  the  Cumberland
river  in  Lyon  county,  was  purchased  by  him  in
1846,  and  he  soon  acquired  a  high  reputation  for
the  excellence  of  his  products.  At  the  Suwanee
furnace  nearly  one  half  of  his  metal  was  converted
into  large  sugar-kettles  made  on  cast-iron  elastic
moulds  of  his  own  invention,  which  found  their
way  to  the  sugar-plantations  in  Louisiana  and
Cuba,  while  at  the  Union  forge  he  made  charcoal
blooms  which  were  sent  to  the  rolling-mills  in
Cincinnati.  In  1847,  owing  to  the  great  cost  of
fuel,  he  began  experimenting  toward  decarbonizing
the  iron  by  the  introduction  of  a  current  of  air,
thereby  directly  converting  pig-iron  into  steel  by
means  of  a  converter,  which  can  still  be  seen  at
the  Cambria  iron-works  in  Johnstown,  Pa. Zerah


KELPIUS


KELTON


509


Colburn,  in  his  history  of  the  Bessemer  process
of  refining  iron,  says  :  "  The  first  experiments  in
the  conversion  of  melted  cast-iron  into  malleable
steel,  by  blowing  air  in  jets  through  the  mass  in
fusion,  appear  to  have  been  made  by  William
Kelly,  an  iron-master  at  the  Suwanee  furnaces,
Lyon  county,  Kentucky,  U.  S."  This  method,
long  known  as  "  Kelly's  air-boiling  process,"  was
used  for  the  manufacture  of  boiler-plates  before
Sir  Henry  Bessemer  was  known,  and  it  was  claimed
by  Mr.  Kelly  that  Bessemer  obtained  his  original
knowledge  of  the  process  that  bears  his  name  from
information  that  was  procured  through  English
workmen  in  Mr.  Kelly's  employ.  As  soon  as  Besse-
mer brought  out  his  process  in  England,  applica-
tion was  at  once  made  by  Mr.  Kelly  for  a  patent
in  the  United  States,  and  after  considerable  delay,
during  which  time  the  English  applicant  appeared
in  the  patent-office,  the  commissioner  decided  that
Mr.  Kelly  was  the  first  inventor  and  entitled  to
the  patent,  which  he  at  once  issued  to  him.  In
1863  a  syndicate  of  iron-masters  organized  the
Kelly  process  company,  for  the  purpose  of  control-
ling Mr.  Kelly's  patents,  and  at  once  erected  experi-
mental works  at  Wyandotte,  Mich,  (see  Durfee,
William  F.  and  Zoheth  S.),  where  steel  was  first
made  under  Kelly's  patents  in  the  United  States,
months  before  the  similar  production  under  Besse-
mer's  patents  at  Troy  by  Alexander  L.  Holley  (q.  v.).
In  1866  the  interests  of  the  several  patentees  were
consolidated  under  the  title  of  the  Pneumatic  steel
association.  Application  was  made  at  the  patent-
office  in  1871  for  the  renewal  of  the  Bessemer,
Mushet,  and  Kelly  patents,  and  the  claims  of  the
two  former  were  rejected,  while  a  renewal  of  seven
years  was  granted  to  Mr.  Kelly.  In  1854  Mr.
Kelly,  finding  slave  labor  unsatisfactory,  imported
through  a  New  York  tea-house  ten  Chinamen  to
take  the  place  of  negroes  in  his  iron-works.  This
is  said  to  have  been  the  first  introduction  of  that
kind  of  labor  into  the  United  States,  and  it  excited
much  comment.  The  experiment  proved  successful,
and  arrangements  were  made  for  the  further  im-
portation of  fifty  Chinamen,  when  a  difficulty  be-
tween the  two  nations  prevented  their  coming.

KELPIUS,  John,  mystic  philosopher,  b.  in  Sie-
benbiirgen,  Transylvania,  Germany,  in  1673 ;  d.  in
Roxborough,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1708.  He  was  of
a  wealthy  family,  and  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Helmstadt,  where  his  preceptor,  Dr.
John  Fabricius,  selected  him  as  his  assistant  in  the
authorship  of  a  work  in  Latin.  His  native  lan-
guage was  the  German,  but  he  was  also  acquainted
with  the  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  and  English.  He
early  devoted  himself  to  theological  studies  and
became  a  follower  of  Philip  Jacob  Spener,  the
founder  of  the  sect  called  Pietists.  While  in  Lon-
don he  met  Jane  Leade,  the  head  of  the  Phila-
delphians,  another  mystic  sect.  Of  course  his  pe-
culiar views  met  with  opposition,  and  although  at
this  time  there  was  a  great  spirit  of  inquiry  all
over  the  land,  under  the  name  of  Quietism  in  the
Roman  church,  and  Pietism,  Chiliasm,  and  Phila-
delphianism  in  the  Protestant  churches,  the  desire
to  live  where  religious  liberty  could  be  enjoyed  led
him  and  his  followers  to  emigrate  to  the  Xew
World.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one  years,  with  ahout
forty  others  of  like  faith,  he  began  his  voyage  to
this  country,  7  Jan.,  1694,  and  after  a  dangerous
and  tempestuous  journey  reached  Philadelphia,  23
June,  and  next  day  went  to  Germantown,  where
the  German  emigrants  and  those  from  Holland
had  settled  under  the  leadership  of  Francis  Daniel
Pastorius,  the  German  jurist.  Kelpius  and  his  fol-
lowers soon  attracted  much  attention by  their


dress,  their  peculiar  doctrines,  and  holy  wav  of
living.  He  afterward  selected  a  spot  on  the  banks
of  the  Wissahickon,  where  in  a  small  valley  he
built  a  hut  or  cave,  and  walled  a  spring  of  water,
that  is  still  known  as  "the  hermit's  spring."
There  they  lived  as  an  unbroken  brotherhood  for
about  ten  years.  They  held  religious  services  in
the  groves,  and  crowds  of  curious  people  as-
sembled to  hear  the  preaching  of  the  hermits.  It
is  said  that  they  taught  little  children  that  were
brought  to  them.  They  were  called  the  "Society
of  the  women  in  the  wilderness,"  and  their  relig-
ious views  were  tinctured  with  the  doctrines  of
Jacob  Boehme,  the  Teutonic  philosopher.  Kel-
pius was  a  firm  believer  in  the  millennium,  said  it
was  near  at  hand,  and  told  Alexander  Mack,  the
Tunker  preacher,  that  he  should  not  die  till  he
saw  it.  His  Latin  journal,  kept  during  his  voyage
across  the  Atlantic,  is  still  preserved  in  the  His-
torical society  of  Pennsylvania.  In  it  are  copies  of
several  letters  in  English  and  German,  which  he
wrote  to  learned  persons  both  in  Europe  and  Ameri-
ca. When  Pastorius  ceased  to  be  the  agent  of  the
Frankfort  company,  Kelpius  was  chosen  in  his
place,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  acted  as
such.  Reference  is  made  to  Kelpius  in  "  The
Chronicon  Ephratense,"  and  it  would  seem  that
after  his  death  many  of  his  followers  joined  the
Seventh  Day  Baptists  at  Ephrata.  Pa.  (See  Beissel,
Conrad.)  Whittier,  in  "The  Pennsylvania  Pil-
grim,"' speaks  of  the  hermit  as

"  Painful  Kelpius  from  his  hermit  den
By  Wissahickon.  maddest  of  good  men."

KELSO,  Thomas,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1784;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  26  July,  1878.  He
came  to  the  United  States  in  1791,  and  engaged  in
business  in  Baltimore,  where  he  accumulated  a
fortune.  He  was  a  director  of  the  Philadelphia,
Wilmington  and  Baltimore  railroad  for  thirty-
seven  years,  and  held  various  other  financial  offices.
He  founded  the  Kelso  orphan  home,  for  the  or-
phans of  members  of  the  Methodist  church,  at  a
cost  of  $120,000.  and  gave  liberally  to  churches  in
Baltimore  and  Washington.

KELTON,  John  Cuningham,  soldier,  b.  in
Delaware  county,  Pa.,  24  June,  1828.  His  great-
grandfather, James,  came  from  Ireland  to  Chester
county.  Pa.,  about  1735.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1851,  and  was  employed
on  the  frontier  till  1857,  and  at  the  academy,  as
instructor  in  infantry  tactics  and  the  use  of  small
arms,  till  24  April,  1861.  He  served  during  the
civil  war  in  1861-'5  as  assistant  adjutant-general,
with  the  exception  of  two  months  in  1861,  when,
as  colonel  of  the  9th  Missouri  regiment,  he  com-
manded a  brigade  in  that  state.  He  resigned  his
volunteer  commission,  12  March,  1862,  but  was  in
the  field  during  the  advance  upon  Corinth  and  the
siege  of  that  place  in  April  and  May,  and  was  on
Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck's  staff  from  July  of  that
year  till  1  July,  1865.  He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel,  colonel,  and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,
on  13  March,  1865,  "for  most  valuable  and  arduous
services  both  in  the  field  and  at  headquarters."
Gen.  Kelton  was  in  charge  of  the  appointment
bureau  in  the  adjutant-general's  office  at  Washing-
ton in  1865-'70,  and  was  afterward  adjutant-gen-
eral of  the  Division  of  the  Pacific.  On  15  June,
1880,  he  attained  the  staff  rank  of  colonel,  and
since  1885  he  has  been  on  duty  in  the  adjutant-
general's  office  at  Washington.  Since  1880  he  has
patented  a  modification  of  the  locking  mechanism
of  the  Springfield  rifle,  reducing  the  number  of
motions  required  to  load  and  fire  it  to  four;  a
front  sight  cover  and  protector; a detachable


510


KEMBLE


KEMBLE


magazine ;  a  safety-stop  for  revolvers,  preventing
accidental  discharge  in  a  cavalry  combat ;  a  pistol-
pack,  whereby  any  jointed  revolver  can  be  loaded
in  two  seconds ;  an  automatic  check-rein  that  en-
ables the  cavalryman  to  have  both  hands  free :  and
a  rear  sight  for  rifles.  Many  of  these  have  been
adopted  by  the  ordnance  department.  Gen.  Kel-
ton  has  published  "  Manual  of  the  Bayonet "  (New
York,  1861) ;  and  has  printed  privately  "  Fencing
with  Foils "  (San  Francisco,  1882) ;  "  Pigeons  as
Couriers"  (1882);  "Information  for  Riflemen"
(1884) ;  and  "  Select  Songs  for  Special  Occasions  "
(1884).  He  has  edited  "  System  of  Horse  Train-
ing "  by  John  Grace  (1884).

KEMBLE,  Charles,  actor,  b.  in  Brecon,  Wales,
27  Nov.,  1775 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  12  Nov.,
1854.  He  was  the  brother  of  John  Philip  and
Mrs.  Sarah  Siddons,  carefully  educated  at  the
Roman  Catholic  seminary  in  Douai,  and  in  1792
became  engaged  as  a  junior  clerk  in  the  London
general  post-office.  In  April,  1794,  he  made  his
theatrical  debut  in  Sheffield  as  Orlando  in  "As
You  Like  It,"  and  he  appeared  on  the  London  stage
at  Drury  Lane  theatre  on  the  22d  of  that  month,
as  Malcolm  in  "Macbeth."  In  1806  he  married
Miss  Maria  Theresa  De  Camp,  a  ballet-dancer,  who,
after  the  loss  of  her  sprightliness,  became  an  act-
ress. Later  he  and  his  wife  played  in  the  cities
of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  after  joined  the  com-
pany at  Covent  Garden.  From  1828  until  1832  he
was  manager  of  the  last-named  theatre.  In  1832
Kemble  came  to  the  United  States  in  company
with  his  daughter,  Frances  Anne.  He  opened  at
the  Park  theatre  in  New  York  city  as  Hamlet.  For
two  years  father  and  daughter  continued  playing
in  the  large  cities  of  the  Union.  After  the  actor's
return  to  London,  in  1834,  he  performed  in  pub-
lic for  limited  periods,  taking  a  farewell  of  the
stage  in  1836.  He  then  became  a  dramatic  reader
in  public,  and  was  frequently  invited  to  read  con-
densations of  Shakespeare's  plays  in  the  royal
household.  In  1840,  for  a  single  season,  he  again
managed  Covent  Garden.  His  permanent  connec-
tion with  the  stage  was  closed  in  1842. Toward  the

last,  Charles  Kem-
ble became  examin-
er of  plays  for  the
London  theatres.
During  his  manage-
ment he  produced
and  published  sev-
eral dramas  that
were  translated
from  Schiller,  Kot-
zebue,  Dumas,  Sr.,
and  others.  If  it
be  true,  as  the  Eng-
lish would  have  it,
that  " there  never
was  a  Welshman
of  first  -  rate  abili-
ty," Charles  Kem-
ble comes  under  this  sarcasm.  While  his  sister,
brother,  and  daughter  were  actors  of  remarkable
endowments,  he,  the  Welsh  member  of  the  family,
could  not  claim  so  high  a  distinction.  It  was  long,
laborious  application  and  careful  study  that  pol-
ished him  into  the  refined  and  scholarly  actor.
Criticism  has  justly  recorded  him  as  "a  first-rate
performer  of  second-rate  parts."  Among  his  best
Shakespearian  renderings  were  Mercutio,  Faulcon-
bridge,  Edgar,  Petruchio,  Cassio,  Benedick,  and
Macduff.  —  His  eldest  daughter,  Frances  Anne,
actress,  b.  in  London,  England,  27  Nov.,  1809,  is
usually  spoken  of  as  Fanny  Kemble. After  receiv-


ing a  careful  education  at  seminaries,  she  dwelt  in
a  theatrical  atmosphere ;  the  ways  of  the  stage  were
more  familiar  to  her  than  the  duties  of  the  house-
hold or  the  graces  of  the  drawing-room.  Her  fa-
ther, who  managed  Covent  Garden  theatre  in  1829,
was  in  serious  financial  difficulties  and  devised
the  expedient  of  introducing  his  daughter  to  the
public  as  an  actress.  She  made  her  debut  on  5
Oct.  of  that  year,  in  the  character  of  Juliet,  in  com-

Eany  with  her  father  as  Mercutio  and  her  mother  as
iady  Capulet.  Miss  Kemble's  success,  which  was
immediate  and  remarkable,  continued  for  several
years  in  London  and  other  large  cities.  On  15
March,  1832,  she  produced  at  Covent  Garden  her
drama  "  Francis  the  First,"  in  which  she  essayed
Louise  of  Savoy.  As  a  literary  production  the
play  was  favorably  criticised,  but  it  became  weari-
some on  repetition.  At  this  time  Miss  Kemble's
attractive  Shakespearian  characters  were  Juliet,
Portia,  Constance,  and  Queen  Katherine,  supple-
mented by  Bianca  in  "  Fazio,"  Julia  in  "  The
Hunchback,"  Belvidere  in  "  Venice  Preserved,"
and  Juliana  in  "  The  Honeymoon."  In  1832  she
came  with  her  father  to  this  country,  and  played
for  about,  two  years  in  the  principal  cities.  Their
success  was  so  marked  as  to  cause  great  excitement,
that  lasted  until  Miss  Kemble's  marriage  and  her
father's  departure  for  England.  Her  last  appear-
ance was  at  the  Park  theatre  in  New  York  city  in
June,  1834.  She  came  before  the  public  in  the
United  States  in  the  full  flush  of  young  woman-
hood— lithe  and  graceful,  with  black  hair  and
brilliant  eyes,  set  forth  by  expressive  features.
Remarkable  energy  and  a  voice  of  uncommon
range  and  power  were  among  her  attributes.  On
7  June,  1834,  she  married,  in  Philadelphia,  Pierce
Butler,  a  southern  planter,  son  of  the  U.  S.  sena-
tor of  that  name.  During  most  of  Miss  Kemble's
American  career  he  had  followed  her  from  place
to  place,  frequently  engaged  as  a  volunteer  musi-
cian in  the  orchestra.  For  the  greater  part  of  their
married  life  the  young  couple  dwelt  in  Bramble-
ton,  near  Philadelphia,  varied  by  brief  winter  visits
to  their  estate  of  Butler's  Island  in  Georgia.  Here
the  wife  found  the  conditions  of  a  southern  plant-
er's life  unendurable.  Her  outspoken  condemna-
tion of  slavery  fostered  disagreements,  and  in  1846
the  wife  permanently  forsook  her  husband's  home.
In  1848  Mr.  Butler  sued  for  a  divorce,  on  the  plea
of  abandonment  and  incompatibility  of  temper.
The  case  stood  entirely  "  non  criminis."  His  coun-
sel was  Geo.  M.  Dallas,  hers  Rufus  Choate.  A  di-
vorce was  readily  granted  by  the  Philadelphia
court,  to  the  satisfaction  of  both  parties.  Mr.
Butler  died  in  1867.  Immediately  after  the  divorce
Mrs.  Butler  resumed  her  maiden  name,  and  for
years  lived  in  Lenox,  Mass.  In  1849  she  came
before  the  public  at  Philadelphia,  in  her  first  course
of  Shakespearian  readings.  These  entertainments
were  repeated  in  many  cities  from  1856  until  1860,
and  again  from  1866  until  1868.  From  1873  until
1877  Mrs.  Kemble  resided  near  Philadelphia.  At
the  present  time  (1887)  she  is  living  in  England.
She  read  in  all  twenty-four  Shakespearian  plays.
The  reader's  own  favorite  was  "  The  Tempest."
Mrs.  Kemble's  renderings  of  the  masculine  roles  of
Lear  and  Macbeth  were  particularly  admired.  As
a  reader  Mrs.  Kemble  was  pre-eminent,  displaying
both  scholarship  and  intellectual  mastery,  and
combining  tenderness  with  power.  It  sounds
strangely  to  hear  from  one  so  highly  gifted  that
"  her  dislike  for  the  stage  made  her  indifferent  to
her  own  success"  as  an  artist.  Apart  from  her
acting  and  reading  she  has  claims  to  distinction  as
a poet, dramatist,  critic,  and prose-writer. Her


KEMBLE


KEMP


511


jtszfyzi^Kr-  yCesm^-fl^


publications  include  "  Francis  the  First,"  a  drama
(London,  1832;  New  York,  1833);  "Journal"  (2
vols.,  London,  1835:  Philadelphia  and  Boston,
1835);  "The  Star  of  Seville,"  a  drama  (London
and  New  York,  1837);  "  Poems"  (London  and
Philadelphia,  1844;  Boston,  1859);  "A  Year  of
Consolation"  (2  vols.,  London  and  New  York,
1847) ;  "  Plays,"  translated  (London,  1863) :  "  Jour-
nal of  a  Residence  on  a  Georgia  Plantation  "  (Lon-
don and  New  York,  1863) ;  "  Records  of  a  Girlhood  "
(3  vols.,  London,  1878 ;  New  York,  1879) ;  "Records
of  Later  Life  "  (3  vols.,  1882) ;  and  "  Notes  on  some
of  Shakespeare's  Plays  "  (London,  1882).

KEMBLE,  Gouv'erneur,  manufacturer,  b.  in
New  York  citv,  25  Jan.,  1786 ;  d.  in  Cold  Spring,
N.  Y.,  16  Sept.,  1875.  He  was  a  son  of  Peter
Kemble,  of  New  Jersey,  and  a  nephew  of  Gen.
Gage,  of  the  British
army,  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1803,
engaged  in  com-
merce, and  during
the  administration  of
President  Monroe
was  appointed  consul
to  Cadiz.  He  subse-
quently visited  the
Mediterranean  ports,
and  transacted  busi-
ness for  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment in  connec-
tion with  the  supply
of  the  squadron  dur-
ing the  Algerian  war
in  1815.  On  his  re-
turn he  established  at
Cold  Spring.  N.  Y.,  opposite  West  Point,  the  first
foundry  in  the  United  States  where  cannon  were
cast  with  any  approach  to  perfection.  He  served
in  congress  in  1837-'41,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Democrat,  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  state
constitutional  convention  of  1846,  and  a  promot-
er of  the  Hudson  river  and  Panama  railroads.
Mr.  Kemble  was  a  lover  and  patron  of  art,  and
made  a  valuable  collection  of  paintings.  He  was
the  life-long  friend  of  Washington  Irving  and  his
brother-in-law,  James  K.  Paulding,  was  the  owner
of  the  house  near  Newark,  N.  J.,  described  by  those
writers  in  "  Salmagundi  "  as  "  Cockloft  Hall,"  and
was  celebrated  for  his  hospitality  at  his  beauti-
ful bachelor  establishment  at  Cold  Spring,  desig-
nated by  Irving  as  the  "  Bachelor's  Elysium."
Some  of  the  letters  preserved  by  Mr.  Irving  con-
tain pleasant  allusions  to  the  hall,  and  show  how
fondly  it  was  remembered.  Mr.  Kemble  writes  to
Irving  in  1842:  "  I  still  look  forward  to  the  time
when  vou,  Paulding,  Brevoort,  the  Doctor  [Peter
Irving],  and  myself  shall  assemble  there,  recount
the  stories  of  our  various  lives,  and  have  another
game  at  leap-frog."  At  their  last  meeting,  shortly
before  Mr.  Irving's  death,  he  said  of  Mr.  Kemble:
"  That  is  my  friend  of  early  life,  always  unchanged,
always  like  a  brother;  one  of  the  noblest  beings
that  ever  was  created.  His  heart  is  pure  gold."
Gen.  Winfield  Scott  pronounced  the  glowing  eulo-
gium  on  Kemble  that  he  was  "the  most  perfect
gentleman  in  the  United  States."

KEMEYS,  Edward,  sculptor,  b.  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  31  Jan.,  1843.  He  studied  in  New  York,  and
later  in  Paris,  where  he  was  impressed  by  the  style
of  Barye,  although  in  no  sense  an  imitator.  His
works  show  powerful  conception  and  individuality
and  a  keen  perception  of  animal  traits  of  character.
He  has  made  a  specialty  of  the  wild  animals  of
the  American  continent. His  "  Fight  between  Buf-


falo and  Wolves  "  attracted  much  attention  at  the
Paris  salon  in  1878.  Among  his  other  important
works  are  "  Panther  and  Deer,"  and  "  Coyote  and
Raven."  A  recent  work  is  a  colossal  head  of  a
buffalo  for  the  facade  of  the  station  of  the  Pacific
railroad  at  St.  Louis,  which  was  cast  in  bronze  in
New  York  in  August,  1887,  and  is  the  largest  work
of  its  kind  that  has  been  done  in  this  country.

KEMP,  James,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Keith  Hall
parish,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  in  1764;  d.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  28  Oct.,  1827.  He  was  graduated
at  Marischal  college,  Aberdeen,  in  1786,  but  con-
tinued there  a  year  as  resident  graduate.  He  came
to  the  United  States  in  1787,  and  became  tutor  in
a  family  in  Dorchester  county,  Md.,  where  he  re-
mained two  years.  Although  brought  up  a  Pres-
byterian, he  was  led  at  that  time  to  examine  the
doctrines  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  with
which  he  shortly  afterward  united.  He  then  stud-
ied theology,  was  ordained  priest,  27  Dec,  1789,
and  in  August,  1790,  became  rector  of  Great  Chop-
tank  parish,  where  he  remained  for  over  twenty
years.  In  1813  he  was  elected  associate  rector  of
St.  Paul's,  Baltimore.  Having  been  elected  by  the
convention  of  Maryland,  he  was  consecrated,  1
Sept..  1814,  suffragan  bishop  with  Dr.  Thomas  J.
Claggett.  The  latter  committed  to  .his  charge  the
churches  on  the  eastern  shore,  making  about  one
third  of  all  parishes  in  the  diocese.  On  the  death
of  his  superior  in  1816  he  succeeded  to  the  bishop-
ric. In  1815  he  was  elected  provost  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Maryland,  which  office  he  held  until  his
death,  and  in  1802  he  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia.  Dr.  Kemp  published,  in
addition  to  several  occasional  discourses,  "A  Tract
on  Conversion  "  (1807) :  "  Letters  in  Vindication  of
Episcopacy  "  (1808) ;  "  A  Sermon  on  Deathbed  Re-
pentance" (1815);  and  "A  Sermon  on  the  Death
of  Bishop  Claggett "  (1816).

KEMP,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Achlossan,  Scot-
land, 10  April,  1763 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  15  Nov.,
1812.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Aber-
deen, Scotland,  in  1781,  and  before  he  was  of  age
became  a  member  of  the  Royal  society  of  Edin-
burgh. He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1783,
and,  after  settling  in  Virginia,  came  to  New  York
city,  where  in  1785  he  was  appointed  teacher,  and
the  next  year  became  professor  of  mathematics  in
Columbia.  In  1795  he  was  transferred  to  the
chair  of  geography,  history,  and  chronology.  Prof.
Kemp  had  an  important  influence  in  moulding  the
views  of  De  Witt  Clinton  on  topics  of  internal  im-
provement and  national  policy.  In  1810  he  visited
Lake  Erie  to  examine  into  the  feasibility  of  the
projected  canal,  and  in  advance  of  the  surveys  pro-
nounced it  entirely  practicable.

KEMP,  William  Miller,  phvsician,  b.  in
Frederick  county,  Md.,  21  Feb.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  6  Sept..  1886.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  the  Universitv  of  Pennsylvania  in
1834,  and  settled  in  Baltimore  in  1839.  While  he
was  president  of  the  board  of  health  of  Baltimore
in  1855,  he  repeatedly  visited  Norfolk,  Va.,  where
yellow  fever  was  epidemic.  A  careful  study  of  this
disease  in  that  city  convinced  him  that  it  was  non-
contagious, and  the  board  of  health  therefore  de-
termined, with  the  best  results,  not  to  quarantine
vessels  that  transported  persons  from  Norfolk  to
Baltimore.  Dr.  Kemp  was  president  of  the  board
of  health  until  1861,  in  1859  was  a  founder  and
president  of  the  National  quarantine  and  sanitary
association,  and  in  1883  was  president  of  the  Bal-
timore medical  and  chirurgical  faculty.  He  con-
tinued to  practise  in  Baltimore  until  his  death.
He  published  various  surgical  and  medical  papers.


512


KEMPER


KEMPT


KEMPER,  Jackson,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Pleas-
ant Vallev.  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Dec,  1789;  d.
in  Delafield,  Waukesha  co.,  Wis.,  24  May,  1870.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1809,  studied
theology,  was  ordered  deacon  in  1811,  and  or-
dained priest  in  1812.  He  was  the  assistant  of
Bishop  White  in  the  rectorship  of  St.  Peter's  church,
Philadelphia,  until  1831,  when  he  was  called  to
be  rector  of  St.  Paul's,  Norwalk,  Conn.  In  1835  he
was  elected  the  first  missionary  bishop  of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church,  his  jurisdiction  compris-
ing what  was  then  known  as  the  northwest.  Out
of  it  have  since  been  formed  the  dioceses  of  Mis-
souri, Indiana,  Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  Iowa,  Kan-
sas, and  Nebi'aska.  Early  in  the  winter  of  the  lat-
ter year  Bishop  Kemper  reached  St.  Louis,  where
he  took  up  his  residence  until  he  removed  to  Wis-
consin in  1844.  Meanwhile  (about  1838)  he  had
been  elected  bishop  of  Maryland,  but  preferred  the
more  burdensome  office  he  then  held.  In  1847,  Wis-
consin having  been  organized  into  a  diocese,  the  pri-
mary convention  elected  Bishop  Kemper  diocesan.
He  again  declined,  but,  on  being  unanimously  re-
elected in  1854,  he  accepted  on  condition  that  he
should  still  remain  missionary  bishop.  The  latter
office,  however,  he  finally  resigned  in  1859,  and
from  that  time  until  his  death  confined  his  labors
entirely  to  the  diocese  of  Wisconsin.  He  had  been
active  in  the  establishment  of  a  theological  semi-
nary within  the  bounds  of  his  episcopate,  and  when
it  was  founded  at  Nashotah,  Wis.,  he  took  up  his
residence  on  an  adjoining  farm.  In  1868,  notwith-
standing his  great  age,  he  attended  the  general
council  of  bishops  in  London,  and  received  from
the  University  of  Cambridge  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
That  of  S.  T.  D.  had  already  been  conferred  upon
him  by  Columbia  in  1829. — His  sister,  Sophia
Cornelia,  lived  to  be  over  one  hundred  (b.  in
1777 ;  d.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  19  Jan.,  1879),  and  mar-
ried Samuel  Sitgreaves,  minister  to  England  under
President  Adams.

KEMPER,  Reuben,  adventurer,  b.  in  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  in  1770 ;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  10  Oct.,
1826.  He  emigrated  to  Ohio  in  1800  with  his  father,
who  was  a  Baptist  preacher.  Reuben  and  his  two
brothers  subsequently  went  to  the  Mississippi  ter-
ritory, engaged  in  land-surveying,  and  were  leaders
in  the  movement  to  rid  western  Florida  of  Spanish
rule.  In  1808  they  formed  an  unsuccessful  ex-
pedition to  Baton  Rouge  from  the  adjacent  coun-
ties of  Mississippi,  and  were  kidnapped  by  Spanish
authority.  They  were  rescued  by  the  commandant
of  the  U.  S.  fort  at  Pointe  Coupee,  and  afterward
inflicted  severe  chastisement  on  the  Spaniards  who
had  been  engaged  in  the  capture.  Reuben  then
devoted  himself  to  driving  the  Spaniards  out  of
North  America.  He  was  engaged  in  an  unsuccess-
ful attempt  to  capture  Mobile,  was  one  of  the
organizers  of  the  expedition  of  Gutierrez  and  To-
ledo against  Spanish  authority  in  Mexico,  and  in
1812  he  commanded  with  the  rank  of  major,  and
subsequently  that  of  colonel,  a  force  of  about  600
Americans  that  co-operated  with  the  Mexican  in-
surgents. The  expedition  advanced  into  Texas,
and  several  successful  battles  were  fought,  but  the
dissensions  that  followed  between  the  Mexicans
and  Americans  enabled  the  Spaniards  to  put  the
divided  forces  to  rout,  and  the  Americans,  dis-
gusted with  their  allies,  returned  home.  Kemper
then  joined  the  U.  S.  army  as  a  volunteer,  served
under  Andrew  Jackson  at  the  defence  of  New  Or-
leans, and  performed  important  duties  that  greatly
added  to  his  reputation.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
war,  he  settled  as  a  planter  in  Mississippi.  He  is
described  as  of  stalwart  and  gigantic  stature,  reso-


nant voice,  and  brusque  soldier-like  manner,  and
was  celebrated  for  his  "  eloquent  profanity." — His
cousin,  James  Lawson,  soldier,  b.  in  Madison
county,  Va.,  11  June,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Wash-
ington college,  Lexington,  Va.,  in  1842,  and  was  a
captain  in  the  U.  S.  army  during  the  Mexican  war.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legislature  ten
years,  during  two  of  which  he  was  speaker  of  the
house,  and  in  1861  entered  the  Confederate  army
as  colonel  of  the  7th  Virginia  regiment.  He  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  in  May,  1862,  was
in  many  battles,  and  severely  wounded  and  cap-
tured at  Gettysburg,  being  disabled  for  further
service.  In  1874  he  was  governor  of  Virginia,  and,
since  the  conclusion  of  his  term,  he  has  been  en-
gaged in  planting  in  Orange  county,  Va.  While
governor  he  published  a  volume  of  messages  to  the
legislature  (Richmond,  1876).

KEMPSTER,  Walter,  physician,  b.  in  London,
England,  25  May,  1842.  He  emigrated  to  the
United  States  in  childhood,  was  educated  in  the
public  schools  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  and  graduated
at  Long  Island  medical  college,  Brooklyn,  in  1864.
Entering  the  National  army  as  a  private,  he  served
throughout  the  civil  war,  and  in  1865  became
acting  assistant  surgeon.  At  the  close  of  the  war
he  settled  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1865-'6  was
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Asylum  for  idiots
there.  He  was  assistant  physician  to  the  New
York  state  lunatic  asylum  in  Utica  in  1866-'73,
and  since  that  time  has  been  superintendent  of
the  Northern  Wisconsin  hospital  for  the  insane,  at
Oshkosh,  Wis.  From  1866  till  1873  he  was  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  "American  Journal  of  Insanity."
Dr.  Kempster  was  the  first  physician  in  the
United  States  to  make  systematic  investigations
into  the  pathological  condition  of  the  brains  of
the  insane,  and  the  first  to  photograph,  through
the  microscope,  the  conditions  therein  found.  He
has  published  several  papers  on  the  jurisprudence
of  insanity,  and  "Reports  of  the  Northwestern
Hospital  for  the  Insane  "  (Oshkosh,  1873-'87).

KEMPT,  Sir  James,  governor  of  Canada,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1765 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 20  Dec,  1855.  He  entered  the  army  as  en-
sign, 31  March,  1783,  became  lieutenant  in  1784,
and  captain  in  1794.  From  June,  1796,  till  Febru-
ary, 1797,  he  served  as  inspecting  field-officer  of  the
recruiting-service  in  Scotland,  and  was  promoted
lieutenant-colonel,  28  Aug.,  1799.'  In  June,  1800,
he  accompanied  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby  to  the
Mediterranean,  and  afterward  to  Egypt,  and  con-
tinued with  him  until  that  general's  death  at  Alex-
andria. In  1806  he  went  to  Calabria,  and  com-
manded the  light  brigade  at  the  battle  of  Maida.
In  November,  1807,  he  was  appointed  quarter-
master-general of  the  forces  in  British  North
America,  and  on  8  March,  1809,  became  aide-de-
camp to  the  king.  He  served  in  the  peninsular
campaign,  attained  the  rank  of  major-general,  1
Jan.,  1812,  and  subsequently  was  on  the  staff  in
North  America  and  in  Flanders,  where  he  com-
manded a  brigade.  After  the  battle  of  Waterloo,
in  which  he  was  severely  wounded,  he  was  made  a
knight  grand  cross  of  the  bath,  and  received  simi-
lar honors  from  the  sovereigns  of  Russia,  Austria,
and  the  Netherlands.  In  1820  he  succeeded  the
Earl  of  Dalhousie  as  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,  and
on  10  July,  1828,  became  governor  of  Canada,
which  post  he  held  for  over  two  years.  When  he
arrived  at  Quebec  he  found  the  country  in  a  state
bordering  on  rebellion,  but  after  he  had  adminis-
tered the  government  for  a  few  months  tranquillity
was  restored.  While  in  office,  Sir  James  reinstated
magistrates  and  militia  officers  who  had  been  dis-


KENDALL


KENDALL


513


missed  for  party  reasons,  secured  for  his  executive
council  a  broader  basis  by  introducing  members
that  possessed  the  confidence  of  the  majority,  and
urged  the  judges  to  retire  from  the  legislative
council.  On  his  retirement  from  office  he  was  pre-
sented with  complimentary  addresses  by  various
fmblic  bodies  in  Canada,  and  on  his  return  to  Eng-
and  he  was  appointed  master-general  of  the  ord-
nance, 30  Nov.,  1830,  and  became  a  privy  councillor,
and  on  23  Nov.,  1841,  attained  the  rank  of  general.
KENDALL,  Amos,  journalist,  b.  in  Dunstable,
Mass.,  16  Aug.,  1789;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
11  Nov.,  1869.  His  ancestor,  Francis,  came  from
England  to  Woburn,  Mass.,  about  1640.  His  parents
were  poor,  and,  after  working  on  his  father's  farm
till  he  was  sixteen  years  old,  he  entered  Dartmouth
with  a  year's  preparation,  and  was  graduated  in
1811  at  the  head  of
his  class,  although  he
had  been  absent  much
during  his  course  that
he  might  support  him-
self by  teaching.  He
then  studied  law,  and
in  1814  removed  to
Lexington,  Ky.,  where
he  practised,  and  was
also  tutor  in  the  fam-
ily of  Henry  Clay  dur-
ing the  latter's  absence
to  negotiate  the  treaty
of  Ghent.  He  was
then  postmaster  and
X-«  K^^htM-  editor  of  a  local  paper
at  Georgetown,  Ky..
and  in  1816  became  co-editor  and  part  owner  of
the  "  Argus  of  Western  America,"  the  state  journal
at  Frankfort.  He  actively  supported  the  Demo-
cratic party,  and  also  secured  the  passage  by  the
legislature  of  an  act  setting  apart  half  the  profits
of  the  Bank  of  the  commonwealth  as  a  school
fund.  He  warmly  supported  Jackson  in  1824,  and
the  latter  at  the  beginning  of  his  term  in  1829
appointed  Kendall  fourth  auditor  of  the  treasury.
He  acquired  great  influence  with  the  administra-
tion, and  became  one  of  the  readiest  and  most  power-
ful political  writers  in  the  capital.  Some  of  Jack-
son's ablest  state  papers  were  attributed  to  Kendall's
pen.  He  aided  in  shaping  the  president's  anti-bank
policy,  was  appointed  a  special  treasury-agent  to  ne-
gotiate with  state  banks,  and  during  the  quarrel
with  Calhoun,  foreseeing  the  disaffection  of  the
*'  Telegraph,"  the  administration  organ,  advised  the
president  to  invite  Francis  P.  Blair  to  establish
the  "  Globe  "  in  Washington.  Harriet  Martineau
wrote  of  him  at  this  time :  "  I  was  fortunate  enough
to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  invincible  Amos  Kendall,
one  of  the  most  remarkable  men  in  America.  He
is  supposed  to  be  the  moving  spring  of  the  admin-
istration ;  the  thinker,  planner,  and  doer ;  but  it  is
■all  in  the  dark."  He  was  made  postmaster-general
in  1835,  and  introduced  many  reforms  in  the  de-
partment, also  freeing  it  from  debt.  His  action  in
1835  in  refusing  to  punish  the  postmaster  of
Charleston,  S.  C,  for  allowing  the  destruction  by
a  mob  of  northern  newspapers,  which  it  was  alleged
contained  "abolition  documents,"  created  much
excitement.  In  his  next  annual  report  he  urged
the  passage  of  a  law  forbidding  the  circulation  in  the
mails  of  anything  touching  the  subject  of  slavery.
He  retired  from  the  cabinet  in  1840,  and  afterward
refused  a  foreign  mission  that  was  tendered  to  him
by  President  Polk.  He  was  for  several  years  em-
barrassed by  a  suit  that  was  brought  against  him
by  certain  mail-contractors,  and  which  he  chose  to
vol.  m. — 33


defend  at  his  own  expense,  but  it  was  finally  de-
cided in  his  favor.  He  established  a  bi-weekly
called  "Kendall's  Expositor"  in  1841,  and  the
"  Union  Democrat,"  a  weekly,  in  1842,  but  both
were  soon  discontinued.  Kendall  became  asso-
ciated with  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse  in  1845  in  the
ownership  of  the  latter's  telegraph  patents,  and  by
his  ability  and  enterprise  aided  in  insuring
their  success.  His  connection  with  their  manage-
ment, after  years  of  trial  and  defeat,  made  him  a
rich  man,  and  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in
Washington  and  at  his  country-seat,  Kendall
Green,  near  that  city.  He  was  active  in  works  of
philanthropy,  contributed  $100,000  toward  build-
ing the  Calvary  Baptist  church  in  Washington  in
1864,  and  after  its  destruction  by  fire  in  1867  gave
largely  toward  rebuilding  it.  He  was  the  founder
of  the  Washington  deaf  and  dumb  asylum  and
its  first  president,  and  gave  it  $20,000.  Among
his  other  gifts  were  % 25,000  to  two  mission  schools,
and  several  scholarships  to  Columbian  college,  of
whose  board  of  trustees  he  was  for  some  time
president.  In  1860  Mr.  Kendall  published  in  the
Washington  "  Evening  Star "  a  series  of  protests
against  secession,  and  during  the  civil  war  he  ear-
nestly supported  the  administration  by  his  pen,
though  he  still  called  himself  a  Jackson  Democrat.
He  was  the  author  of  "Life  of  Andrew  Jackson,
Private,  Military,  and  Civil  "  (New  York,  1843,  un-
completed);  and  a  pamphlet  entitled  "Full  Ex-
posure of  Dr.  Charles  T.  Jackson's  Pretensions  to
the  Invention  of  the  American  Electro-magnetic
Telegraph,"  which  was  republished  with  prefatory
remarks  by  Prof.  Morse  (Paris,  1867).  After  his
death  appeared  his  autobiography,  edited  by
William  Stickney  (Boston,  1872).

KENDALL,  Bion  Freeman,  lawyer,  b.  in
Bethel,  Me.,  in  October,  1827  ;  d.  in  Olympia,
Washington  territory,  4  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1852.  became  a  clerk  in  one
of  the  departments  at  Washington,  and  then  acted
as  astronomer  for  the  expedition  that  was  sent
under  Gen.  Isaac  I.  Stevens  to  explore  a  route  for
the  Pacific  railroad.  He  afterward  became  a
lawyer  in  Olympia,  W.  T.,  where  he  attained  note
in  his  profession,  and  was  secretary  of  the  legisla-
ture, also  engaging  in  the  lumber  business.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  made  a  four-
months'  trip  in  the  southern  states,  and  reported
to  Gen.  Scott  on  the  condition,  resources,  and  war
material  of  each.  Soon  afterward  he  was  ap-
pointed superintendent  of  Indian  affairs  for  Wash-
ington territory,  and  also  edited  a  newspaper
there.  He  was  assassinated  by  a  man  whose  father
Kendall  had  attacked  in  his  journal.

KENDALL,  Edward  Hale,  architect,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  31  July,  1842.  He  was  educated  at
the  Boston  Latin-school,  studied  architecture  in
Paris,  and  has  practised  his  profession  in  New
York  city.  Since  1884  he  has  been  president  of
the  New" York  chapter  of  the  American  institute
of  architects.  He  was  associated  in  designing  the
original  Equitable  building,  and  was  the  architect
of  the  German  savings-bank  on  Fourth  avenue,  the
Washington  building  on  lower  Broadway,  and  the
residences  of  Robert  and  Ogden  Goelet  on  Fifth
avenue.  New  York  city.

KENDALL,  George  Wilkins,  journalist,  b.  in
Amherst  (now  Mount  Vernon),  N.  H.,  22  Aug.,
1809 ;  d.  in  Oak  Spring,  near  Bowie,  Tex.,  22  Oct.,
1867.  He  learned  the  printer's  trade  at  Burlington,
Vt.,  and  then  worked  as  a  journeyman  in  the  middle,
southern,  and  western  states.  He  went  to  New
Orleans  in  1835,  and  on  27  Jan.,  1837,  established
there,  with  Francis  A.  Lumsden,  the  "  Picayune,'


514


KENDRICK


the  first  cheap  daily  paper  in  that  city.  This  jour-
nal became  under  his  direction  one  of  the  most
influential  in  the  south.  In  1841,  partly  from  love
of  adventure  and  partly  for  his  health,  he  joined
in  the  Santa  Fe  trading  expedition,  was  taken
prisoner,  and  carried  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  but
was  released  after  seven  months  of  captivity.
During  the  war  with  that  country  he  accompanied
the  U.  S.  forces  under  Gen.  Taylor  and  Gen.  Scott,
and  by  means  of  pony  expresses  and  steamers
supplied  his  paper  with  the  latest  news,  sometimes
giving  information  to  the  government  in  advance
of  the  official  despatches.  On  one  occasion  he  char-
tered a  steamer  for  this  purpose  at  a  cost  of  $5,000.
After  travelling  two  years  in  Europe,  where  he
superintended  the  publication  of  his  work  on  the
war,  he  purchased,  in  1852,  a  large  grazing  farm
in  Comal  county,  Tex.  There  he  spent  the  rest
of  his  life,  and  amassed  a  fortune,  often  raising
$50,000  worth  of  wool  in  a  single  year.  He  re-
tained his  interest  in  the  "  Picayune,"  and  occa-
sionally contributed  editorials  to  its  columns.  In
private  life  Mr.  Kendall  was  genial  and  companion-
able. On  his  tombstone  are  the  words  "  Poet,
journalist,  author,  farmer — eminent  in  all ;  clear
head,  stout  heart,  a  man  of  many  friends,  best  be-
loved by  those  who  knew  him  best."  He  published
"Narrative  of  the  Texan  Santa  Fe  Expedition,"
which  was  highly  commended,  and  had  a  large
sale  (2  vols.,  New' York,  1844:  London,  1845;  new
ed.,  enlarged,  New  York,  1856) ;  and  "  The  War
between  the  United  States  and  Mexico  "  (folio,  with
12  colored  plates  by  Carl  Nebel.  New  York,  1851).

KENDRICK,  Clark,  clergyman,  b.  in  Han-
over, N.  H.,  6  Oct.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Poultney,  Vt.,  29
Feb.,  1824.  He  spent  three  years  in  teaching  in
his  native  town,  and  on  20  May,  1802,  was  ordained
pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  at  Poultney,  Vt.  He
also  made  several  missionary  excursions  in  Ver-
mont and  northern  New  York  between  1810  and
1814.  He  was  vice-president  in  1813— '17,  and  then
corresponding  secretary  till  his  death,  of  the  auxil-
iary Baptist  foreign  missionary  society  in  Vermont,
and  he  was  chaplain  to  the  Vermont  legislature  in
1817.  It  was  chiefly  through  his  efforts  that  the  Bap-
tist education  society  of  Vermont  was  organized,  the
object  of  which  was  to  assist  indigent  young  men
in  their  preparation  for  the  ministry.  Mr.  Ken-
drick  was  chosen  its  president,  and  subsequently
appointed  an  agent  to  visit  the  churches  and  pro-
cure funds  in  its  behalf.  In  1820,  when  the  es-
tablishment of  a  school  was  contemplated,  it  was
decided  to  co-operate  with  the  Baptists  of  central
and  western  New  York  in  supporting  the  college
already  in  operation  at  Hamilton,  Madison  co.,
N.  Y.,  and  Mr.  Kendrick  was  appointed  general
agent  for  the  state  to  carry  out  this  object.  He
published  a  pamphlet  on  close  communion  en-
titled "  Plain  Dealing  with  the  Pedo-  Baptists,"
and  a  few  sermons.  —  His  son,  Asahel  Clark,
educator,  b.  in  Poultney,  Vt.,  7  Dec,  1809,  after
graduation  at  Hamilton  college  in  1831,  became  a
tutor  in  the  literary  and  theological  institution  at
Hamilton  (now  Madison  university),  which  his  fa-
ther's cousin,  Dr.  Nathaniel  Kendrick,  had  founded.
The  second  year  he  was  made  professor  of  Latin
and  Greek,  but  he  was  afterward  relieved  from  the
Latin  department  and  made  professor  of  Greek
exclusively.  Save  for  one  interval  of  a  year  and  a
half,  when  he  took  a  horseback  journey  through
the  southern  states  for  his  health,  he  remained  at
Madison  until  1850.  Then,  on  the  establishment
of  the  University  of  Rochester,  he  was  called  to
the  professorship  of  Greek  in  that  institution.
During  his  stay  at  Madison  he  had  been  called  to


^O.


KENDRICK

professorships  at  Hamilton,  Waterville,  Brown,
and  other  institutions,  and  a  professorship  at
Hamilton  had  been  promised  to  him  while  he  was
still  a  student  there.  In  1852  he  visited  Europe,
and  made  a  long  stay  at  Rome  and  Athens,  devot-
ing himself  there  and
at  other  points  es-
pecially to  the  study
of  antiquities.  He
travelled  in  northern
Greece,  and  made  a

i'ourney  through  the
'eloponnesus.  Re-
turning in  1854,  he
took  his  place  as  pro-
fessor in  the  Univer-
sity of  Rochester,  with
which  he  is  still  (1887)
connected.  From  1865
till  1868,  in  addition
to  his  usual  duties,  he
filled  the  chair  of  He-
brew and  New  Testa-
ment interpretation  at  Rochester  theological  semi-
nary, and  when  the  American  committees  were
formed  to  aid  in  the  revision  of  the  authorized  Eng-
lish version  of  the  Bible,  4  Oct.,  1872,  he  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  committee  on  New  Tes-
tament revision,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  work
until  its  completion  in  1880,  rarely  missing  a  meet-
ing of  the  committee  for  eight  years.  He  was
ordained  as  a  Baptist  clergyman,  but  has  never  had
a  pastoral  charge.  In  his  special  department,  the
Greek  language  and  literature,  he  is  among  the
foremost  scholars  of  the  country,  endowed,  apart
from  his  broad  and  accurate  knowledge,  with  a
subtile  and  sensitive  appreciation  of  their  beauties ;
but  he  has  paid  much  attention  to  oriental  learn-
ing also,  and  is  widely  read  in  general  literature,
touching  naturally  and  familiarly  everything  per-
taining to  art  and  scholarship.  Besides  various
sermons  and  magazine  and  review  articles,  he  has
published  "  A  Child's  Book  in  Greek  " ;  "  Intro-
duction to  the  Greek  Language " ;  the  "  Greek
Ollendorf  "  (New  York,  1852) ;  a  revised  edition  of
the  English  translation  of  Olshausen's  "  Commen-
tary on  the  New  Testament,"  many  notes  being
added  and  some  portions  translated  anew  (6  vols.,
1853-'8) ;  "  Echoes,"  a  small  volume  of  translations
from  the  French  and  German  poets  (Rochester,
1855) ;  "  Life  of  Linus  W.  Peck  " ;  "  Life  and
Letters  of  Emily  C.  Judson"(New  York,  1860);
a  translation  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  with
notes,  for  Lange's  "  Commentary  "  (1867),  a  brief
work,  giving  the  results  attained  in  a  more  elaborate
and  exhaustive  work  that  is  still  in  manuscript ;
"  Our  Poetical  Favorites,"  three  volumes  of  selec-
tions (New  York,  1870,  1875,  1880);  and  an  edi-
tion of  Xenophon's  "Anabasis,"  with  notes  (1873).
He  also  revised  Bullions's  Greek  grammar,  con-
tributed the  greater  part  of  the  "  Life  of  Rev.
James  S.  Dickerson  "  (Chicago,  1879),  and  revised,
with  notes,  Heinrich  A.  W.  Meyer's  "  Commentary
on  John  "  (New  York,  1885). — Another  son,  James
Ryland,  clergyman,  b.  in  Poultney,  Vt.,  21  April,
1821;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y..  11  Dec,  1889.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1840,  and  for  two
years  was  a  teacher  in  Georgia.  He  was  ordained
at  Forsyth,  Ga.,  in  the  autumn  of  1842,  and  in
1843  became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in  Ma-
con. In  1847  he  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of
the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Charleston,  and  in  1854
established  the  Citadel  square  church  in  that  city.
During  the  war  he  preached  at  Madison,  Ga.  He
had  been  a  Union  man  throughout  the  struggle,


I


KENDRICK


KENNA


515


and  in  November,  1865,  was  called  to  the  Taber-
nacle church,  New  York  city,  where  he  officiated
seven  years.  In  1873-'80  he  was  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Poughkeepsie.  He  was  a  trus-
tee of  Vassar  college,  and  in  1885-'6  was  its  presi-
dent. The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Rochester  university  in  1866.  He  was  for
some  time  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Southern
Baptist,"  published  in  Charleston,  contributed
largely  to  periodical  literature,  and  published  nu-
merous sermons,  tracts,  and  addresses,  and,  with
P.  L.  Ritter,  compiled  "  The  Woman's  College
Hymnal "  (Boston,  1887). — Clark's  cousin,  Nathan-
iel, educator,  b.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  22  April,  1777:
d.  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,  1848,  worked  on
his  father's  farm  till  the  age  of  twenty,  and  subse-
quently engaged  alternately  in  teaching  and  at-
tending the  academy.  He  had  been  educated  as
a  Congregationalist,  but  united  with  the  Baptist
church,  and  after  studying  theology,  and  being
licensed  in  the  spring  of  1803,  he  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  church  at  Lansingburg,  N.  Y.,  in
August,  1805,  remaining  there  until  his  removal
in  1810  to  Middlebury,  Vt.,  where  he  divided  his
time  between  several  feeble  churches.  In  1817  he
was  called  to  Eaton,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1822  was  elected
professor  of  systematic  and  pastoral  theology  in
the  seminarv  that  had  recently  been  established  at
Hamilton,  N.  Y.  From  1825  till  1837  he  was  one
of  the  overseers  of  Hamilton  college,  Clinton,
N.  Y.,  and  in  1836  was  chosen  president  of  the
Hamilton  literary  and  theological  institution  (now
Madison  university),  which  office  he  did  not  ac-
cept, although  he  performed  its  duties  for  a  time.
From  1834  till  his  death  he  served  as  correspond-
ing secretary  of  the  New  York  Baptist  education
society.  In  1845  he  was  rendered  helpless  by  a
fall,  and  lingered  for  three  years  in  great  suffer-
ing. In  1823  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Brown.  Dr.  Kendrick's  theology  was  thoroughly
Calvinistic.  His  publications  include  a  few  occa-
sional sermons.  See  a  memoir  by  his  son-in-law,
Rev.  Samuel  W.  Adams,  D.  D.

KENDRICK,  Henry  Lane,  educator,  b.  in
Lebanon,  NT.  H.,  20  Jan.,  1811 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
24  May,  1891.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1835.  For  the  next  twelve  years
he  was  assistant  professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,
and  geology  at  West  Point,  and  in  the  mean  time
was  transferred  to  the  2d  artillery  and  made  cap-
tain, 18  June,  1846.  He  saw  active  service  during
the  war  with  Mexico,  taking  part  in  the  battle  of
Cerro  Gordo,  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  the  de-
fence of  Puebla,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct in  which  he  was  brevetted  major,  12  Oct.,  1847.
After  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  stationed  chiefly
in  the  west,  taking  part  in  several  expeditions
against  the  Indians,  and  for  five  years  command-
ing a  post  in  New  Mexico  until  1857,  when  he  was
appointed  professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and

feology  in  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  On  28
'eb.,  1873,  he  was  made  colonel,  and  on  13  Dec,
1880,  at  his  own  request,  having  been  forty-five
years  in  the  service,  with  the  reputation  of  being,
perhaps,  the  kindest-hearted  and  most  popular  pro-
fessor ever  employed  at  West  Point,  he  was  retired.
In  1859  he  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  assay  com-
missioners at  the  U.  S.  mint  in  Philadelphia,  and
on  23  Sept.,  1861,  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  but  declined.  He  received
the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Dartmouth  in  1844,  and
that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Missouri  in

1868,  and  from the University  of Rochester  in

1869.  His  portrait  has  been  added  to  the  collec-
tion in  the  library  of  the  U.  S.  military  academy.


KENDRICK,  John,  navigator,  b.  in  Boston
about  1745 ;  d.  in  Hawaii  in  1800.  He  resided  in
Wareham,  Mass., commanded  a  privateer  during  the
Revolutionary  war,  and  was  one  of  the  first  Ameri-
can seamen  to  undertake  useful  voyages  of  discov-
ery. In  1787,  while  commanding  the  "  Columbia  "
and  the  sloop  "  Washington,"  fitted  out  by  Boston
merchants,  he  explored  the  northwest  coast  of
America  and  the  islands  of  the  Pacific.  He  ex-
changed ships  with  Capt,  Gray,  his  second  in  com-
mand, and  the  latter,  in  a  subsequent  voyage,
discovered  the  Columbia  river.  In  1791  Capt.
Kendrick,  in  company  with  Capt.  Douglas,  in  the
brigs  "  Washington  "  and  "  Grace,"  made  a  voyage
to  the  South  seas.  He  visited  Oceania  and  origi-
nated and  carried  on  a  successful  trade  in  sandal-
wood with  China.  His  death  was  caused  by  the
accidental  firing  of  a  charge  of  grape-shot  from  a
cannon  by  an  English  captain  in  returning  his  sa-
lute in  Sandwich  island  waters.

KENLY,  John  Reese,  soldier,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  in  1822.  He  was  educated  in  the  private
schools  of  his  native  city,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1845.  He  joined  the  "  Eagle
artillery"  of  Baltimore,  rose  to  the  rank  of
lieutenant,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Mexi-
can war  raised  a  company  of  volunteers.  Capt.
Kenly  took  part  in  the  battles  that  preceded  the
fall  of  Monterey,  and  when  Col.  William  H.  Wat-
son fell  during  that  engagement  he  rallied  and  re-
formed the  battalion.  He  returned  to  Baltimore
on  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  enlistment,  but  at
once  received  a  commission  as  major  and  returned
to  active  service.  After  the  war  the  general  assem-
bly of  Maryland  voted  him  the  thanks  of  the  state
for  gallantry  in  the  field.  He  continued  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  until  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  when  he  was  commissioned  colonel,  11
June,  1861,  and  given  the  command  of  the  1st
Maryland  regiment.  In  May,  1862,  being  stationed
at  Front  Royal,  he  aided  in  checking  the  Con-
federate advance,  and  in  saving  the  force  under
Gen.  Banks  from  capture.  In  this  action  Col.
Kenly  was  severely  wounded  and  taken  prisoner,
but  was  exchanged  on  15  Aug.,  and  for  his  ser-
vices at  Front  Royal  was  made  brigadier-general
on  22  Aug.  1862.  He  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand all  the  troops  in  Baltimore  outside  the
forts,  jc  ned  McClellan  after  the  battle  of  Antietam,
and  rendered  efficient  service  at  Hagerstown  and
Harper's  Ferry.  In  1863  Gen.  Kenly  led  the  Mary-
land brigade  at  the  recapture  of  Maryland  Heights,
Harper's  Ferry,  and  from  that  date  until  the  close
of  the  war  he  held  various  brigade  commands  in
the  1st  and  8th  army  corps.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,  and
after  he  was  mustered  out  the  general  assembly  of
Maryland  again  passed  a  vote  of  thanks  to  him,  and
the  corporation  of  Baltimore  presented  him  with  a
sword.  Since  the  close  o  the  war  Gen.  Kenly  has
devoted  himself  to  his  profession  and  to  literature.
He  has  written  "  Memoirs  of  a  Maryland  Volun-
teer," in  the  Mexican  war  (Philadelphia,  1873).

KENNA,  John  Edward,  senator,  b.  in  Valcou-
lon,  W.  Va.,  10  April.  1848.  After  working  on
a  farm  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  a  pri-
vate, served  chiefly  in  Missouri,  was  wounded  in

1864,  and  was  surrendered  at  Shreveport,  La.,  in

1865.  He  afterward  attended  St.  Vincent's  college
at  Wheeling,  studied  law  at  Charleston.  W.  Va.,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  20  June,  1870.  He
was  prosecuting  attorney  for  Kanawha  county  in
1872-'7,  and  in"  1875  was  elected  by  the  bar,  under
statutory  provision,  to  hold  the  circuit  courts  of
Lincoln  and  Wayne  counties. He  was  chosen  to


516


KENNADAY


KENNEDY


congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  October,
1877,  until  March,  1883,  and  had  been  re-elected
when  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  to  succeed  Henry
O.  Davis,  and  took  his  seat  in  December.

KENNADAY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city,  3  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  13  Nov.,
1863.  He  was  apprenticed  in  early  life  to  a  printer,
but  devoted  his  leisure  moments  to  the  study  of
law.  He  entered  the  ministry  in  the  Methodist
church,  and  during  forty  years  of  clerical  life
filled  pulpits  in  the  New  York.  Philadelphia,  and
New  York  East  annual  conferences.  He  was  a
member  of  two  general  conferences,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death  was  presiding  elder  of  Long  Isl-
and district.  "  In  the  pulpit,"  said  Bishop  Janes,
"  he  was  clear  in  the  statement  of  his  subject,  abun-
dant and  most  felicitous  in  his  illustrations,  and
pathetic  and  impressive  in  his  applications.  His
oratory  was  of  a  high  order."

KENNAN,  George,  traveller,  b.  in  Norwalk,
Huron  co.,  Ohio,  16  Feb.,  1845.  He  was  educated
in  the  public  schools  of  his  native  town,  and  in
1862  attended  the  Columbus,  Ohio,  high-school
while  working  at  night  as  a  telegraph-operator.
In  1864  he  was  assistant  chief  operator  in  the  tele-
graph-office at  Cincinnati,  and  in  December  of  the
same  year  went  to  Kamtchatka  by  way  of  Nicara-
gua, California,  and  the  north  Pacific.  As  a  leader
of  one  of  the  Russo-American  telegraph  company's
exploring  parties  in  northeastern  Siberia  in  1865-'6,
and  as  superintendent  of  construction  for  the  mid-
dle district  of  the  Siberian  division  from  1866  till
1868,  he  explored  and  located  a  route  for  the  Russo-
American  telegraph-line  between  the  Okhotsk  sea
and  Bering  strait,  spending  nearly  three  years  in
constant  travel  in  the  interior  of  northeastern  Si-
beria, and  returning  to  the  United  States  on  the
abandonment  of  the  enterprise  in  1868.  In  1870
he  went  again  to  Russia  to  explore  the  mountains
of  the  eastern  Caucasus,  proceeded  down  the  Volga
river  to  the  Caspian  sea,  made  extensive  explora-
tions on  horseback  in  Daghestan  and  Chechnia,
crossing  the  great  range  of  the  Caucasus  three
times  in  different  places,  and  in  1871  returned  to
this  country.  In  1885-'6  he  made  a  journey  of
15,000  miles  through  northern  Russia  and  Siberia
for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  Russian  exile
system,  visited  all  the  convict-prisons  and  mines
between  the  Ural  mountains  and  the  head-waters
of  the  Amur  river,  and  explored  the  wildest  part
of  the  Russian  Altai.  Mr.  Kennan  has  arranged
(1887)  for  the  publication  of  a  series  of  magazine
articles  on  Siberia  and  the  exile  system,  which  will
ultimately  be  issued  in  book-form.  He  is  also  the
author  of  "  Tent  Life  in  Siberia  and  Adventures
among  the  Koraks  and  other  Tribes  in  Kamtchatka
and  Northern  Asia  "  (New  York,  1870).

KENNEDY,  Alfred  L.,  physician,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  25  Oct.,  1818.  He  was  educated  in
his  native  city,  studied  civil  and  mining  engineer-
ing and  also  medicine,  being  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1848,  then  studied  physi-
ology and  physiological  chemistry  in  Paris  and
Leipsic,  and.  geology  and  botany  in  Paris.  Re-
turning to  Philadelphia,  he  began  the  practice  of
medicine  in  1853,  but  in  1865  retired  and  settled
in  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.  He  was  made  assistant
professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Pennsylvania  medi-
cal college  in  1839,  lecturer  on  chemical  physics  in
1840,  and  on  general  and  medical  botany  and  medi-
cal jurisprudence  and  toxicology  in  1842.  He  was
also  appointed  lecturer  on  medical  chemistry  in
the  Philadelphia  school  of  medicine  in  1843,  and
on  industrial  botany  in  1849  and  agricultural
chemistry  in  1852  in  the  Franklin  institute  in  the


same  city.  In  1849  he  was  elected  professor  of
medical  chemistry  in  the  Philadelphia  college  of
medicine.  In  1842  he  had  established  the  Phila-
delphia school  of  chemistry,  and  remained  at  its
head  until  1853.  when  it  became  under  a  new  char-
ter the  Polytechnic  college  of  the  state  of  Penn-
sylvania. He  was  then  chosen  its  president.  He
was  vice-president  of  the  American  agricultural
congress  in  1876,  and  the  same  year  held  the  same

Sost  in  the  Pennsylvania  agricultural  society,
•uring  the  war  he  acted  as  a  volunteer  surgeon  of
the  2d  army  corps  in  the  Gettysburg  hospital,  and
in  1863  was  commissioned  colonel  of  volunteer  en-
gineers. Dr.  Kennedy  has  published  "  Practical
Chemistry  a  Branch  of  Medical  Education,  etc."
(Philadelphia,  1852).

KENNEDY,  Archibald,  publicist,  b.  in  Scot-
land ;  d.  in  New  York  in  1763.  He  was  a  lineal
descendant  of  Thomas  Kennedy,  second  son  of  the
third  Earl  of  Cassilis,  in  the  peerage  of  Scotland.
Coming  to  this  country,  he  was  made  collector  of
customs  at  the  port  of  New  York,  and  was  also  a
member  of  the  provincial  council  in  1750.  He  ad-
vocated parliamentary  taxation,  and  publicly  urged
on  the  ministry  that  "  liberty  and  encouragement
are  the  basis  of  colonies."  "  To  supply  ourselves
with  manufactures,"  he  insisted,  "  is  practicable ;
and  where  people  in  such  circumstances  are  nu-
merous and  free,  they  will  push  what  they  think
is  for  their  interest,  and  all  restraining  laws  will
be  thought  oppression,  especially  such  laws  as,  ac-
cording to  the  conceptions  we  have  of  English
liberty,  they  have  no  hand  in  controverting  or
making.  They  cannot  be  kept  dependent  by  keep-
ing them  poor."  He  at  one  time  acted  as  receiver-
general  of  the  province.  Kennedy  published
"  Importance  of  the  Northern  Colonies  "  (New
York,  1749)  and  "  Present  State  of  Affairs  in  the
Northern  Colonies"  (1754).

KENNEDY,  Crammond,  lawyer,  b.  in  North
Berwick,  Scotland,  29  Dec,  1842.  After  attending
school  in  his  native  country,  he  came  to  New  York
in  1856,  and  in  1857-60  delivered  addresses  on  re-
ligious subjects  to  large  audiences. in  that  city  and
elsewhere,  being  widely  known  as  "  the  boy  preach-
er." He  studied  in  Madison  university  in  1861— '3,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  ordained  as  chaplain  of
the  79th  New  York  regiment,  the  "  Highlanders."
He  was  brevetted  major  for  services  in  east  Ten-
nessee and  the  Wilderness,  lectured  in  England
and  Scotland  on  the  civil  war  in  1864-'5,  and  in
1865-'7  was  connected  with  the  Freedmen's  com-
mission. He  became  editor  and  proprietor  of  the
'■  Church  Union  "  in  1869,  and  in  that  year  was  as-
sociated with  Henry  Ward  Beecher  in  establishing
the  "  Christian  Union,"  of  which  he  became  man-
aging editor  in  1870.  He  then  studied  law,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  law-school  in  1878,  and
has  since  practised  his  prof  ession  in  New  York  and
in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  has  published  "  James
Stanley,"  a  prize  Sunday-school  book,  issued  anony-
mously (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1859) ;  "  Corn  in  the
Blade,"  poems  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  Close  Com-
munion or  Open  Communion  ?  "  (1869) ;  and  a  prize
essay  on  "  The  Liberty  of  the  Press  "  (1876).

KENNEDY,  John  Alexander,  superintendent
of  police,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  9  Aug.,  1803 :  d.  in
New  York  city,  20  June,  1873.  His  father  was  a
native  of  the  north  of  Ireland,  and  had  been  for
many  years  a  teacher  in  Baltimore.  The  son  re-
ceived a  good  education,  and  while  still  young  re-
moved to  New  York  city  and  began  business  with
his  brother.  In  1849  he  was  appointed  a  commis-
sioner of  emigration,  and  in  1854  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  common  council. Subsequently  he


KENNEDY


KENNEDY


517


was  appointed  superintendent  of  Castle  Garden,
and  did  much  to  protect  emigrants  against
swindlers.  In  1860  he  became  superintendent  of
the  Metropolitan  police.  During  the  draft  riots
he  was  severely  beaten  by  a  mob,  while  protecting
the  office  of  the  provost-marshal  at  Third  avenue
and  Forty-«ixth  street,  on  the  morning  of  14  July,
1863,  and  never  fully  recovered  from  his  wounds.
Upon  returning  to  duty  he  was  appointed  provost-
marshal  of  New  York  city,  as  well  as  superintend-
ent of  police,  and  continued  to  serve  in  this  double
capacity  during  the  civil  war.  He  made  many
enemies  through  his  efforts  to  enforce  the  metro-
politan excise  law.  He  resigned  on  11  April,  1870,
was  president  of  a  street-railroad  company  for
about  two  years,  and  then  held  the  office  of  col-
lector of  assessments  till  his  death.

KENNEDY,  John  Pendleton,  author,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  25  Oct.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,
18  Aug.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Baltimore
college  (now  University  of  Maryland)  in  1812,  and
in  1814  fought  at  Bladensburg  and  North  Point.
Subsequently  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1816.  He  was  elected  to  the  Maryland
house  of  delegates  in
1820,  and  re-chosen  the
two  years  following.
In  1823  he  was  appoint-
ed secretary  of  legation
to  Chili,  but  withdrew
his  acceptance  before
the  mission  sailed.  He
was  a  warm  advocate
of  the  administration
of  John  Quincy  Adams,
and  wrote  diligently  in
its  support,  strenuous-
ly opposing  the  exten-
sion of  slavery.  He
also  wrote  a  review
(Baltimore,  1830)  of
Churchill  C.  Cambre-
leng's  report  on  com-
merce and  navigation,  combating  its  anti-protective
arguments.  This  was  widely  circulated,  and  the
following  year  Kennedy  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to
the  National  convention  of  the  Friends  of  manu-
facturing industry,  and  was  one  of  the  committee
appointed  to  draft  an  address  setting  forth  the
protectionist  view.  In  1838  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, and  in  1840  he  was  one  of  the  electors  on  the
Harrison  ticket.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  again
sent  to  congress,  and  appointed  chairman  of  the
committee  on  commerce,  in  which  capacity  he  drew
up  a  report  upon  the  reciprocity  treaties  and  their
effects  on  the  shipping  interest  of  the  country.  On
President  Tyler's  abandonment  of  the  Whigs,  Mr.
Kennedy  was  selected,  at  a  meeting  of  the  members
of  that  party  in  both  houses  of  congress,  to  draft  a
"  manifesto  "  condemning  the  course  of  the  chief
magistrate.  In  1842  he  was  once  more  returned  to
congress.  At  the  next  election  he  was  defeated  by
a  small  vote,  but  in  1846  was  elected  to  the  Mary-
land house  of  delegates,  and  made  speaker.  In
1852  Mr.  Kennedy  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
navy,  and  it  was  mainly  to  his  efforts  that  the  suc-
cess of  Cora.  Perry's  Japan  expedition  and  of  Dr.
Kane's  second  arctic  voyage  was  due.  On  the
accession  of  Franklin  Pierce  to  the  presidency,
Mr.  Kennedy  retired  finally  from  politics.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  warmly  espoused  the
national  cause,  and  at  its  close  advocated  the  elec-
tion of  Gen.  Grant.  After  the  war  he  made  three
visits  to  Europe,  chiefly  with  the  view  of  bene-
fiting his  health,  but  without  success,  as  his  death


J.  A  /iU^i>a


occurred  soon  after  his  return.  While  he  was
abroad  he  became  a  friend  of  William  M.  Thack-
eray. On  one  occasion,  in  Paris,  when  "  The  Vir-
ginians "  was  in  course  of  publication  in  monthly
numbers  in  London,  Thackeray  spoke  of  his  dis-
inclination to  supply  the  printer  with  "copy"
for  the  next  chapter,  and  said,  jestingly,  "  I  wish
you  would  write  one  for  me."  "  Well,""  said  Ken-
nedy, "  so  I  will,  if  you  will  give  me  the  run  of
the  story."  The  result  was  that  Kennedy  wrote
the  fourth  chapter  of  the  second  volume  of  "  The
Virginians,"  which  accounts  for  the  accuracy  of
the  descriptions  of  the  local  scenery  about  Cum-
berland, with  which  Kennedy  was  familiar,  and
which  Thackeray  had  never  seen.  During  the  last
of  his  sojourns  abroad  he  acted,  in  1867,  as  U.  S.
commissioner  to  the  Paris  exhibition.  He  took
great  interest  in  the  Peabody  institute  in  Balti-
more, and  the  donor  largely  availed  himself  of
his  advice  in  its  organization.  Mr.  Kennedy  also
bequeathed  to  the  institute  his  library  and  papers.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard
in  1863.  In  1818-'19  he  issued  in  Baltimore,  with
Peter  H.  Cruse,  "  The  Red  Book,"  a  fortnightly
satirical  publication.  His  novels  are  "Swallow
Barn,"  a  story  of  rural  life  in  Virginia  (Philadel-
phia, 1832) ;  "  Horse-Shoe  Robinson,  a  Tale  of  the
Tory  Ascendency  "  (1835) :  and  "  Rob  of  the  Bowl,
a  Legend  of  St.  Inigoes,"  describing  the  province
of  Maryland  in  the  days  of  the  second  Lord  Bal-
timore (Philadelphia,  1838).  The  three  were  after-
ward issued  in  a  new  illustrated  edition  (New
York,  1852).  His  other  works  include :  "  An-
nals of  Quodlibet,"  a  political  satire  (1840),  and
"  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  William  Wirt "  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1849 ;  2d  ed.,  revised,  1850).  By  his
will  Mr.  Kennedy  provided  for  the  publication  of
a  uniform  edition  of  his  entire  works,  which  has
since  appeared  (10  vols.,  New  York,  1870).  Among
his  various  speeches,  reports,  addresses,  etc..  that
have  been  printed  are  "  Address  before  the  Balti-
more Horticultural  Society  "  (1833) ;  "  A  Discourse
on  the  Life  and  Character  of  William  Wirt "
(Baltimore,  1834);  "A  Discourse  at  the  Dedica-
tion of  Green  Mount  Cemetery"  (1839):  "A  De-
fence of  the  Whigs "  (1844) ;  and  "  Discourse  on
the  Life  and  Character  of  George  Calvert,  the  First
Lord  Baltimore  "  (Baltimore,  1845).  The  complete
edition  of  his  works  also  contains  "  Mr.  Ambrose's
Letters  on  the  Rebellion"  (New  York.  1865),  and
"  At  Home  and  Abroad,  a  Series  of  Essays,  with
a  Journal  in  Europe  in  1867-'8  "  (1872).  See  his
life  by  Henry  T.  Tuckerman  (New  York,  1871),
and  "  Tribute  to  the  Memory  of  Hon.  John  Pen-
dleton Kennedy,"  delivered  by  Robert  C.  Win-
throp,  8  Sept.,  1870. — His  brother.  Anthony,  sena-
tor, b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  21  Dec,  1811,  removed
with  his  parents  to  Charlestown,  Va.,  in  1821,  re-
ceived a  classical  education,  studied  law.  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  never  practised  his  pro-
fession, but  subsequently  became  a  cotton-grower
and  manufacturer.  From  1839  till  1843  he  was  a
member  of  the  Virginia  legislature,  and  in  1847  the
Whig  candidate  for  congress.  In  1850  he  refused
the  consul-generalship  to  Cuba,  and  in  1851,  after
marrying  for  his  second  wife,  Margaret,  daughter
of  Christopher  Hughes,  removed  to  Baltimore,
where  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving
from  12  May.  1858,  till  3  March,  1863.  In  the  con-
vention of  i867  he  took  an  active  part  in  framing
the  present  constitution  of  Maryland.

KENNEDY,  Joseph  Camp  Griffith,  statis-
tician, b.  in  Meadville,  Pa.,  1  April,  1813;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  13  July,  1887.  His  grand-
father, Samuel,  served as  a  surgeon  on  the  staff


518


KENNEDY


KENNER


of  Gen.  Washington.  He  was  educated  at  Alle-
ghany college,  studied  law,  and  before  coming  of
age  established  and  edited  the  Crawford,  Pa.,
"Messenger"  and  the  Venango,  Pa.,  "Intelli-
gencer." In  1849  he  was  appointed  by  President
Taylor  secretary  of  a  board  to  prepare  a  plan  for
taking  the  seventh  and  future  U.  S.  censuses.  In
1857  he  was  appointed  by  President  Buchanan  to
complete  the  census  of  1850,  and  in  1859  was  made
superintendent  of  the  8th  census,  continuing  the.
work  until  the  failure  of  the  appropriation  in  1863.
In  1850  he  visited  Europe  on  business  that  was
connected  with  the  census,  with  a  special  view  of
securing  uniformity  in  the  statistics  of  all  nations,
and  also  uniform  cheap  postage.  In  common  with
M.  Guizot,  Michael  Chevalier,  and  Herr  Quitelet,
the  Prussian  astronomer  royal,  he  was  active  in
organizing  the  first  statistical  congress,  which  met
at  Brussels  in  1853.  He  was  secretary  of  the  IT.  S.
commissioners  to  the  World's  Pair  in  London
in  1851,  a  member  of  the  statistical  congresses  of
1855  and  1860,  and  a  commissioner  to  the  London
exhibition  of  1862.  In  1865-6  he  acted  as  exam-
iner of  national  banks  under  the  comptroller  of
the  currency.  He  received  a  gold  medal  from  King
Christian  IX.  of  Denmark  for  his  labors  as  a  stat-
istician, and  was  elected  a  member  of  different
American,  French,  German,  and  Belgian  learned
societies.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Alleghany  college,  and  endowed  that  institution
with  four  perpetual  scholarships  for  the  benefit  of
disabled  young  soldiers,  or  the  orphans  of  soldiers.

KENNEDY,  Josiah  Forrest,  physician,  b.  in
Oak  Grove,  Perry  co.,  Pa.,  31  Jan.,  1834.  He  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1855,  and  subse-
quently at  Jefferson  medical  college,  and  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  the  city
of  New  York.  He  removed  to  Iowa,  and  was  an
army  surgeon  in  1861,  but  resigned,  and  removed
in  1870  to  Des  Moines,  Iowa.  In  1869  he  was
elected  professor  of  obstetrics  in  the  Iowa  state
university,  but  resigned  the  following  year,  and
now  occupies  the  same  chair  in  the  Iowa  college
of  p>hysicians  and  surgeons  at  Des  Moines.  He  is
secretary  of  the  Iowa  state  board  of  health  and
of  the  Iowa  state  board  of  medical  examiners.
Dr.  Kennedy  is  the  editor  of  the  "  Iowa  Health
Bulletin,"  and  has  edited  and  compiled  the  third
and  fourth  biennial  reports  of  the  state  board  of
health  (1883-'5).  He  has  also  contributed  to  pro-
fessional periodical  literature.

KENNEDY,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Scot-
land in  1720 ;  d.  in  Basking  Ridge,  N.  J.,  31  Aug.,
1787.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Ed-
inburgh, came  to  this  country,  and,  after  studying
theology,  was  called  in  1751  to  be  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  at  Basking  Ridge,  where  he
remained  until  his  death.  During  a  meeting  of
the  synod  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia  in  May,
1760,  attention  was  called  to  the  case  of  Rev.  Will-
iam McClenachan,  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of
England  in  Philadelphia,  who  had  aroused  enmity
in  his  denomination  by  some  display  of  religious
zeal.  Several  members  of  the  synod,  including
Mr.  Kennedy,  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Archbishop
of  Canterbury,  asking  him  to  retain  McClenachan
in  his  pastorate,  which  he  seemed  in  danger  of
losing.  To  this  letter  the  archbishop  paid  no  at-
tention, and,  the  affair  soon  becoming  public,  the
missive  found  its  way  into  print  and  was  severely
criticised.  During  the  next  meeting  of  the  synod
it  was  sold  in  the  streets  of  Philadelphia  with  the
proclamation,  "  Eighteen  Presbyterian  ministers
for  a  groat."  Mr.  Kennedy  added  to  his  labors  as
pastor  those  of  teacher  and  medical  practitioner.


KENNEDY,  William,  author,  b.  near  Paisley,
Scotland,  26  Dec,  1799  ;  d.  near  London,  England,
in  1849.  Before  he  was  twenty-five  he  published
a  prose  story  called  "  My  Early  Days  "  (London),
and  in  1827  followed  it  with  a  volume  of  short
poems  under  the  title  of  "  Fitful  Fancies,"  which
met  with  unusual  success.  He  was  the  personal
friend  and  literary  partner  of  William  Motherwell,
and  in  1828-'9  was  associated  with  the  latter  in
the  management  of  the  "  Paisley  Magazine,"  in
which  many  of  the  poems  of  the  two  authors  ap-
peared. Not  proving  a  pecuniary  success,  its  pub-
lication was  soon  abandoned.  Kennedy's  third
volume  was  "  The  Arrow  and  the  Rose ;  with
Other  Poems  "  (London,  1830),  and  he  then  settled
down  to  a  literary  life  in  the  English  metropolis.
When  the  Earl  of  Durham  went  to  Canada,  Ken-
nedy accompanied  him  as  private  secretary,  and
on  the  former's  return  to  England  received  the
appointment  of  British  consul  at  Galveston,  Tex.,
where  he  resided  many  years,  going  back  to  Eng-
land in  1847,  and  retiring  on  a  pension.  Besides
the  works  already  mentioned,  Mr.  Kennedy  pub-
lished "  The  Rise,  Progress,  and  Prospects  of  the
Republic  of  Texas "  (2  vols.,  London,  1841),  and
an  abridgment  of  the  same  entitled  "  Texas,  its
Geography,  Natural  History,  and  Topography"
(New  York,  1844).  See  Wilson's  "  Poets  and  Poet-
ry of  Scotland  "  (New  York  and  London,  1876).

KENNEDY,  William  Megee,  clergyman,  b.

Srobably  in  North  Carolina,  10  Jan.,  1773 ;  d.  in
ewberry  district,  S.  C,  22  Feb..  1840.  nis  father
lost  nearly  the  whole  of  his  estate  in  the  Revolu-
tion, and  the  son's  early  education  was  limited.
He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  church
in  1805,  and  labored  as  circuit  and  stationed
preacher,  as  well  as  presiding  elder,  for  more  than
thirty  years.  In  1838  he  became  agent  for  the
Cokesbury,  S.  C,  school,  and  originated  and  car-
ried out  a  plan  of  contribution  which  secured  to
that  institution  a  handsome  endowment.  In  1839
he  was  stricken  with  apoplexy,  but  he  continued  to
labor  till  his  death.  He  was  eminent  among  cler-
gymen of  the  southern  Methodist  church.

"KENNEDY,  William  Nassau,  Canadian  sol-
dier, b.  in  Darlington,  Ont.,  27  April,  1839 ;  d.  in
London,  England,  3  May,  1885.  In  1870  he  went
to  Winnipeg  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  expeditionary
force  under  Gen.  Garnet  (now  Lord)  Wolseley.
After  this  force  was  disbanded  he  adopted  Winni-
peg as  his  home,  and  in  1872  was  appointed  regis-
ter of  deeds  for  the  city  and  county.  In  1873  he
became  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  the
northwest,  and  in  1875-'6  was  elected  chief  magis-
trate. He  organized  and  was  for  several  years
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Winnipeg  field  battery,
and  in  1883  took  command  of  the  90th  Winnipeg
rifles.  When  the  demand  came  for  Canadian  voya-
geurs  to  go  to  Egypt,  Col.  Kennedy  selected  them
from  Manitoba,  and  afterward  served  with  them
throughout  the  entire  Egyptian  campaign.

KENNEDY,  William  Sloane,  clergyman,  b.  in
Muncy,  Pa.,  3  June,  1822 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
30  July,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Western  Re-
serve college  in  1846,  studied  theology,  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1848,  and  soon  afterward  ordained
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Brecksville,
Ohio.  He  was  called  to  Sandusky  in  1852,  and  m
1859  took  charge  of  a  parish  in  Cincinnati.  Mr.
Kennedy  was  the  author  of  "  Messianic  Prophe-
cies "  and  a  "  Life  of  Christ  "  (Hudson,  Ohio,  1852 ;
new  ed..  New  York,  1858-60) ;  and  "  A  History
of  the  Plan  of  Union"  and  "  Sacred  Analogies."

KENNER,  Duncan  F.,  planter,  b.  in  New  Or-
leans in  1813  ;  d.  there,  3  July,  1887. He  became


KENNY


KENRICK


519


a  wealthy  sugar-planter,  served  for  several  terms
in  the  Louisiana  legislature,  and  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitutional  conventions  of  1845  and
1852,  presiding  over  the  latter.  Pie  was  a  member
of  the  Confederate  congress,  and  chairman  of  its
ways  and  means  committee,  and  in  1864  was  sent
by  Jefferson  Davis  as  special  commissioner  to
England  and  Prance,  to  secure  the  recognition  of
the  southern  Confederacy.  Much  of  his  property
was  confiscated  on  the  capture  of  New  Orleans  in
1862,  but  at  his  death  he  was  again  a  millionaire.
He  was  fond  of  horses,  and  owned  one  of  the
largest  stock-farms  in  the  United  States.

KENNY,  Sir  Edward,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  County  Kerry,  Ireland,  in  1800.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Ireland,  and  came  in  1824  to  Halifax,
N.  S.,  where  he  engaged  in  trade.  He  sat  in  the
legislative  council  of  Nova  Scotia  for  twenty-six
years,  and  for  eleven  years  was  its  president.  He
became  a  member  of  the  privy  council,  and  in  July,
1867,  was  appointed  receiver-general  of  Canada,
which  portfolio  he  held  till  October,  1869,  when  he
became  president  of  the  privy  council.  He  re-
tired from  the  cabinet  in  May,  1870,  on  being  ap-
pointed administrator  of  the  government  of  Nova
Scotia.  He  was  called  to  the  senate  in  May,  1867,
resigned  in  1876,  and  was  knighted  in  1870.

KENRICK,  Francis  Patrick,  R.  C.  archbishop,
b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  3  Dec,  1797 ;  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  6  July,  1863.  He  prepared  for  the
priesthood  in  the  College  of  the  propaganda  at
Rome  in  1815— '21,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  select-
ed to  direct  the  newly  established  theological  semi-
nary at  Bardstown,
Kv.  During  the
jubilee  of  1826-7,
he  attended  Bishop
Flaget  in  his  pas-
toral visitations,  and
gave  public  confer-
ences on  religion
which  led  to  the  po-
lemical discussions
in  which  he  was
frequently  engaged
during  the  rest  of
his  life.  In  1829  he
attended  the  coun-
cil of  Baltimore  as
<^2/  .  .s'  theologian  to  Bish-

£/v*w-*«-~#  (7* /(e+rr*"C  op  Flaget,  and  was

appointed  assistant
secretary.  He  was  nominated  coadjutor  bishop  of
Philadelphia  in  1830,  and  was  consecrated  bishop
of  Arath  in  partibus  infidelium  on  6  June  at  Bards-
town by  Bishop  Flaget.  The  administration  of
the  diocese  of  Philadelphia  required  at  this  time
great  tact  and  firmness.  The  trustees  of  St.  Mary's
church,  which  was  the  bishop's  cathedral,  refused
to  recognize  him  as  pastor,  but  he  interdicted  the
church,  and  the  trustees  finally  submitted  to  his
authority.  He  then  made  a  regulation  that  all
church  property  in  future  should  be  vested  in  the
bishop.  The  trustees  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Pitts-
burg, refused  to  accept  this  regulation,  but  after  a
bitter  contest  the  bishop  had  his  way.  A  large
number  of  congregations  in  Pennsylvania  were
without  pastors,  and  to  remedy  this  evil  he  founded
the  Theological  seminary  of  St.  Charles  Borromeo
in  Philadelphia  in  1838.  During  the  cholera  epi-
demic of  1832  he  was  active  in  his  ministrations
to  the  sick.  In  1842  he  introduced  the  Order  of
the  hermits  of  St.  Augustine  into  his  diocese,  and
helped  them  to  build  the  College  of  St.  Thomas
at  Villanova. During  the  anti-Catholic  riots  of


1844  he  constantly  preached  peace  and  forbear-
ance, and  patiently  took  measures  to  restore  the
edifices  that  had  been  destroyed.  He  aided  in
building  St.  Joseph's  college  in  1851,  and  another
of  the  same  name  in  Susquehanna  county.  On  the
death  of  Archbishop  Eccleson  he  was  translated  to
the  see  of  Baltimore  in  August,  1851,  and  ap-
pointed by  the  pope  apostolic  delegate  to  preside
at  a  national  council  of  all  the  archbishops  and
bishops  of  the  United  States  in  Baltimore  in  May,
1852.  Some  years  afterward  he  was  invested  with
a  "  primacy  of  honor  "  over  the  other  archbishops.
During  his  stay  in  Baltimore  a  great  impulse  was
given  to  the  erection  of  charitable  and  educational
institutions,  among  which  were  the  Infant  asylum,
the  Aged  women's  home,  St.  Agnes's  asylum  for
destitute  sick,  the  School  of  St.  Laurence  at  Locust
point,  and  the  College  of  Loyola.  He  went  to
Rome  in  1854  to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  that
resulted  in  the  definition  of  the  dogma  of  the  im-
maculate conception.  Archbishop  Kenrick  was  a
profound  Hebrew  scholar,  and  spoke  the  principal
modern  languages  fluently.  He  is  considered  the
ablest  theologian  that  the  Roman  Catholic  church
in  the  United  States  has  produced,  and  his  theo-
logical works  have  been  largely  used  both  in  this
country  and  in  Europe.  His  works  are  "  Letters
of  Omicron  to  Omega "  (1828) ;  '•  Four  Sermons
preached  in  the  Cathedral  of  Bardstown  "  (Bards-
town, 1829) ;  "  Theologia  Dogmatica "  (4  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1839-'40 ;  new  ed.,  3  vols.,  Baltimore,
1857) ;  "  Theologia  Moralis  "  (3  vols..  Philadelphia,
1841-3) ;  " Letters  on  the  Primacy  of  the  Holy  See
and  the  Authority  of  General  Councils."  in  reply
to  Bishop  Hopkins  of  Vermont  (1837;  enlarged
ed.,  with  the  title  "  The  Primacy  of  the  Apostolic
See  vindicated,"  Baltimore,  1855) ;  "  The  Catho-
lic Doctrine  on  Justification  explained  and  vindi-
cated "  (Philadelphia,  1841);  "  Treatise  on  Baptism"
(New  York,  1843) :  "Vindication  of  the  Catholic
Church,"  a  series  of  letters  in  reply  to  Bishop  John
II.  Hopkins,  and  "  End  of  Religious  Controversy
controverted  "  (Baltimore,  1855).  Archbishop
Kenrick  was  dissatisfied  with  the  condition  of  the
text  of  the  English  Roman  Catholic  Bibles  that
were  used  iti  the  United  States,  which  had  widely
departed  from  the  Rheims  and  Douay  translations.
He  devoted  himself  to  a  careful  translation  on  the
basis  of  the  original  Rhemish-Douay  version,
edited  by  Dr.  Challoner,  with  copious  notes.  This
includes  "  The  New  Testament "  (2  vols..  New
York,  1849-51) ;  "  Psalms,  Books  of  Wisdom  and
Canticle  of  Canticles  "  (Baltimore,  1857) ;  and  "Job
and  the  Prophets"  (1859).— His  brother,  Peter
Richard,  archbishop,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  17
Aug.,  1806,  was  educated  in  his  native  country,
and,  after  finishing  his  theological  course,  was  or-
dained priest  about  1830.  He  followed  his  brother
to  the  United  States  in  1833,  and  was  appointed
assistant  pastor  at  the  cathedral  in  Philadelphia.
Shortly  afterward  he  also  took  charge  of  the
"  Catholic  Herald,"  and  in  1835  he  became  pastor
of  the  cathedral  parish.  He  was  then  made  presi-
dent of  the  diocesan  seminary,  in  which  he  also
filled  the  chair  of  dogmatic  theology,  and  he  was
next  "raised  to  the  rank  of  vicar-general  of  the
diocese,  and  accredited  by  Bishop  Brute  as  his
theologian  to  the  Third  provincial  council  of  Balti-
more in  1837.  Bishop  Rosati,  of  St.  Louis,  de-
manded the  appointment  of  a  coadjutor  in  1841,  and
Father  Kenrick  was  chosen  for  the  post.  He  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Dra.sa  in  partibus  infidelium
in  Philadelphia  on  30  Nov.,  and  succeeded  Dr.
Rosati  as  bishop  of  St.  Louis,  25  Sept.,  1843.
Bishop  Kenrick  found his  diocese  in  financial


520


KENSETT


KENT


trouble,  and  with  a  large  quantity  of  unimproved
real  estate,  but,  as  the  result  of  his  efforts,  it  was
soon  freed  from  debt.  It  comprised,  when  he  be-
came coadjutor,  several  states  and  territories,  from
which  so  many  new  sees  have  been  made  that  at
present  it  embraces  only  the  eastern  part  of  Mis-
souri. Bishop  Kenrick  gave  a  great  impetus  to
the  work  of  building  churches.  He  delivered  a
series  of  lectures  in  St.  Louis  on  the  doctrines  of
his  church,  founded  a  magazine  called  the  "  Catho-
lic Cabinet,"  and  established  various  schools.  In
1847  St.  Louis  was  created  an  archiepiscopal  see
by  Pius  IX.,  and  Dr.  Kenrick  became  archbishop.
In  1858  he  received  large  bequests  that  afterward
enabled  him  to  carry  out  successfully  his  plans  for
endowing  charitable  and  other  institutions  in  St.
Louis.  During  the  civil  war  the  archbishop  de-
voted his  energies  to  the  relief  of  the  sick  and
wounded  of  both  sides.  When,  after  the  war,  a
constitution  was  adopted  by  the  state  of  Missouri,
one  of  whose  articles  required  all  teachers  and  cler-
gymen to  take  a  stringent  oath,  he  forbade  his
priests  to  do  so,  and  the  oath  was  afterward  de-
clared unconstitutional.  In  the  Vatican  council
he  was  one  of  the  ablest  opponents  of  the  dogma
of  papal  infallibility ;  but  as  his  objection  was  not
to  the  truth  but  the  opportuneness  of  this  doc-
trine, he  at  once  accepted  it  when  it  was  defined.
Archbishop  Kenrick  has  introduced  into  his  diocese
numerous  religious  orders,  which  have  charge  of
four  industrial  schools  and  reformatories,  and
88  parochial  schools  with  17,180  pupils.  The  ceme-
tery of  St.  Louis,  laid  out  by  him,  is  one  of  the
finest  on  the  continent.  Among  his  works  are
"  The  Holy  House  of  Loretto,  or  An  Examination
of  the  Historical  Evidence  of  its  Miraculous  Trans-
lation " ;  and  "  Anglican  Ordinations."

KENSETT,  John  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in
Cheshire,  Conn.,  22  March,  1816  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  16  Dec,  1872.  He  was  apprenticed  to  his
uncle,  Alfred  Daggett,  an  engraver  of  bank-note

vignettes,  and  de-
voted his  leisure  to
painting.  In  1840
he  went  to  Eng-
land, where  he  stud-
ied art  for  five
years,  supporting
himself  by  engrav-
ing. In  the  spring
of  1845  he  exhib-
ited in  the  Royal
academy,  London,
his  first  picture,  a
distant  view  of
Windsor  castle,  the
purchase  of  which
encouraged  him  to
persevere  in  his  pro-
fession. He  spent
the  following  two
years  in  Rome,  painting  views  of  Italian  scenery,
several  of  which  became  the  property  of  the
American  art  union.  His  "  View  on  the  Arno "
and  "  Shrine,"  exhibited  at  the  National  academy
in  New  York  in  1848,  established  his  reputation.
In  1848  he  returned  to  New  York,  where  he  re-
sided till  his  death.  He  was  elected  an  associate
in  1848,  and  in  1849  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  design.  In  1859  he  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  National  art  commission  to  direct
the  ornamentation  of  the  capitol  in  Washington,
and  to  superintend  the  works  of  art  that  were
placed  there.  His  pictures  are  singularly  equal
in  merit,  facile  and  pure  in  feeling,  and  are  popu-


lar. George  Bancroft  wrote  of  him :  "  The  works
of  his  hands  will  make  John  F.  Kensett  familiar
to  posterity;  the  loveliness  of  his  character  and
his  virtues  live  in  the  memory  and  affection  of  his
friends."  His  works  are  chiefly  landscapes,  and
include  "  Mount  Washington  from  North  Conway"
(1849);  "Sketch  of  Mount  Washington"  (1851);
"  Franconia  Mountains  "  (1853) ;  "  High  Bank  on
the  Genesee  River  "  (1857) ;  "  Sunset  on  the  Coast  *
(1858);  "Sunset  on  the  Adirondacks " (1860) ;  "Au-
tumn Afternoon  on  Lake  George"  (1864),  in  the
Corcoran  gallery,  Washington  ;  "  Glimpse  of  the
White  Mountains"  (1867);  "Afternoon  on  Con-
necticut Shore";  "Noon  on  the  Seashore";  "Lake
Cohesus  ";  "  Coast  of  Massachusetts  ";  "  New  Hamp-
shire Scenery,"  owned  by  the  Century  club ;  "  Lake
George  " ;  and  "  Narragansett."  Thirty-eight  of  his
paintings  were  presented  to  the  Metropolitan  mu-
seum of  New  York  by  his  brother  Thomas  in  1873.
Others  were  sold  in  New  York  in  1887.

KENT,  Aratus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Suffield,
Conn.,  15  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in  Galena,  111.,  8  Nov.,
1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1816,  and
he  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1820.  In  1822-'3  he
studied  in  Princeton  theological  seminary  and  in
1825  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  church  in  Lockport,
N.  Y.,  which  charge  he  held  till  1828.  He  then
applied  to  the  Home  missionary  society  for  "a
place  so  hard  that  no  one  else  would  take  it,"  and
in  1829  was  sent  to  the  Galena,  111.,  lead-mines,
where  he  established  a  Sabbath-school  and  a  day-
school.  He  organized  the  first  Presbyterian  church
in  Galena  in  1831,  and  was  its  pastor  till  1848,
when  he  became  agent  for  the  Home  missionary
society  in  northern  Illinois,  serving  till  1868.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  Beloit  college  and  of
Rockford  female  seminary,  and  although  he  had  a
small  salary  gave  nearly  $7,000  to  the  church.

KENT,  Edward,  governor  of  Maine,  b.  in  Con-
cord, N.  H.,  8  Jan.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Bangor,  Me.,  19
May,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1821,  studied  law,  and  began  to  practise  in  Bangor
in  1825.  In  1827  he  was  appointed  chief  justice
of  the  court  of  sessions  for  Penobscot  county,  and
from  1829  till  1833  he  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature. He  was  mayor  of  Bangor  from  1836  till
1838,  and  governor  of  the  state  from  1838  till
1840.  His  election  as  governor  was  the  first  indi-
cation of  the  defeat  of  the  Democratic  party
throughout  the  country  in  1840,  and  gave  rise  to  a
famous  political  song —

"  Have  you  heard  the  news  from  Maine  ?  "
In  1843  Gov.  Kent  was  appointed  by  the  legislature
a  commissioner  to  settle  the  Maine  boundary-line
under  the  Ashburton  treaty.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  National  Whig  convention  of  1848,  that  nomi-
nated Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  to  the  presidency,  and
in  1849-'53  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Rio  Janeiro.  In
1859  he  was  appointed  associate  justice  of  the  state
supreme  court,  and  on  his  retirement  in  1873  he
was  chosen  president  of  the  constitutional  com-
mission of  Maine.  Waterville  college  (now  Colby
university)  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1855.

KENT,  Edward  Augustus,  Duke  of,  British
soldier,  b.  2  Nov.,  1767;  d.  23  Jan.,  1820.  He  was
the  fourth  son  of  King  George  III.,  and  father  of
Queen  Victoria.  He  studied  at  Gottingen  and
Geneva,  and  entered  the  army  in  1790.  Three  years
later  he  served  under  Sir  Charles  Grey  in  the  at-
tack on  the  French  West  India  islands,  and  in  com-
pliment to  him  the  name  of  Fort  Royal  in  Marti-
nique was  changed  to  Fort  Edward.  In  1796  he
was  appointed  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,  created
Duke  of  Kent  and  Strathearne  and  Earl  of  Dublin,
with  a  seat  in  the  house  of  lords,  and  was  appointed


KENT


KEXT


521


commander-in-chief  of  the  British  forces  in  North
America.  The  island  of  St.  John  changed  its  name
in  his  honor  to  Prince  Edward  island.  In  1802  he
became  governor  of  Gibraltar;  but  his  rigid  dis-
cipline produced  a  mutiny,  and  he  was  recalled.
On  20  May,  1818,  he  married  the  Princess  Maria
Louisa  Victoria,  widow  of  the  Prince  of  Leiningen,
and  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Coburg.  Queen
Victoria  was  the  only  child  of  this  union.

KENT,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Putnam  countv,
N.  Y.,  31  July,  1763;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12
Dec.,  1847.  His  grandfather,  Elisha,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1729,  became  the  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  at  Philippi,  N.  Y.,  in  1740,
and  died  there  in  1776,  and  his  father,  Moss,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in
1752,  became  a  lawyer,
was  surrogate  of  Rens-
selaer county,  and
died  in  1794.  James
was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1781,  where  he  was
one  of  the  founders  of
the  Phi  Beta  Kappa
society  in  1 780,  studied
law  with  Egbert  Ben-
son, was  admitted  to
practice  as  an  attor-
ney in  1785  and  as  a
counsellor  in  1787,  and
settled  in  Poughkeep-
sie,  N.  Y.  He  had
been  attracted  to  the
study  of  the  law  by
reading  Blackstone  at  the  age  of  sixteen.  Not
satisfied  with  the  limited  classical  acquirements
obtained  at  college,  he  adopted  at  the  beginning
of  his  professional  life  a  plan  of  daily  study,
which  he  followed  until  he  was  elevated  to  the
supreme  bench.  Rising  early  in  the  morning,  he
devoted  two  hours  to  Latin  and  two  to  Greek
before  breakfast.  After  the  conclusion  of  his  la-
bors for  the  day  he  was  accustomed  to  read  French
works  for  two  hours,  and,  when  not  socially  en-
gaged, devoted  his  evenings  to  English  writers.
He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1790  and  1792,
but  was  defeated  as  the  Federalist  candidate  for  con-
gress in  1793.  He  had  already  achieved  a  high
reputation  for  legal  learning,  and  on  removing  to
New  York  city  was  appointed  professor  of  law  at
Columbia  college,  which  post  he  held  till  1798.
His  attention  was  called  to  the  writers  on  civil  law
of  continental  Europe  by  Alexander  Hamilton,
whose  acquaintance  he  had  made  during  the  strug-
gle over  the  adoption  of  the  Federal  constitution
in  New  York  state.  Reading  the  works  of  Pothier,
Emerigon,  and  other  French  jurists,  he  became
imbued  with  the  principles  of  the  civil  law.  He
began  his  lectures  in  November.  1794.  The  "In-
troductory "  was  published  by  the  trustees  of  the
college,  and  three  preliminary  dissertations,  dis-
cussing the  constitutional  history  of  the  United
States  and  important  principles  of  the  law  of  na-
tions, were  issued  by  him  in  a  volume  (1797).  In
1796  Gov.  Jay,  whose  friendship  he  had  won  when
a  member  of  the  legislature  by  his  course  during
the  election  dispute  in  1792  between  Jay  and
George  Clinton,  appointed  him  one  of  the  two
masters  in  chancery,  and  in  the  same  year  he  was
returned  to  the  legislature  from  New  York  city.
In  an  anniversary  address  before  the  State  society
for  the  promotion  of  agriculture,  arts,  and  manu-
factures in  1796,  he  displayed  an  enlightened  ap-
preciation of  the  material  needs  and  capabilities  of
the  country. In  1797  he  was  appointed  recorder


of  New  York  city,  an  officer  at  that  time  exercis-
ing civil  jurisdiction,  and  Gov.  Jay  nominated
him  in  1798  as  one  of  the  justices  of"  the  supreme
court.  On  becoming  a  judge  he  returned  to
Poughkeepsie,  but  in  1798  removed  to  Albany,
where  he  continued  to  reside  while  he  was  on  the
bench.  In  1802  he  was  joint  editor  of  a  collection
of  the  "Revised  Statutes  of  the  State  of  New
York."  On  2  July.  1804,  he  became  chief  justice
of  the  supreme  court.  He  originated  the  custom
of  presenting  a  written  argumentative  opinion,
with  the  citation  of  legal  authorities,  in  all  cases
of  importance.  The  law  was  at  that  time  in  an
inchoate  condition,  and  the  courts  depended  for
precedents  on  English  decisions,  and  followed  the
procedure  of  the  English  tribunals.  Judge  Kent
applied  himself  to  the  task  of  determining  the  un-
settled principles  of  the  law.  In  defining  the
limitations  of  the  English  common  law  as  appli-
cable to  the  United  States,  in  the  interpretation  of
constitutional  provisions  and  the  construction  of
recent  statutes,  in  settling  the  forms  of  judicial
procedure  and  the  principles  of  practice,  and  in
evolving  principles  of  commercial  law  to  fit  the
changing  conditions  of  commerce  and  production
and  the  needs  of  a  young  and  growing  nation,  he
did  as  much  as  any  other  jurist  to  give  shape  and
direction  to  the  evolution  of  American  jurispru-
dence. To  questions  of  commercial  and  maritime
law  and  the  interpretation  of  contract  obligations
he  brought  the  light  of  his  reading  of  the  civil  law
and  its  commentators.  His  written  opinions  con-
tain the  results  of  exhaustive  researches  on  every
mooted  point.  His  decisions  are  fully  recorded  in
the  "  Reports  "  of  George  Caines  (New  York.  1813),
and  William  Johnson's  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Su-
preme Court  and  Court  of  Errors  of  New  York  from
1806  to  1823."  On  25  Feb.,  1814,  he  was  appointed
chancellor  of  New  York.  The  court  of  chancery  pre-
vious to  his  accession  had  been  shunned  by  lawyers
and  litigants  on  account  of  its  dilatory  proceedings
and  circuitous  and  expensive  forms  of  practice.
Chancellor  Kent  enlarged  and  improved  the  court,
and  by  expounding  and  applying  the  doctrines  of
chancery,  which  before  had  not  been  adequately
administered,  laid  the  foundations  of  equity  juris-
prudence in  the  United  States.  His  chancery  de-
cisions are  given  in  Johnson's  "  Reports  of  Cases
in  the  Court  of  Chancery  of  New  York  from  1814
to  1823."  At  the  age  of  sixty,  though  possessed
of  the  fullest  degree  of  physical  and  mental  vigor,
he  was  retired  in  conformity  with  a  statute  that
was  afterward  repealed.  As  judge  of  the  supreme
court  and  as  chancellor  he  had  important  legisla-
tive as  well  as  judicial  duties  to  perform.  The
higher  judiciary  constituted  with  the  governor  a
council  of  revision,  possessing  a  qualified  veto  on
acts  of  the  legislature,  until  the  council  was  abol-
ished, with  the  acquiescence  of  the  judges,  by  the
constitutional  convention  of  1822.  He  was  active
and  efficient  in  the  discharge  of  these  political  func-
tions. In  the  discussions  of  the  constitutional  con-
vention he  took  an  active  part,  opposing  without
success  the  extension  of  the  electoral  franchise  and
other  democratic  innovations,  but  succeeding  in
the  prevention  of  the  proposed  abolition  of  the
court  of  chancery.  His  name  was  warmly  urged
by  William  Wirt,  then  attorney-general,  for  an  ap-
pointment to  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,
but  President  Monroe  had  alreadv  selected  Smith
Thompson.  Returning  to  New  Yprk  city,  he  re-
sumed the  professorship  of  law  in  Columbia  col-
lege. A  "Summary  of  the  First  Ten  Lectures"
was  published  in  1824.  The  courses  of  lectures
delivered  to  the  classes  during  two  years  were  em-


522


KENT


KENTON


bodied  in  his  "Commentaries  on  American  Law"
(4  vols.,  New  York,  1826-'30),  which  embraces  the
jurisprudence  of  the  Federal  Union,  the  common
and  statutory  laws  of  the  individual  states,  and
the  leading  principles  of  international  law.  It  has
since  served  as  the  standard  general  treatise  on
law  in  the  United  States.  Retiring  from  the  ac-
tive duties  of  his  professorship  in  1825,  he  gave  his
attention  to  revising  and  elaborating  his  work,
and  to  chamber  practice  and  the  decision  of  legal
controversies  that  were  submitted  to  his  judgment.
In  1828  he  delivered  an  anniversary  address  before
the  New  York  historical  society,  of  which  he  had
been  chosen  president,  and  in  1831  one  before  the
Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  at  Yale  college.  A  sec-
ond edition  of  the  "Commentaries."  with  many
changes  and  additions,  appeared  in  1832.  The
sixth  edition,  which  was  the  last  one  revised  by
the  author,  appeared  shortly  before  his  death.
Part  of  the  "  Commentaries  "  was  republished  in
Edinburgh  under  the  title  of  "  A  Treatise  on  Com-
mercial and  Maritime  Law "  (1837).  J.  Eastman
Johnson  published  an  "Analytical  Abridgment  of
Kent's  Commentaries"  (New  York,  1840).  The
seventh  (1852),  eighth  (1854),  ninth  (Boston,  1858),
and  tenth  (I860)  editions  of  the  "  Commentaries  "
were  edited  by  William  Kent  and  his  friend  Dor-
man  B.  Eaton,  the  eleventh  edition  (Boston.  1866)
by  George  P.  Comstock,  the  twelfth  (1873)  by
Oliver  W.  Holmes,  Jr.,  the  thirteenth  by  Charles
M.  Barnes  (1884).  This  work,  which  was  desig-
nated by  Judge  Story  as  the  first  judicial  classic
of  the  United  States,  is  as  lucid,  terse,  and  pure
in  style  as  the  "  Commentaries "  of  Blackstone,
and  resembles  them  in  logical  exactness  of  expres-
sion and  cogency  of  reasoning ;  yet  in  breadth  of
scholarship  and  copiousness  of  learning  the  Ameri-
can jurist  was  superior  to  his  English  predecessor,
drawing  illustrations,  parallels,  and  arguments
from  the  Roman  law  and  the  jurisprudence  of
continental  nations,  and  discussing  subjects  which
Blackstone  was  unable  from  lack  of  knowledge
to  include  in  his  work,  such  as  commercial  and
maritime  law,  the  law  of  nations,  and  equity
jurisprudence.  In  1836  Judge  Kent  prepared  and
published  at  the  instance  of  the  common  council
of  the  city  a  compendious  treatise  "  On  the  Char-
ter of  the  City  of  New  York  and  on  the  Powers  of
the  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  other  Municipal  Offi-
cers "  (reissued  in  1856).  The  same  year  he  de-
livered an  address  before  the  New  York  bar  asso-
ciation. In  1840  he  prepared  for  the  benefit  of  the
Mercantile  library  association  of  New  York  a
"  Course  of  Reading,"  which,  with  additions  and
changes  made  by  Charles  King,  was  republished
by  Henry  A.  Oakley  in  1853.  After  his  death  eu-
logistic orations  were  pronounced  at  a  meeting  of
the  bar  of  New  York  by  Ogden  Hoffman,  Benja-
min F.  Butler,  and  others.  See  a  "  Discourse  on
the  Life,  Character,  and  Public  Services  of  James
Kent,"  by  Judge  John  Duer  (New  York,  1848).—
His  brother,  Moss,  b.  in  Rensselaer  county,  N.  Y.,
studied  law,  and  began  practice  in  Le  Raysville,
Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
legislature  in  1807  and  1810,  and  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Federalist,  and  re-elected  for  the
following  term,  serving  from  24  May.  1813,  to  3
March,  1817.  He  was  subsequently  register  of  the
New  York  court  of  chancery. — William,  jurist,
the  son  of  James,  b.  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Fishkill,  N.  Y.,
4  Jan.,  1861,  studied  law,  and  practised  with  suc-
cess in  New  York  city.  Gov.  Seward  appointed
him  a  judge  of  the  circuit  court  of  New  York,  but
after  serving  some  years  he  resigned  in  1846  in
order  to  accept  the  professorship  of  law  in  Har-


^-»-->o  o~->n.


O  JCirrJo


o-n.


vard. Resigning  in  1847,  he  returned  to  New  York,
where  he  was  frequently  employed  as  a  referee.

KENT,  Joseph,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
Calvert  co.,  Md.,  14  Jan.,  1779;  d.  near  Bladens-
burg,  Md.,  24  Nov.,  1837.  He  was  educated  as  a
physician,  but  combined  farming  with  his  practice,
first  in  Calvert  county,  and  after  1806  in  Prince
George  county,  Md.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Federalist,  serving  from  1811  till  1815,  and  again
from  1819  till  1826,  when  he  became  governor  of
Maryland.  He  held  this  office  till  1829,  and  was
U  S.  senator  from  1833  till  1837.

KENTON,  Simon,  pioneer,  b.  in  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  3  April,  1755 ;  d.  in  Logan  county,
Ohio,  29  April,  1836.  He  was  of  obscure  parent-
age, his  father  was  Irish  and  his  mother  Scotch,
and  owing  to  their  poverty  his  education  was  neg-
lected. At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  had  an  affray
with  William  Veach,
arising  from  a  love-
affair,  and  believing
that  he  had  killed  his
adversary  he  fled  be-
yond the  Alleghanies,
where  he  changed  his
name  for  a  while  to
Simon  Butler.  Here
he  formed  friend-
ships with  traders
and  hunters,  among
whom  were  Simon
Girty  and  George
Yeagef,  who  gave
him  descriptions  of
the  "  cane  -  land,"
called  by  the  Indians
"  Kaintuckee."  He  spent  the  winter  of  1773-4  on
Big  Sandv  river  with  a  hunting-party,  but  retreated
to  Fort  Pitt  when  the  troubles  with  the  Indians
arose.  He  volunteered  and  was  engaged  as  a  spy  in
the  expedition  of  Lord  Dunmore,  British  governor
of  Virginia,  against  the  Indians,  displaying  remark-
able courage,  sagacity,  and  endurance  throughout
the  campaign.  He  performed  many  daring  feats  as
the  friend  and  companion  of  Daniel  Boone,  whose
life  he  saved  in  a  conflict  with  the  Indians.  He
ranged  the  country  as  a  spy  till  1 778,  when  he  joined
Gen.  George  Rogers  Clark  at  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,
and  was  with  him  at  the  surprise  of  Kaskaskia.  He
was  soon  captured  by  the  Indians  and  saved  from
death  at  their  hands  by  Simon  Girty,  notwith-
standing whose  influence  he  was  again  condemned
to  the  stake.  Logan,  the  Mingo  chief,  prevailed
upon  Druyer,  a  Canadian  trader,  to  obtain  Kenton
from  the  Indians,  and  he  was  taken  as  a  prisoner
of  war  to  the  British  commander  at  Detroit,  where
he  worked  for  the  garrison  on  half  pay  till  he  was
aided  by  a  trader's  wife  to  escape  in  July,  1779.
During  the  invasion  of  Kentucky  by  the  British
and  Indians  in  that  year,  he  led  a  company  from
Harrod's  Station,  and  aided  in  driving  out  the  in-
vaders. In  1782  he  again  commanded  a  company  un-
der Gen.  Clark.  On  learning  that  the  man  he  sup-
posed he  had  killed  was  yet  alive  he  went  to  Vir-
ginia in  1782,  but  soon  returned  with  his  father's
family  to  Kentucky,  and  in  1784  settled  at  his  old
camp  near  Maysville.  He  commanded  a  battalion
of  Kentucky  volunteers  as  major  under  Gen.
Anthony  Wayne  in  1793-'4,  became  brigadier-
general  of  Ohio  militia  in  1805,  and  fought  at  the
battle  of  the  Thames  in  1813.  He  was  reduced  to
great  poverty,  for  the  immense  tracts  of  land
which  he  possessed  were  lost  through  the  invasion
of  settlers  and  his  ignorance  of  law.  In  1824  he
appeared  in  Frankfort  in  tattered  garments  to


KENYON


KEPPEL


523


etition  the  legislature  of  Kentucky  to  release  the
claim  of  the  state  upon  some  mountain  land  owned
by  him.  His  appearance  excited  ridicule,  but,  on
"  Bing  recognized  by  Gen.  Thomas  Fletcher,  he  was

iken  to  the  capitol,  seated  in  the  speaker's  chair,

id  introduced  to  a  large  assemblv  as  the  sec-
Mid  great  adventurer  of  the  west. His  lands  were

eleased  and  a  pension  of  $240  was  procured  for

im  from  congress. He  died  near  the  spot  where,

fty-eight  years  previous,  he  had  escaped  death  at

le  hands  of  the  Indians.  Kenton  county,  Ky.,
was  named  in  his  honor.

KENYON,  James  Benjamin,  poet,  b.  in  Frank-
fort, Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  26  April,  1858. He  was

lucated  at  Hungerford  collegiate  institute,  Adams,
Y.,  and  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist

Episcopal  church  in  1878.  He  is  at  present  (1887)
stor  of  the  Arsenal  street  M.  E.  church  in  Water-

jwn,  N.  Y.  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals,
»nd  is  the  author  of  "  The  Fallen,  and  Other  Poems  "

Jtica,  1876) ;  "  Out  of  the  Shadows  "  (Philadelphia.
:  "  Songs  in  All  Seasons  "  (Boston.  1885) :  and
"  In  Realms  of  Gold  "  (New  York,  1887).

KENYON,  William  Asbnry,  poet,  b.  in  Hing-
ham,  Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1817;  d.  there,  25  Jan.,  1862.
He  was  the  son  of  John  Wilder,  but  for  some  un-
known reason  changed  his  name.  He  was  a  jour-
neyman tailor  by  trade,  but  taught  for  a  time  in
Illinois,  and  travelled  widely  in  the  Mississippi
valley.  His  poems  were  suggested  by  prairie
scenes,  and  satirize  backwoods  customs  "  with  more
truth  than  poetry."  These  were  included  in  "  Mis-
cellaneous Poems,  to  which  are  added  Writings  in
Prose  on  Various  Subjects"  (Chicago.  1845).

KEOGH,  James,  clergvman,  b.  in  Ennescorthv,
County  Wexford,  Ireland,  4  Feb.,  1834;  d.  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  10  July,  1870.  He  came  to  the  United
States  with  his  parents  in  1841,  and  settled  at  Pitts-
burg, Pa.  He  was  sent  to  Rome  to  study  in  the
College  of  the  propaganda,  where,  in  1851,  he
was  awarded  the  degree  of  doctor  of  philosophy
and  the  gold  medal  of  the  faculty  for  his  suc-
cessful defence  of  120  propositions  in  natural
theology.  In  1855  he  defended  317  theses  from
ecclesiastical  history  and  dogmatic  theology,  and
was  awarded  the  degree  of  D.  D.  and  a  gold  medal,
although  he  was  not  eighteen  years  old.  He  was
ordained  priest,  5  Aug.,  1856,  and  soon  afterward
returned  to  the  United  States,  where  he  was  as-
signed the  chaplaincy  of  St.  Xavier's  academy  and
the  care  of  the  congregation  at  Latrobe,  where  he
finished  a  church.  He  was  appointed  professor  of
dogmatic  theology  in  the  diocesan  seminary  of
Glenwood  in  1857,  and  in  1863  became  its  presi-
dent and  also  editor  of  the  •*  Pittsburg  Catholic."
In  1864  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was
made  professor  of  dogmatic  theology,  Hebrew,
Sacred  Scripture,  and  rubrics,  in  the  seminary  of
St.  Charles  Borromeo.  He  acted  as  secretary  to
the  second  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  in  Octo-
ber, 1866,  and  in  the  same  year  became  editor  of
the  "  Catholic  Standard,"  which  post,  with  his  pro-
fessorship, he  held  till  1868.  He  then  returned  to
Pittsburg  on  account  of  failing  health.  He  con-
tributed various  articles  to  the  "  Catholic  World,"
including  those  on  "  The  Council  of  Trent "  and
"  The  Greek  Schism,"  and  delivered  lectures,  sev-
eral of  which  have  been  published.

KEOKUK  (The  Watchful  Fox),  chief  of  the
united  Sacs  and  Foxes,  b.  on  Rock  river,  111.,  about
1780;  d.  in  Kansas  in  June,  1848.  He  was  by  birth
a  Sac,  and,  although  not  an  hereditary  chief,  rose  to
that  post  by  force  of  talent.  He  was  admitted  to
the  councils  of  his  nation  during  the  period  of
the  war  of  1812  with  Great  Britain  because  of  the


exercise  of  remarkable  bravery  and  eloquence,  as
shown  in  numerous  barbaric  adventures  of  which  he
was  the  hero,  and
ever  afterward
he  was  regarded
as  in  many  re-
spects the  fore-
most brave  in
the  confederacy.
His  particular
privilege,  from  an
early  age,  as  the
result  of  one  of
his  enterprises,
was  always  to  ap-
pear on  horse-
back in  times  of
tribal  ceremony,
whether  or  not
his  companions
were  mounted.
He  was  stout,
graceful,  and
commanding  in
figure,  had  fine
features,  and  an

intelligent  expression,  and  excelled  in  athletic
sports.  His  power  of  oratory  was  of  a  high  order,
and  remarkable  stories  are  told  of  his  capacity  to
sway  the  sentiments  of  a  council.  On  several"  oc-
casions he  carried  with  him  the  votes  of  a  consid-
erable assemblage  of  his  tribe,  when  every  member
but  himself  before  his  speech  had  been  firmlv  de-
termined to  the  contrary.  At  one  time,  in  May,
1832,  he  broke  in  upon  a  war-dance  that  his  band
was  holding  preparatory  to  uniting  with  Black
Hawk  against  the  whites,  and  convinced  the  war-
riors in  the  heat  of  their  fury  that  the  act  would  be
suicidal  and  must  not  be  undertaken.  Keokuk  al-
ways enacted,  for  policy's  sake,  the  part  of  an  ar-
dent friend  of  the  whites.  In  1832,  when  Black
Hawk  (q.  v.)  took  up  arms  against  the  Americans,
and  solicited  general  co-operation,  the  energy  of
Keokuk  alone  succeeded  in  keeping  the  majority
of  the  band  on  the  side  of  peace,  and  he  lost  no
opportunity  to  induce  Black  Hawk  to  withdraw
from  his  position  before  it  was  too  late.  When,  in
August,  1833,  Black  Hawk  returned  from  his  visit
as  a  captive  to  Washington  and  the  east,  he  was
formally  delivered  by  the  U.  S.  authorities  to  the
custody  of  Keokuk,  who,  by  the  Rock  Island  treaty
of  September,  1832,  had  been  officially  recognized
as  the  principal  chief  of  the  Sacs  and  Foxes.  In
1837  Keokuk,  with  several  village  chiefs  of  his
nation,  visited  Washington,  where  a  peace  was  ar-
ranged between  his  people  and  their  old-time  ad-
versaries, the  Sioux.  They  also  made  visits  to
New  York,  Boston,  and  Cincinnati,  where  Keokuk
attracted  much  attention  by  his  uniformly  excel-
lent speeches.  Black  Hawk  was  with  the  party,  as
Keokuk  feared  to  leave  the  scheming  old  man  at
home  during  his  own  absence.  Keokuk's  town
during  the  Black  Hawk  war  was  at  the  foot  of  the
rapids,  near  the  mouth  of  Des  Moines  river,  the
site  of  the  present  city  of  Keokuk,  which  was
named  in  his  honor.  The  treaty  of  1832  gave  him
a  reservation  of  forty  miles  square  on  Iowa  river,
to  which  he  soon  afterward  removed.  In  1845  he
made  his  final  move  to  Kansas,  where  three  years
later  he  fell  a  victim  to  poison,  administered  by  a
member  of  the  Black  Hawk  band.  Between  this
band  and  his  own  there  had  existed  a  deadlv  feud.
KEPPEL,  George,  3d  Earl  of  Albemarle,  Brit-
ish soldier,  b.  in  London,  3  April,  1724;  d.  13  Oct..
1772. He  entered  the  army  very  young,  and  in


524


KER


KERFOOT


1745  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Fontenoy  as  aide-
de-camp  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  In  1702  he
was  made  lieutenant-general  and  given  command
of  the  army  of  14,000  men  which,  in  conjunction
with  the  fleet  under  Admiral  Pocock,  took  the  city
of  Havana  on  4  Aug.,  1762.  He  was  subsequently
governor  of  the  city,  and  returned  to  England
with  a  large  fortune.  He  was  great-grandfather  of
William  Coutts  Keppel,  Viscount  Bury.  (See  Bury.)

KER,  Henry,  traveller,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
about  1785.  At  an  early  age  he  removed  with  his
father  to  London,  and  was  educated  at  Westmin-
ster school  for  a  mercantile  life.  Being  fond  of
adventure,  he  left  England  on  25  April,  1808,  and
after  travelling  through  North  and  South  Caro-
lina, Tennessee,  and  Mississippi,  he  went  to  Jamaica,
W.  I.,  but  returned  to  New  Orleans,  and  sailed  up
Red  river,  where  he  found  a  tribe  of  Indians,  the
Mnacedeus,  from  whose  language  and  customs  he
inferred  that  they  were  descended  from  Madoc,  a
Welsh  prince.  Ker  remained  among  these  Indians
for  some  time  and  discovered  a  platina-mine,  for
which  he  was  condemned  to  death,  but  was  rescued
by  the  daughter  of  a  chief.  He  subsequently  trav-
elled through  Mexico,  Florida,  and  the  Gulf  states,
returning  to  England  by  way  of  New  York.  He
published  "  Travels  through  the  United  States  and
Mexico  in  1808-'16  "  (Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  1816).

KERATRY,  Charles  Albert,  Chevalier  de
(kay'-rah'-tre'),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Dinan  in  1753 ;
d.  in  Nantes  in  1794.  He  was  sent  to  this  country  by
Beaumarchais  in  1776,  and  served  during  the  war
of  independence  in  1776-'83,  being  wounded  at
Brandy  wine  and  at  Yorktown.  Congress  brevetted
him  colonel  at  the  close  of  the  war,  and  he  was
made  a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.
In  1785  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  Port  au
Prince  regiment  in  Santo  Domingo,  and  was  con-
spicuous among  the  members  of  the  council  who
urged  Governor  Blanchelande  to  disobey  the  orders
of  the  home  government  and  to  refuse  to  the
negroes  the  benefit  of  the  clement  laws  that  had
been  voted  by  the  constituent  assembly  in  1790.
He  was  instrumental  in  bringing  about  by  his  in-
tolerance the  rebellion  of  1791,  and  was  left  for
dead  during  the  massacres ;  but,  having  recovered,
he  organized  a  company  of  volunteers  and  made
terrible  havoc  among  the  negroes.  Going  to
Louisiana  in  1793,  he  offered  his  services  to  the
Spanish  government,  and  commanded  for  some
time  the  artillery  of  the  colony ;  but  his  hatred  of
the  blacks  and  the  cruelties  to  which  he  resorted
caused  his  resignation  in  1793.  On  his  arrival  in
France  he  was  arrested,  and  after  a  mock  trial
condemned  to  death  and  executed.  Ho  published
"La  colonie  Francaise  de  Saint  Domingue;  ses
ressources,  commerce,  industrie ;  de  la  population
creole  et  des  negres  "  (Paris,  1790).

KERATRY,  Emile  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in
Paris,  France,  20  March,  1832.  His  father,  Au-
guste  Hilarion  de  Keratry,  was  made  a  peer  by
Louis  Philippe  in  1837.  Ihe  son  entered  the  army
as  a  volunteer,  30  Sept.,  1854,  serving  in  Africa
during  the  Crimean  war,  and  subsequently  in  the
Mexican  campaign  of  1863-'5,  after  which  he  pub-
lished articles  denouncing  the  frauds  and  impolicy
of  imperial  intervention  in  that  country.  He  re-
tired from  the  army  in  1866,  and  devoted  his  at-
tention to  politics  and  literature.  In  1869-'70  he
was  prominent  in  the  corps  legislatif  as  an  active
opponent  of  Napoleon,  although  he  approved  of
the  war  against  Prussia.  At  the  beginning  of  the
revolution  in  1870,  he  was  prefect  of  police  in
Paris,  and  as  general  of  division  under  Gambetta
organized  nearly  fifty  battalions  in  Brittany. He


was  prefect  at  Toulouse  and  Marseilles  under  the
Thiers  government  of  1871-2.  He  has  been  con-
nected with  various  periodicals,  a  newspaper  en-
titled "  Le  Soir,"  and  has  published  several  plays
and  miscellaneous  writings,  many  of  which  relate
to  the  Mexican  expedition,  and  is  now  (1887)  about
to  issue  a  volume  entitled  "  A  travers  le  passe."

KERCKHOVE,  Lorenz  Wenceslas  (kair-ko'-
veh),  Dutch  naturalist,  b.  in  Bois  le  Due  in  1785;
d.  in  Amsterdam  in  1839.  He  studied  in  Rotter-
dam, and  early  showed  a  fondness  for  the  natural
sciences.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  joined  an  uncle
who  was  established  in  business  in  New  York ;  but
having  made  the  acquaintance  of  Alexander  von
Humboldt  during  his  sojourn  in  the  United  States
in  1802,  he  gave  up  business  and  went  to  Central
America.  He  had  resolved  to  follow  the  steps  of
the  German  naturalist,  and  like  him  write  an
account  of  his  travels,  but  after  visiting  the  West
Indies,  Central  America,  Louisiana,  Mexico,  and
Guiana,  during  1804-'9,  his  health  declined  and  he
was  compelled  to  return  to  his  native  land.  For
several  years  he  was  professor  of  natural  history  in
the  University  of  Leyden,  but  resigned  in  1821  to
devote  himself  exclusively  to  science,  and,  settling
in  Amsterdam,  published  many  works,  including
"Reisen  durch  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  Louisiana,
Nueva  Esparia  und  Guiana  "  (2  vols.,  Leyden,  1817) ;
"  Historia  ecclesiastica  et  Universalis  Guianas "
(Amsterdam,  1825) ;  "  Die  Kriege  von  1814-1821  in
Mexico "  (Leyden,  1833) ;  "  Surinam  in  Bildern
und  Skizzen  "  (Amsterdam,  1835) :  and  "  Historia
plantarum  circa  Havana  sponte  crescentium "
(3  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1839).

KERFOOT,  John  Barrett,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  1  March,  1816 ;  d.  in  Meyersdale,
Pa.,  10  July,  1881.  He  was  brought  to  Lancaster,
Pa.,  by  his  father  in
1819,  and  at  an  early
age  entered  a  Sun-
day-school that  had
been  opened  by  the
Rev.  William  A.  Muh-
lenberg, for  whom  he
formed  an  attach-
ment that  lasted
through  life.  Young
Kerfoot  followed
Mr.  Muhlenberg  to
Flushing,  and  was
his  pupil  there  and
at  College  Point.  On
his  twenty-first  birth-
day he  was  ordained
to  the  Protestant
Episcopal  ministry
by  Bishop  Onder-
donk,  of  New  York.  On  the  establishment  of  St.
James's  hall  in  Maryland,  Mr.  Kerfoot  was  put  in
charge,  and  he  continued  there,  at  the  head  of  the
school  and  afterward  of  the  College  of  St.  James,
from  1842  till  1864.  The  civil  war  had  a  disastrous
effect  on  the  prosperity  of  the  institution.  Most
of  the  students  were  from  the  southern  states,
while  the  sympathy  of  the  rector  was  strongly  with
the  supporters  of  the  Union.  In  the  midst  of  much
trouble  and  anxiety,  the  work  of  the  college  was
continued  until  in  August,  1864,  when  the  buildings
were  occupied  by  Confederate  soldiers.  Dr.  Kerfoot
was  put  under  arrest,  but  released  on  condition
that  he  should  secure  the  surrender  of  Dr.  Boyd
who  had  been,  it  was  claimed,  unjustly  held  a  pris-
oner by  the  Federal  authorities.  This  was  accom-
plished, and  in  September  Dr.  Kerfoot  entered  on
the  duties  of  the  presidency  of  Trinity  college,  to


KERGORLAY


KEROUALLE


525


yhich  he  had  been  elected  a  short  time  before. In

the  following  year  he  was  a  deputy  to  the  general

anvention  of  the  Episcopal  church,  and  took  an

influential  part  in  the  deliberations  that  led  to  the

reunion  of  the  church  in  the  north  and  south.

The  western  part  of  Pennsylvania  having  been  set

Dff  as  the  diocese  of  Pittsburg,  Dr.  Kerfoot  was

uhosen  to  be  its  first  bishop,  and,  accepting  the

affice,  he  was  consecrated  on  25  Jan.,  1866. His

rork  as  bishop  was  successful  within  his  diocese,

and  he  also  bore  an  honorable  part  in  the  first  and

le  second  Lambeth  conferences,  in  the  Old  Catho-

ic  conference  at  Boone,  and  as  a  member  of  com-

littees  of  the  American  house  of  bishops.  The  de-

ree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  bv  Columbia  in

1850  and  by  Trinity  in  1865,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by

the  University  of  Cambridge,  England,  in  1867.  Dr.

Terfoot  published  several  sermons  and  addresses

at  different  times. His  life  has  been  written  by

the  Rev.  Hall  Harrison  (New  York,  1886).

KERGORLAY,  Ives  Guy,  Baron  de  (kair'-gor-
ay'),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Le  Moule,  Guadeloupe,
'  1756 :  d.  in  Le  Cap,  Santo  Domingo,  in  Novem-
er,  1795.  He  was  in  garrison  in  Santo  Domingo
at  the  beginning  of  the  American  Revolution,  and
erved  during  the  campaigns  of  1778-'82.  He  con-
tributed also  to  drive  the  British  from  Dutch
Juiana,  and  governed  Demerara  from  1782  till
1784.  In  1787  he  commanded  the  fortress  of  the
aintes,  and  from  1790  till  1794  the  northwestern
art  of  Grande  Terre,  Guadeloupe,  where  he  took
an  active  part  in  the  repression  of  the  troubles  on
the  island,  and  resisting  the  English  invaders,
refused  an  honorable  capitulation  in  1795,  and
brought  his  forces  to  Santo  Domingo.  During  the
following  six  months  he  exhibited  remarkable
energy  in  fighting  the  negro  insurgents,  repelling
the  English,  and  also  opposing  at  times  the  revo-
lutionists and  the  royalists.  He  was  finally  mur-
dered. Kergorlay  left  a  manuscript  in  the  Li-
brairie  nationale  of  Paris,  entitled  "  Campagnes
d'un  volontaire  pendant  la  guerre  d'Amerique."

KERLEREC,  Louis  Billouart  de,  colonial
governor  of  Louisiana,  b.  in  Quimper,  France,  in
1704;  d.  in  Paris,  9  Sept.,  1770.  He  entered  the
marine  guards  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  served  in
twenty-three  campaigns,  and  was  in  three  combats
between  the  "  Neptune "  and  superior  English
forces  in  1746.  On  21  Oct.,  1747,  in  another  en-
gagement, he  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the
vessel  after  the  captain  and  1st  lieutenant  had  been
killed,  and  continued  the  resistance  until  300  men
were  slain  or  disabled.  He  commanded  a  cruiser
in  1750,  was  promoted  captain  in  1751,  and  in  1752
was  appointed  governor  of  Louisiana.  During
the  Seven  years'  war,  when  the  colony  was  left  to
its  own  resources,  he  preserved  it  from  the  Eng-
lish, and  on  his  return  to  France  in  1764  left  it  in
a  flourishing  condition.  On  arriving  in  France,
some  insubordinate  officers  and  the  widow  of  an
official  with  whom  he  had  had  difficulties  charged
him  with  abuse  of  authority  and  excessive  sever-
ity. His  exile  was  decreed  in  1769,  but  he  ap-
pealed, and  had  collected  proofs  of  innocence  and
testimony  regarding  the  ability  and  integrity  of
his  administration  when  he  suddenly  died.  He
is  said  to  have  composed  memoirs  of  Louisiana,
but  the  manuscript  is  lost.

KERNAN,  Francis,  senator,  b.  in  Wayne,  Steu-
ben co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Jan.,  1816.  He  was  graduated  -at
Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  in  1836,  studied  law,  and
removed  to  Utica  in  1839,  where  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  July,  1840.  He  was  reporter  of  the
court  of  appeals  from  1854  till  1857,  and  was  chosen
member  of  assembly  in  1860. He  was  elected  from


the  Oneida  district  to  congress  in  1862  over  Roscoe
Conkling,  the  Republican  candidate,  and  served
from  1863  till  1865.  In  1864  he  was  a  candidate
for  re-election,  but  was  defeated  by  Mr.  Conk-
ling. He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  con-
vention in  1867,  and  also  of  the  commission  to
report  to  the  legislature  proposed  amendments
to  the  constitution,  which  were  adopted  in  1874.
He  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  governor  in
1872,  but  was  defeated  by  Gen.  John  A.  Dix.  Mr.
Kernan  was  elected  senator  from  New  York  in
January,  1875,  and  served  from  4  March,  1875,  to
4  March,  1881.  His  "  Reports  "  were  published  in
four  volumes  (Albany,  1855-'7).

KERNEY,  Martin  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  Lew-
iston,  Frederick  co..  Md.,  in  August,  1819 ;  d.  in
Baltimore,  Md..  16  March,  1861.  He  was  left  an
orphan  in  infancy,  and  obtained  an  education  by
his  own  exertions,  graduating  at  Mt.  Saint  Mary
college,  Emmittsburg,  Md.,  in  1838.  He  established
and  conducted  a  successful  academy  in  Baltimore,
and,  perceiving  the  lack  of  school-books  adapted  to
Catholic  methods  of  education,  applied  himself
during  spare  hours  to  the  composition  of  text-
books, which  came  into  general  use  in  Roman
Catholic  schools  throughout  the  United  States.
After  teaching  for  several  years,  he  studied  and
practised  law,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of
Maryland  in  1852.  As  chairman  of  the  committee
on  education,  he  brought  forward  a  bill  that  was
designed  to  place  Roman  Catholic  schools  on  an
equality  with  the  other  schools  of  the  state.  In
connection  with  his  legal  and  political  occupations
he  continued  his  literary  work.  He  edited  the
"  Metropolitan  Magazine  "  for  four  years,  and  com-
piled the  '•  Catholic  Almanac  "for  1860-'l.  Among
the  numerous  text-books  that  he  published  are  a
"Compendium  of  History"  (Baltimore,  1851);  a
"  Class-Book  of  History  "  (1851) ;  an  adaptation  of
"Murray's  Grammar"  (1851);  a  "Catechism  of
Scripture  History  "  (1854) ;  "  Columbian  Arithme-
tic" (1856);  and  also  catechisms  of  the  history  of
the  United  States  and  of  England,  and  a  "  Cate-
chism of  Biography."

KERNOT,  Henry,  bibliographer,  b.  in  London,
England,  20  Oct.,  1806 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  25
Oct.,  1874.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  firm  of  Ger-
man booksellers  and  publishers  in  London,  became
manager  of  a  London  house,  afterward  went  to
Dublin,  where  he  was  employed  in  completing  vari-
ous departments  in  the  library  of  Trinity  college,
and  in  1836  emigrated  to  the  United  States.  lie
was  employed  by  various  bookselling  firms,  for  a
time  carried  on  business  as  a  publisher  and  book-
seller, and  was  consulted  by  collectors  on  account
of  his  wide  acquaintance  with  old  books ;  prepared
many  classified  and  annotated  catalogues,  and  a
few  months  before  his  death  published  a  descrip-
tive list  of  books  relating  to  the  devil,  with  notes,
quotations,  proverbs,  and  index,  under  the  title  of
"  Bibliotheca  Diabolica  "  (New  York,  1874).

KEROUALLE,  Eloi  Ferdinand  Latonr  de
(kair'-ou'-al),  West  Indian  magistrate,  b.  in  Saint
Francois,  Grande-Terre,  Guadeloupe.  11  Jan.,  1772 ;
d.  in  Basse  Terre,  6  Nov.,  1831.  He  became  dis-
trict attorney  of  Pointe-a-Pitre  in  1797,  and  after-
ward of  Basse  Terre.  At  the  time  of  the  invasion
of  the  colony  by  the  British  in  1809  he  raised  a
regiment  among  his  own  slaves  and  fought  at  its
head.  Lord  Cochrane  confirmed  him  in  his  post
of  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  in  the  name  of
George  III.,  and  offered  him  knighthood  and
the  presidency  of  the  supreme  court  of  Jamaica,
which  Keroualle  declined.  In  1819  he  resigned
from  the  bench  to  accept  the  presidency  of  the


526


KERR


KERR


Erivv  council  of  the  governor-general,  which  post
e  held  till  his  death.  Keroualle  is  the  author  of
several  important  works  on  the  French  colonies.
He  is  still  considered  as  the  most  competent  writer
on  colonial  laws  and  customs,  and  his  "  Les  lois  et
constitutions  en  vigueur  dans  les  colonies  fran-
caises  de  l'Amerique,  appelees  ties  sous  le  vent,  de
1650  a  1790"  (9  vols.,  Paris,  1821-'7),  is  the  stand-
ard work  on  the  French  colonial  administrative
system  during  the  last  two  centuries.  Among  his
other  publications  are  "  Statistique  de  la  Guade-
loupe "  (Basse  Torre,  1820) ;  "  Expose  du  regime
colonial  a  la  Martinique  et  a  la  Guadeloupe  durant
le  xviiie  siecle"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1825);  "Essai  de
notions  coloniales"  (1827);  "De  l'effet  du  climat
des  Antilles  sur  le  systeme  nerveuse "  (1828) ;
"  De  la  longevite  a  la  Guadeloupe,  suivie  de  tables
statistiques  comparant  la  mortalite  dans  les  An-
tilles avec  la  mortalite  en  France  "  (2  vols.,  1829) ;
"  Du  resultat  pour  les  colonies  francaises  des
Antilles  de  la  revolution  et  de  la  guerre  qui
en  a  ete  la  suite  "  (2  vols.,  1830) ;  and  "  Expose  du
climat  des  Antilles  et  de  son  influence  sur  les
Europeens  et  les  Creoles  "  (1831).

KERR,  James,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Leith,
Scotland,  about  1764;  d.  in  Quebec,  5  May,  1846.
He  was  educated  at  Leith  and  at  the  University  of
Glasgow,  and  in  1785  entered  at  the  Inner  Temple,
London,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  English  bar.
In  1794  he  removed  to  Canada,  and  in  August,
1797,  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  vice-admiralty
court  at  Quebec.  He  was  made  a  judge  of  the  king's
bench  in  1807.  in  1812  was  called  by  Sir  George
Prevost  to  the  executive  council,  and  in  1821  by
the  Earl  of  Dalhousie  to  the  legislative  council.
During  the  absence  of  Chief-Justice  Sewell  in  Eng-
land, at  various  periods  between  1814  and  1827,
Judge  Kerr  presided  in  the  court  of  king's  bench,
and  in  1826-7  was  speaker  of  the  legislative  council.
KERR,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Casswell  county,
N.  C,  14  Aug.,  1782 ;  d.  29  Sept.,  1842.  He  was
licensed  to  preach  in  August,  1801,  and  after  trav-
elling as  an  evangelist  in  South  Carolina,  Georgia,
and  Virginia,  he  settled  in  Halifax  county,  Va.,  in
1805.  In  1812  he  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to
congress,  and  served  two  terms,  from  24  Mav,
1813,  till  3  March,  1817.  Returning  to  Halifax,  he
preached  in  the  churches  at  Arbor  and  Mary  Creek
until  March,  1825,  when  he  became  pastor  of  the
1st  Baptist  church  in  Richmond.  His  eloquence
attracted  a  large  congregation,  and  produced  re-
vivals in  1826-'7  and  1831  that  added  about  700
members  to  his  church.  Yet  in  1831  a  schism
arose  in  consequence  of  the  preaching  of  Alexander
Campbell,  who  had  been  invited  to  occupy  the  pul-
pit while  attending  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention in  Richmond.  The  separation  of  nearly
half  his  society  caused  Mr.  Kerr  to  resign  at  the
close  of  1832. — His  son,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Pittsyl-
vania county,  Va. ;  d.  in  Reidsville,  N.  C,  5  Sept.,
1879,  was  educated  in  Richmond,  Va.,  studied  law
with  Judge  John  S.  Pearson,  of  North  Carolina,
and  practised  at  Yanceyville,  N.  C.  He  was  the
Whig  candidate  for  governor  in  1852,  but  was  de-
feated by  David  S.  Reid.  The  same  year  he  was
elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  5  Dec,  1853,
till  3  March,  1855.  In  1858  and  1860  he  was  a
member  of  the  legislature.  During  the  reconstruc-
tion conflict  he  was  arrested  by  the  military  au-
thorities. Chief-Justice  Pearson  refused  to  issue
an  attachment  against  Col.  George  W.  Kirk,  who
held  Mr.  Kerr  and  other  prisoners  in  custody  under
order  of  Gov.  William  W.  Holden  (q.  v.),  on  the

f round  that  the  power  of  the  judiciary  was  ex-
austed ;  but  Judge  George  W.  Brooks,  on  25  Aug.,


1870,  issued  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  and  on  its  re-
turn ordered  the  prisoners  to  be  released.  Kerr's
arrest  and  imprisonment  brought  him  into  notice,
and  led  to  his  election,  by  the  legislature  in  1874,
to  the  bench  of  the  superior  court.

KERR,  John  Leeds,  senator,  b.  near  Annapolis,
Md.,  15  Jan.,  1780:  d.  near  Easton,  Md.,  21  Feb.,
1844.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  John's  college.  An-
napolis, in  1799,  studied  law  with  John  L.  Bozman,
and  practised  in  Easton.  In  1817  he  was  agent  of
the  state  of  Maryland  for  the  settlement  of  claims
against  the  United  States  for  expenditures  during
the  war  of  1812.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Whig,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1825,  till  3  March,  1829,
and  defeated  at  the  next  election,  but  was  again
successful  at  the  succeeding  one,  and  served  from
5  Dec,  1831,  till  2  March,  1833.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1840,  and  on  the  death  of  John
S.  Spence  was  chosen  by  the  legislature  to  serve
out  the  latter's  unexpired  term  in  the  U.  S.  senate,
serving  from  13  Jan.,  1841,  till  3  March,  1843.  He
edited  the  "History  of  Maryland,"  by  his  uncle,
John  L.  Bozman  (Baltimore,  1837). — His  son,  John
Bozman,  b.  in  Easton,  Md.,  5  March,  1809 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  27  Jan.,  1878,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1830,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833.
He  practised  at  Easton.  Md.,  was  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives  in  1836-'8.  In  1848
he  was  elected  as  a  Whig  to  congress,  and  in  1850
was  re-elected,  but  did  not  take  his  seat  because  he
had  accepted  the  post  of  charge  d'affaires  at  Nica-
ragua, which  he  filled  from  12  March,  1851,  to  1
June,  1853.  He  was  instrumental  in  saving  the
lives  of  some  of  the  chief  officers  of  the  revolu-
tionary party  in  1851.  After  his  return  he  prac-
tised his  profession  at  Baltimore  and  St.  Michaels,
Md.,  was  a  solicitor  before  the  U.  S.  court  of
claims,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  employed
in  the  treasury  department.

KERR,  Joseph,  senator.  He  was  elected  from
Ohio  to  serve  through  the  unexpired  term  of
Thomas  Worthington,  who  had  resigned.  Mr.  Kerr
took  his  seat  on  30  Dec,  1814,  and  served  till  the
end  of  the  session,  which  closed  on  2  March.  1815.

KERR,  Michael  Crawford  (ker),  statesman,  b.
in  Titusville,  Pa.,  15  March,  1827 ;  d.  in  Rockbridge,
Alum  Springs,  Va.,  19  Aug.,  1876.  He  studied  for
a  time  at  the  Erie  academy,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1845.  He  became  a  teacher,  and  then  attended
the  law-school  of  the  Louisville  university,  Ken-
tucky, where  he  was  graduated  in  1851.  In  1852
he  removed  to  New  Albany,  Ind.,  and  began  the
practice  of  law.  Two  years  later  he  was  chosen
city  attorney,  and,  after  one  year's  service,  prose-
cuting attorney  of  Floyd  county.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  the  Indiana  legislature  in  1856.  and
in  1862  was  chosen  reporter  of  the  supreme  court
of  Indiana,  publishing,  while  in  that  position,  five
volumes  of  reports  which  are  regarded  as  the  best
of  those  that  have  been  issued  by  the  court.  He
was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress  in  1864,  and
served  continuously  till  1872,  when  he  refused  a
renomination  for  his  own  district,  but  ran  for  con-
gressman-at-large  on  the  state  ticket  against  God-
love  S.  Orth,  and  was  defeated  by  a  majority  of  only
126  votes.  In  1874  he  was  chosen  to  represent  his
own  district  after  a  bitter  canvass  against  a  coali-
tion candidate,  and  he  was  elected  speaker  of  that
body,  6  Dec,  1875.  His  health  began  to  fail  rapidly
after  the  election  of  1874,  and  was  so  broken  after
he  was  chosen  speaker  that  it  was  with  difficulty
he  performed  the  duties  of  the  office  during  the
first  session  of  congress,  and  four  days  after  its
adjournment  he  died  of  consumption.  Mr.  Kerr
was  a  tall  and  massively  built  man,  with  a  serious


KERR


KERVERSEAU


527


and  powerful  face.  The  east  of  his  character  was
earnest,  his  rule  of  action  was  conscientiousness,
and  his  mind  was  strong  rather  than  brilliant.
Though  a  vigorous  and  at  times  fierce  opponent,
he  always  commanded  the  respect  of  his  political
enemies.  He  fought  strongly  against  the  recon-
struction legislature  of  the  Republican  party,  but
owed  his  chief  distinction  to  his  efforts  for  a  re-
vision of  the  tariff  in  the  direction  of  free  trade,
his  adherence  to  the  policy  of  resumption,  and  his
opposition  to  the  inflation  theory.  He  was  an  eager
investigator  of  the  principles  of  finance,  and  fear-
less in  advocating  their  application,  so  that  he
found  himself  at  one  time  almost  alone  among  the
politicians  of  Indiana  in  fighting  against  an  indefi-
nate  issue  of  greenbacks.  During  his  congressional
career  he  served  on  the  committees  on  private  land
claims,  elections,  railways,  and  canals,  the  civil
service,  and  ways  and  means.

KERR,  Washington  Caruthers,  geologist,  b.
in  Alamance  county,  N.  C,  24  May,  1827 ;  d.  in
Asheville,  N.  C,  9  Aug.,  1885.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1850,  and
subsequently  taught,  also  holding  a  chair  in  Mar-
shall university,  Texas,  whence  he  went  to  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  as  a  computer  in  the  Nautical  Al-
manac office.  This  place  afforded  him  opportuni-
ties for  study  at  Harvard.  In  1855  he  was  called
to  the  professorship  of  chemistry,  geology,  and
mineralogy  in  Davidson  college,  N.  C,  but  the  civil
war  severed  this  relation,  and  he  enlisted  as  a  pri-
vate in  the  Confederate  army.  Prof.  Kerr  was  soon
detailed  to  superintend  and  devise  methods  for  the
manufacture  of  salt  on  the  coasts  of  North  and
South  Carolina.  In  1806  he  was  made  state  geolo-
gist of  the  former  state,  and  at  the  same  time  he
delivered  occasional  lectures  on  geology  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina.  His  work  on  the
geology  of  the  state  continued  until  1882,  when  he
received  an  appointment  on  the  U.  S.  geological
survey,  so  that  he  might  connect  the  work  of  his
state  with  that  of  the  nation.  His  health  failing
in  1883  he  was  compelled  to  resign  his  office.  He
was  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  to  whose  pro-
ceedings he  contributed  papers  of  merit,  and  he
published,  besides  minor  reports,  "  Report  of  the
Geological  Survey  of  North  Carolina  "  (vol.  i.,  Ra-
leigh, 1875 ;  vol.  'ii.,  1881).

KERSAINT,  Gni  Pierre  de  Caetnempreii,
Count  de  (kair-sang),  French  mariner,  b.  in  Paris,
20  July,  1742 ;  d.  there,  4  Dec,  1793.  He  was  de-
scended from  a  family  that  is  famous  in  the  annals
of  the  French  navy,  and  entered  the  marine  guards
in  1755.  Two  years  later,  after  fighting  in  the
West  Indies,  he  became  lieutenant,  and  was  made
captain  in  1765.  He  served  in  Canada  in  1762  and
during  the  war  for  American  independence  in
1777-83.  In  1777  he  captured  off  Boston  harbor
two  English  frigates  after  a  brilliant  engagement.
During  the  following  year  he  served  under  Count
de  Guichen  in  the  West  Indies,  and  contributed
under  the  Marquis  de  Bouille  to  the  capture  of
Tobago  in  1779.  He  commanded  in  1782  a  squad-
ron composed  of  one  ship  of  the  line  and  four
frigates,  and  after  a  sharp  action  drove  the  English
from  the  Dutch  colonies  of  Demerara,  Essequibo,
and  Berbice.  Then,  joining  Count  de  Grasse  off
Yorktown,  he  was  stationed  in  Chesapeake  bay
and  fought  several  engagements  with  English
cruisers.  In  1783  he  became  an  honorary  member
of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati,  and  the  Dutch
voted  him  an  annuity  of  4,000  florins  on  the  cus-
toms receipts  of  Guiana.  From  1785  till  1790  he
commanded  the  station  of  South  America,  and  he
was  made  vice-admiral  in  1793. As  a  deputy  to


the  constituent  assembly  his  political  influence  was
very  great,  for  a  time  during  the  French  revolution,
and  he  was  conspicuous  in  supporting  the  claims
for  political  rights  of  the  colored  population  of  the
French  colonies.  He  also  wrote  pamphlets  that
enjoyed  a  high  reputation.  When  the  reign  of  ter-
ror began  he  was  arrested,  and  after  a  mock  trial
sentenced  and  executed.  Among  his  works  the
best  known  is  "Opinion  et  projet  de  decret  sur
l'organisation  des  corsaires"  (Paris,  1792).

KERSHAW,  Joseph  Brevard,  soldier,  b.  in
Camden,  S.  C,  5  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  educated  at
academies  in  South  Carolina,  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1843,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate
in  1852-'7,  and  of  the  state  convention  of  1860.
He  raised  the  2d  South  Carolina  regiment  for  the
Confederate  army,  and  commanded  it  at  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Run  in  July.  1861.  He  was  made
brigadier-general,  13  Feb.,  1862,  commanded  a  bri-
gade in  McLaws's  division  through  the  peninsula
campaign  of  that  year,  and  afterward  held  the
sunken  road  at  Fredericksburg  against  the  assault
of  the  National  troops.  His  command  led  the
attack  of  Longstreet's  corps  at  Gettysburg,  where
he  lost  more  than  half  his  brigade.  After  en-
gaging in  the  battle  of  Chickamauga  and  the  siege
of  Knoxville.  he  returned  to  Virginia  in  1864  as
major-general,  and  commanded  a  division  in  the
final  campaigns  of  Lee's  army.  He  held  the  Na-
tional forces  in  check  at  Spottsylvania  until  the
arrival  of  Lee,  was  at  Cold  Harbor,  in  Early's  val-
ley campaign,  and  in  the  rear  of  Lee's  army  at
Sailor's  Creek,  where  he  surrendered  on  6  April,
1865.  He  was  then  imprisoned  at  Fort  Warren
till  July,  1865,  when  he  resumed  his  law-practice
in  Camden,  S.  C,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1865-'6.  serving  in  the  latter  year  as
president.  In  1870  he  prepared  for  the  conserva-
tive convention  the  resolutions  that  were  adopted
by  that  body,  recognizing  the  recent  constitutional
amendments  as  accomplished  facts  and  entitled  to
obedience.  In  1877  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  5th
circuit  of  the  state,  which  office  he  now  (1887)  holds.

KERVERSEAU,  Antoine  Nicolas,  Baron  de
(kair'-vair'-so).  French  soldier,  b.  in  Jeremie,  Santo
Domingo,  in  1751;  d.  in  Rochefort,  Fiance,  in
July,  1802.  He  studied  in  Le  Cap,  and  when
eighteen  years  of  age  was  commissioned  lieutenant
in  the  army  of  Santo  Domingo.  He  served  in  the
expedition  against  Tobago  in  1778,  and  in  1780  on
the  continent  under  Saint  Simon ;  was  present  at
Yorktown,  and  led  his  regiment  in  the  successful
assault  on  that  town,  where  he  was  wounded.  Re-
turning to  Santo  Domingo  at  the  conclusion  of
peace  in  1783,  he  took  command  of  the  district  of
baint  Marc.  At  the  time  of  the  French  revolu-
tion he  accepted  democratic  principles  and  afforded
valuable  aid  to  the  colonial  assembly  of  Santo
Domingo,  which  met  at  Saint  Marc,  25  March,
1790.  The  governor-general.  Marquis  de  Peynier,
ordered  Kerverseau  to  dissolve  the  assembly ;  but
the  latter  permitted  the  new  constitution  to  be
promulgated  in  May  following,  and,  on  his  repeated
refusal  to  interfere,  was  threatened  with  arrest.
He  then  sought  refuge  on  the  frigate  "  Leopard,"
and  sailed  for  France  to  seek  redress  before  the
National  assembly.  On  his  arrival  he  was  arrested,
but  liberated  in  1795,  and  served  under  Bonaparte
in  Italy.  When  the  first  consul  resolved  to  re-
conquer Santo  Domingo,  Kerverseau  asked  to
serve  in  the  expedition,  and  was  sent  to  subdue
the  Spanish  part  of  the  colony.  Marching  toward
Seybo,  he  took  Hato  Mayor,  and,  after  a  successful
engagement  with  the  negroes  at  Bayaguana,  ar-
rived, on  16  Feb.,  1802,  before  Santo  Domingo


528


KETCHAM


KEWLEY


The  city  after  some  resistance  fell  into  his  hands
on  20  Feb.,  1802,  and  he  immediately  assumed
command  of  the  province,  governing  with  such
severity  that  a  rebellion  spread  among  the  troops,
who  were  disappointed  in  their  hopes  of  pillage,
and  Gen.  Ferraud,  claiming  to  be  the  superior
officer,  deposed  Kerverseau,  imprisoned  him,  and
finally  sent  him  to  France,  where  he  died  a  few
days  after  his  arrival.  See  Hazard's  "  History
of  Santo  Domingo"  (New  York,  1875).

KETCHAM,  John  H.,  congressman,  b.  in  Dover,
Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  Dec,  1831.  He  received  a
good  education,  became  interested  in  agriculture,
and  in  1856-'7  was  a  member  of  the  state  assembly,
serving  in  the  senate  in  1860-'l.  He  became  colo-
nel of  the  150th  New  York  regiment  in  1862,  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  6  Dec,  1864,
and  major-general,  13  March,  1865,  and  received
the  full  commission  of  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers on  1  April.  He  resigned  to  take  his  seat  in
congress,  to  which  he  had  been  elected  as  a  Repub-
lican, and  served  from  1865  till  1873.  He  was  one
of  the  representatives  that  were  designated  by  the
house  to  attend  the  funeral  of  Gen.  S<jott  in  1866,
and  during  his  service  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittees on  expenditures  in  the  post-office  depart-
ment and  military  affairs.  In  1874-'7  he  was  one
of  the  commissioners  for  the  District  of  Columbia,
and  in  1876  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican
national  convention.  He  was  elected  again  to  con-
gress in  1876,  and  has  since  served  by  successive
re-elections. His  present  term  will  expire  in  1889.

KETCHAM,  Leander  Smith,  jurist,  b.  in
Marion,  "Wayne  co.,  N.  Y.,  31  Aug.,  1818;  d.  in
Clyde,  Wayne  co.,  N.  Y.,  27  March,  1870.  He
studied  law  while  supporting  himself,  and  in  1842
began  to  practise  in  Clyde.  In  1852-'60  he  was
surrogate  and  judge  of  probate,  and  afterward  en-
gaged in  agriculture.  Not  one  of  his  decisions  was
reversed  during  the  eight  years  of  his  service.
Judge  Ketcham  rendered  efficient  service  in  rais-
ing troops  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  a  member
of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1867.

KETCHUM,  Annie  Chambers,  poet,  b.  in  Scott
county,  Ky.,  8  Nov.,  1824.  She  was  educated  un-
der private  tutors,  and  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.
from  Georgetown  female  college.  Misfortune  made
it  necessary  for  her  to  support  herself,  and  in  1855-'8
she  became  principal  of  the  high-school  for  girls
in  Memphis,  Tenn.  In  1858  she  married  Leonidas
Ketchum,  who  died  from  wounds  that  he  received
at  Shiloh  in  1863  while  serving  as  a  Confederate
officer.  She  then  opened  a  normal  school  for  ad-
vanced pupils  in  Georgetown,  Ky.,  and  conducted
it  until  1866,  when  she  returned  to  Memphis  and
there  taught  until  1869.  Mrs.  Ketchum  is  known
as  a  teacher  of  elocution,  and  has  appeared  in  pub-
lic as  a  dramatic  reader  and  lecturer.  Among  her
best  known  poems  are  "  Benny  and  his  Kitten,"
"  Dolores,"  "  Semper  Fidelis,"  "  La  Notte,"  and
"  Christmas  Carillons."  These  have  appeared  both
in  southern  newspapers  and  as  special  contributions
to  the  larger  magazines.  In  1859  she  established
in  Memphis  "  The  Lotus,"  a  monthly  magazine,  but
abandoned  it  in  1861  in  consequence  of  the  civil
war.  Much  of  her  work  appeared  in  this  journal,
including  a  romance  entitled  "  Rilla  Motto,"  which
was  published  only  in  part.  She  has  also  made
translations  from  the  Latin,  German,  and  French,
including  M  Marcella,  a  Russian  Idyl "  (New  York,
1878).  Her  other  works  are  "  Nellie  Bracken,"  a
novel  (Philadelphia,  1855) ;  "  Benny :  A  Christmas
Ballad"  (New  York,  1869);  "Lotus  Flowers,"  a
collection  of  poems  (1878);  "The  Teacher's  Em-
pire," a  series  of  essays  on  pedagogy  contributed


to  educational  journals  in  1886;  and  "  Botany  for
Academies  and  Colleges  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).

KETCHUM,  William  Scott,  soldier,  b.  in  Nor-
folk, Conn.,  7  July,  1813;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  28
June,  1871.  His  father,  Daniel,  was  a  major  in
the  regular  army.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1834,  served  in  garrisons
on  the  frontier  and  in  the  war  against  the  Semi-
noles  in  Florida,  and  became  in  February,  1842,
a  captain  in  the  6th  infantry.  From  1842  till  1861
he  was  engaged  in  garrison  duty  on  the  western
frontier  and  Pacific  coast,  and  was  promoted  major
in  the  4th  infantry  in  June,  1860.  He  became
acting  inspector-general  of  the  Department  of  the
Missouri  in  March,  1861,  with  headquarters  at  St.
Louis.  In  February,  1862,  he  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  and  given  charge  of  the
organization  of  recruits  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  and
later  served  in  the  war  department.  During  the
latter  part  of  the  civil  war  he  was  connected  with
the  quartermaster's  department,  and  after  being
brevetted  major-general,  on  13  March,  1865,  he
was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service.  He
then  served  on  special  duty  in  the  adjutant-gener-
al's department  until  1870,  when  he  was  retired.

KETCHUM,  Winthrop  W.,  lawyer,  b.  in
Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  29  June,  1820 ;  d.  in  Pittsburg,
6  Dec,  1879.  He  received  an  academic  education,
and  for  four  years  taught  languages  and  mathe-
matics in  Wyoming  seminary.  Subsequently  he
studied  law,  and,  after  his  admission  to  the  bar
in  1850,  was  for  three  years  prothonotary  of  Lu-
zerne county.  He  became  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1858,  and  in  1859  of  the  state  senate,  was
solicitor  of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims  in  1864-'6,
and  then  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
serving  from  4  March,  1875,  till  3  March,  1877.
Later  he  received  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the
U.  S.  courts  for  the  western  district  of  Pennsyl-
vania, in  which  office  he  continued  until  his  death.

KETTELL,  Samuel,  editor,  b.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1800;  d.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  3  Dec,
1855.  Early  in  life  he  assisted  Samuel  G.  Good-
rich in  the  preparation  of  part  of  his  Peter  Parley
books,  one  of  which  he  translated  into  modern
Greek  for  amusement  while  on  a  voyage  to  Malta,
and  it  was  published  in  that  language.  He  be-
came an  accomplished  linguist,  although  self-
taught,  and  mastered  fourteen  different  languages.
His  humorous  contributions  to  the  Boston  "  Cou-
rier," under  the  pen-names  of  "  Peeping  Tom  "  and
"  Timothy  Titterwell,"  attracted  notice,  and  in
1848  he  became  principal  editor  of  that  paper,
holding  the  place  till  his  death.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in  1851-'3,
where,  as  a  member  of  the  committee  on  educa-
tion, he  wrote  an  elaborate  minority  report  against
the  proposed  introduction  of  the  study  of  "  pho-
notypy  "  into  the  public  schools,  and  secured  the
rejection  of  the  plan.  His  principal  work  is  "  Speci-
mens of  American  Poetry,  with  Critical  and  Bio-
graphical Notices,"  and  an  historical  introduction
(3  vols.,  Boston,  1829);  besides  which  he  pub-
lished "Personal  Narrative  of  the  First  Voyage
of  Columbus  "  (1827),  and  "  Records  of  the  Span-
ish Inquisition  "  (1828).

KEWLEY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  England
about  1770;  d.  in  Belgium  after  1816.  He  was
educated  at  Eton  and  Cambridge,  studied  medi-
cine, and  practised  his  profession  in  the  West  In-
dies. He  next  came  to  the  United  States,  where
he  studied  for  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church,  and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Claggett
in  1803.  He  was  stationed  at  Alleghany,  and  was
rector  at  Chester,  Md.,  in  1805. He  was  rector  in


KEY


KEY


529


Middletown,  Conn.,  from  1809  till  1813,  after  which
he  had  charge  of  St.  George's,  New  York  city.  He
joined  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  1816,  and
shortly  afterward  entered  a  religious  community
in  Belgium.  He  published  "  An  Enquiry  into  the
Validity  of  the  Methodist  Episcopacy,  with  an
Appendix  containing  Two  Original  Documents
never  before  Published.  By  an  Episcopalian  of
the  State  of  Maryland  "  (Wilmington,  1807).

KEY,  David  McKendree,  postmaster-general,
b.  in  Greene  county,  Tenn.,  27  Jan.,  1824.  His
father,  a  clergyman,  moved  to  Monroe  county  in
1826.  The  son  worked  on  a  farm  with  few  oppor-
tunities for  education  until  he  was  twenty-one.
He  then  entered  Hiwassee  college,  Tenn.,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1850,  and  in  that  year  was  also
admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1853  he  moved  to  Chatta-
nooga, where  he  has  since  resided.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1856  and  1860.  Although  he
opposed  secession,  he  yielded  to  the  action  of  his
state,  and  joined  the  Confederate  army  as  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  43d  Tennessee  infantry,  serving
throughout  the  war.  At  its  close  he  wrote  a  letter
to  Andrew  Johnson,  whose  supporter  he  had  been
before  the  war,  and  received  a  free  pardon.  In
1870  he  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional
convention  and  chancellor  of  the  third  division,
holding  the  latter  office  till  1875,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed by  Gov.  James  D.  Porter  U.  S.  senator  to
fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  Andrew
Johnson,  serving  from  6  Dec,  1875,  till  29  Jan.,
1877.  He  was  appointed  postmaster-general  in
President  Hayes's  cabinet  in  1877,  and  served  till
1880,  resigning  to  become  judge  of  the  eastern
and  middle  districts  of  Tennessee,  which  post  he
now  (1887)  holds.

KEY,  Philip  Barton,  lawver,  b.  in  Cecil  countv,
Md.,  in  1757;  d.  in  Georgetown.  D.  C,  28  July,
1815.  His  grandfather,  Philip  Key,  came  to  this
country  from  England  accompanied  by  Dryden,
brother  of  the  poet,  who  died  soon  after  his  arrival,
and  is  buried  on  Blakiston's  island  in  the  Potomac.
Mr.  Key  obtained  large  grants  of  land  in  St.
Mary's,  Cecil,  and  Frederick  counties,  Md.,  from
the  lords  proprietary  of  the  province,  and  also  left
property  in  England.  He  died  in  1764.  Philip
Barton  received  a  liberal  education  in  England,
and  entered  the  British  army  after  the  Declaration
of  Independence.  In  1778  he  held  a  commission
in  the  Maryland  loyalists'  regiment,  of  which  he
became  captain  in  1782,  and  went  with  his  troops
to  Jamaica.  He  served  in  Florida,  where  he  was
taken  prisoner,  and  upon  his  release  on  parole  went
to  England.  After  peace  was  declared  he  retired
on  half  pay,  and  in  1785  returned  to  Maryland,
settling  in  Annapolis  in  1790,  where  he  soon  at-
tained note  as  a  lawyer.  In  1794  he  was  elected  to
the  general  assembly,  in  which  he  continued  for
several  years.  He  removed  to  Georgetown  in  1801.
In  1807  he  made  a  formal  resignation  of  his  claims
to  the  British  government  in  a  letter  to  the  Brit-
ish minister  in  Washington.  He  was  elected  to
congress  in  1806  as  a  Federalist,  and  his  seat  was
contested,  partly  on  the  ground  that  he  was  not  a
citizen  of  Maryland.  On  this  occasion  he  said  in
a  speech,  "  I  had  returned  to  my  country  like  the
prodigal  to  his  father,  had  felt  as  an  American
should  feel,  was  received  and  forgiven,  of  which
the  most  convincing  proof  is — mv  election."  He
served  from  1807  till  1813.— Philip  Barton's  son,
Philip  Barton,  legislator,  b.  at  "  Woodley,"
Georgetown,  D.  C.,  2  Nov.,  1804 ;  d.  at  his  planta-
tion, Acadie,  near  Thibodaux,  La.,  4  May.  1854,
was  graduated  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  in  1823,  stud-
ied law  under  his  cousin,  Francis  Scott  Key,  and
vol.  m. — 34


practised  for  a  short  time  at  Annapolis,  Md.
He  went  to  Louisiana  in  1835,  and  engaged  in
planting.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
of  Louisiana,  and  of  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion in  1850. — The  first  Philip  Barton's  cousin,
Philip,  b.  in  St.  Mary's  county,  Md.,  in  1750;  d.
there,  4  Jan.,  1820,  received  a  collegiate  education
in  England,  and  devoted  himself  on  his  return  to
this  country  to  agriculture.  He  served  in  the
Maryland  house  of  representatives,  and  was  its
speaker  for  one  year.  He  was  elected  to  the  sec-
ond congress,  serving  from  24  Oct.,  1791,  till  2
March,  1793. — The  first  Philip  Barton's  nephew,
Francis  Scott,  author,  b.  in  Frederick  county,
Md.,  9  Aug.,  1780;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  11  Jan.,
1843,  was  the  son  of  John  Ross  Key,  a  Revolu-
tionary officer.  He  was  educated  at  St.  John's
college,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his  uncle,
Philip  Barton  Key,  and  began  to  practise  law  in
Frederick  City,  Md.,  but  subsequently  removed  to
Washington,  where  he  was  district  attorney  for  the
District  of  Columbia.  When  the  British  invaded
Washington  in  1814,  Ross  and  Cockburn  with
their  staff  officers  made  their  headquarters  in  Up-
per Marlboro,  Md.,  at  the  residence  of  a  planter,  Dr.
William  Beanes,  whom  they  subsequently  seized
as  a  prisoner.  Upon  hearing  of  his  friend's  cap-
ture, Key  resolved  to
release  him,  and  was
aided  by  President
Madison,  who  ordered
that  a  vessel  that  had
been  used  as  a  cartel
should  be  placed  at
his  service,  and  that
John  S.  Skinner, agent
for  the  exchange  of
prisoners,  should  ac-
company him.  Gen.
Ross  finally  consented
to  Dr.  Beanes's  release,
but  said  that  the  par-
ty must  be  detained
during  the  attack  on
Baltimore.  Key  and
Skinner  were  trans-
ferred to  the  frig-
ate "Surprise,"  com-
manded by  the  admi-
ral's son.  Sir  Thomas
Cockburn,  and  soon
afterward  returned
under  guard  of  Brit-
ish sailors  to  their  own  vessel,  whence  they  witnessed
the  engagement.  Owing  to  their  position  the  flag
at  Fort  McHenry  was  distinctly  seen  through  the
night  by  the  glare  of  the  battle,  but  before  dawn
the  firing  ceased,  and  the  prisoners  anxiously
watched  to  see  which  colors  floated  on  the  ram-
parts. Key's  feelings  when  he  found  that  the  stars
and  stripes  had  not  been  hauled  down  found  ex-
pression in  "The  Star-Spangled  Banner,"  which
gained  for  him  a  lasting  reputation.  On  arriving
in  Baltimore  he  finished  the  lines  which  he  had
hastily  written  on  the  back  of  a  letter,  and  gave
them  to  Capt.  Benjamin  Eades,  of  the  27th  Bal-
timore regiment,  who  had  participated  in  the  bat-
tle of  North  Point.  Seizing  a  copy  from  the  press,
Eades  hastened  to  the  old  tavern  next  to  the  Hol-
liday  street  theatre,  where  the  actors  were  accus-
tomed to  assemble.  Mr.  Key  had  directed  Eades
to  print  above  the  poem  the  direction  that  it  was
to  be  sung  to  the  air  "  Anacreon  in  Heaven."  The
verses  were  first  read  aloud  by  the  printer,  and
then,  on  being  appealed  to  by  the  crowd,  Ferdi-


530


KEY


KEYSER


nand  Durang  mounted  a  chair  and  sang  them  for
the  first  time.  In  a  short  period  they  were  familiar
throughout  the  United  States.  A  collection  of
Key's  poems  was  published  with  an  introductory
letter  by  Roger  B.  Taney  (New  York,  1857).  James
Lick  bequeathed  the  sum  of  $60,000  for  a  monu-
ment to  Key,  to  be  placed  in  Golden  Gate  park,
San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  it  was  executed  by  Will-
iam W.  Story  in  Rome  in  1885-'7.  The  height  of
this  monument  is  fifty-one  feet.  It  consists  of  a
double  arch,  under  which  a  bronze  figure  of  Key
is  seated.  It  is  surmounted  by  a  bronze  statue  of
America  with  an  unfolded  flag.  The  material  is
travertine,  a  calcareous  stone  of  a  reddish  yellow
hue,  extremely  porous,  but  of  great  durability. —
Francis  Scott's  grandson,  John  Ross,  artist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  16  July,  1837,  studied  art  in  Mu-
nich and  Paris  for  several  years,  after  which  he
removed  to  Chicago,  and  then  to  Boston,  where  he
exhibited  about  one  hundred  of  his  pictures,  in-
cluding "  Marblehead  Beach,"  "  Ochre  Point,  New-
port," "  Morning  Stroll,"  and  a  view  of  "  The  Gold-
en Gate,  San  Francisco,"  for  which  he  received  a
medal  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  of  1876.  His
"  Cloudy  Morning,  Mount  Lafayette,"  was  at  the
National  academy,  New  York,  in  1878.  He  has
been  successful  in  his  works  in  black  and  white.

KEY,  Thomas  Marshall,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Ky.,  8  Aug.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Lebanon,  Ohio,  15
Jan.,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1838,
studied  law,  and  settled  in  practice  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio.  For  many  years  he  served  in  the  Ohio  sen-
ate, where  he  had  much  influence.  He  at  first  op-
posed the  civil  war,  but  afterward  actively  supported
the  government,  and  was  sent  by  Gov.  William  Den-
nison  as  a  commissioner  to  Gov.  Beriah  Magoffin,  of
Kentucky,  to  persuade  him  not  to  aid  the  Confed-
erates. He  served  upon  the  staff  of  Gen.  McClellan,
and  after  the  war  took  an  active  part  in  Ohio  poli-
tics. He  was  the  author  of  the  first  congressional
bill  for  the  emancipation  of  slaves  in  any  part  of
the  United  States,  and  wrote  the  bill  for  the  eman-
cipation of  slaves  in  the  District  of  Columbia.

KEYES,  Emerson  Willard,  lawyer,  b.  in
Jamestown,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  June,  1828.
He  was  graduated  at  the  State  normal  school,
Albany,  in  1848,  and  engaged  in  teaching  for  sev-
eral years.  He  was  deputy  superintendent  of  pub-
lic instruction  of  New  York  in  1857-'65,  and  act-
ing superintendent  in  1861-'2,  during  which  time
he  was  instrumental  in  organizing  teachers'  insti-
tutes. After  studying  law,  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Albany  in  i862.  In  1865  he  was  appointed
deputy  superintendent  of  the  banking  department
of  New  York  state,  serving  till  1870,  and  was  also
acting  superintendent  in  1865-'6,  exercising  great
influence  on  the  present  system  of  banking.  From
1870  till  1873  he  was  state  bank  examiner,  and
from  1879  till  1883  practised  law  in  New  York
city,  and  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  bar  asso-
ciation. He  is  now  (1887)  connected  with  the
board  of  education  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  as  exam-
iner of  legal  papers  and  questions  relative  to  the
laws  of  education,  etc.  He  has  published  "  New
York  Court  of  Appeals  Reports  "  (4  vols.,  Albany,
1867-'9) ;  "  History  of  Savings-Banks  in  the  United
States"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1876-'8);  and  "New
York  Code  of  Public  Instruction  "  (Albany,  1879).

KEYES,  Erasmus  Darwin  (keeze),  soldier,  b.
in  Brimfield,  Mass.,  29  May,  1810.  He  removed
to  Kennebec  county,  Me.,  in  youth,  and  was  ap-
pointed from  that  state  to  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, where  he  was  graduated  in  1832.  He  was
assigned  to  the  3d  artillery,  served  in  Charleston
harbor  during  the  nullification  troubles  of  1832-'3,


and  in  1837-41  was  aide  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.
He  became  captain,  30  Nov.,  1841,  served  in  garri-
son till  1844,  and  then  as  instructor  of  artillery
and  cavalry  at  West  Point  till  1848,  after  which
he  was  again  on  frontier  and  garrison  duty  till
1860.  During  this  time  he  commanded  a  battery
of  artillery  against  hostile  Indians  in  the  north-
west, took  part  in  several  engagements,  and  was
promoted  major  on  12  Oct.,  1858.  He  was  mili-
tary secretary  to  Gen.  Scott  from  1  Jan.,  1860,  till
19  April,  1861,  on  14  May  became  colonel  of  the
11th  infantry,  and  on  17  May  was  made  brigadier"
general  of  volunteers.  He  was  in  New  York  and
Boston,  despatching  and  recruiting  troops,  till  3
July,  and  then  served  in  the  defences  of  Washing-
ton, in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  in  the  penin-
sula campaign,  commanding  the  4th  corps  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  from  March,  1862,  and  being
promoted  to  major-general  of  volunteers  on  5  May.
He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in  the  regular
army  on  31  May  for  his  conduct  in  the  battle  of
Fair  Oaks.  He  organized  a  raid  to  White
House,  Va.,  7  Jan.,  1863,  commanded  the  expe-
dition to  West  Point,  Va.,  on  7  May,  and  was
engaged  in  another  under  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  to-
ward Richmond  in  June  and  July.  He  served  on
the  board  for  retiring  disabled  officers  from  15
July,  1863,  till  6  May,  1864,  when  he  resigned,  and
removed  to  California.  He  was  president  of  the
Mexican  gold-mining  company  in  1867-'9,  and
vice-president  of  the  California  vine-culture  soci-
ety in  1868-72.  Gen.  Keyes  has  published  " Fifty-
Years'  Observation  of  Men  and  Events"  (New
York,  1884). — His  son,  Edward  Lawrence,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  28  Aug.,  1843,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1863,  and  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  New  York  in
1866,  and,  after  eighteen  months  of  study  in  Eu-
rope, settled  in  practice  in  New  York  city.  He
became  lecturer  on  dermatology  in  Bellevue  hos-
pital medical  college  in  1871,  was  made  professor
of  that  branch  in  1872,  and  since  1875  has  been
also  adjunct  professor  of  surgery.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  various  medical  societies,  connected  with
several  hospitals,  and  besides  papers  has  published
"  Genito-Urinary  Diseases  with  Syphilis "  with
Prof.  William  H.  Van  Buren  (New  York,  1874) ;
"  Tonic  Treatment  of  Syphilis  "  (1877) ;  "  Venereal
Diseases  "  (1880) ;  and  an  article  on  "  Urinary  Cal-
culus "  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  "  International
Encyclopedia  of  Surgery  "  (1886).

KEYL,  Ernst  Gerhard  Wilhelm,  clergyman,
b.  in  Leipsic,  Germany.  22  May,  1804 ;  d.  in  Mon-
roe, Mich.,  4  Aug.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at
Leipsic  in  1829.  and,  after  holding  Lutheran  pas-
torates, came  to  this  country  in  1847,  and  officiated
successively  in  Missouri,  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  Balti-
more, Md.,  and  Wiltshire,  Ohio.  For  many  years
he  was  president  of  the  eastern  district  of  the  Mis-
souri synod,  of  which  he  was  a  founder.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Lutherophilus  "  (St.  Louis,  1854) ;
"  Katechismus-Auslegung  aus  Dr.  Luther's  Schrif-
ten"  (4  vols,,  1853-'68);  and  "  Predigt-Entwurfe
liber  die  Sonn  und  Festtags-Evangelien  aus  Dr.
Luther's  Predigten"  (1866).  His  biography  was
published  by  Rev.  J.  F.  Kostering  (St.  Louis,  1882).

KEYSER,  .Ephraim,  sculptor,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  6  Oct.,  1850.  He  was  educated  at  Baltimore
city  college,  and  studied  art  in  the  Maryland
academy  of  arts  in  1871-'2.  He  went  to  Munich
in  1872  and  studied  under  Prof.  Widmann  in  the
Royal  academy,  remaining  there  until  1876,  when
he  removed  to  Berlin,  and  entered  the  studio  of
Prof.  Albert  Wolff,  under  whose  tuition  he  modelled
a  figure  of  Psyche,  for  which  he  gained  the  Michael-


KEYSER


KIDD


531


Beer  prize,  enabling  him  to  spend  a  year  in  Italy
at  the  government's  expense.  He  also  received  a
silver  medal  for  a  statuette  in  1876.  He  now
(1887)  resides  in  Germany,  but  frequently  visits
this  country.  He  has  made  numerous  portrait
busts,  which  include  those  of  Cardinal  Gib-
bons and  Sidney  Lanier.  His  principal  works
are  "Toying  Page,"  "The  Pet  Falcon,"  "Ti-
tania,"  "Psyche,"  "Ye  Old  Storye,"  and  the  De-
Kalb  monument  in  Annapolis,  Md.  (1883).  This
was  modelled  twice,  the  first  figure  having  fallen
while  he  was  altering  its  pose.

KEYSER,  Peter  Dirck,  surgeon,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  8  Feb.,  1835.  He  studied  at  Dela-
ware college  until  1851,  when  he  entered  the  chemi-
cal laboratory  of  Prof.  Frederick  A.  Genth,  and
there  made  analyses  of  minerals,  the  results  of
which  were  published  in  the  "  American  Journal
of  Science,"  and  were  afterward  incorporated  in
Dana's  "  Mineralogy."  In  1856  he  went  to  Ger-
many and  pursued  professional  studies  for  two
years.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  became  captain  in  the  91st  Pennsylvania  regi-
ment, and  served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
until  after  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks.  Failing  health
then  led  to  his  resignation,  and  he  returned  to
Germany,  where  he  studied  at  the  University  of
Munich,  and  then  at  that  of  Jena,  receiving  there
the  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1864.  On  his  return  he  was
appointed  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.
army,  and  was  detailed  to  the  Cuyler  hospital  in
Germantown,  Pa.  In  1865  he  resigned  from  the
service  to  enter  on  his  private  practice,  and  was
called  to  the  charge  of  the  Philadelphia  eye  and
ear  infirmary.  In  1868  he  delivered  a  course  of
lectures  to  physicians  upon  the  accommodation
and  refraction  of  the  eye,  and  in  1870  he  delivered
the  first  regular  course  of  clinical  lectures  on
ophthalmology  that  ever  was  given  in  Philadel-
phia, repeating  the  course  in  1871-'2.  Dr.  Keyser
was  elected  ophthalmic  surgeon  to  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  Philadelphia  German  society  in
1870,  and  one  of  the  surgeons  to  the  Wills  ophthal-
mic hospital  in  1872.  Dr.  Keyser  is  a  member  of
medical  societies  and  of  the  Pennsylvania  histori-
cal society,  and  he  has  been  a  contributor  of
medical  papers  to  the  journals  of  his  profession
both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.

KIDD,  William,  navigator,  b.  in  Scotland,
probably  in  Greenock ;  d.  in  London.  England,  24
May,  1701.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  son
of  a  non-conformist  clergyman  who  suffered  tor-
ture by  the  boot,  and  who  died.  14  Aug.,  1679.
Young  Kidd  went  to  sea  at  a  very  early  age,  and
in  the  latter  part  of  the  17th  century  he  had  ac-
quired a  reputation  as  a  bold,  skilful,  and  success-
ful captain.  He  had  fought  against  the  French,
had  performed  some  daring  exploits,  had  done
good  service  in  the  American  colonies,  and  in  1691
had  received  from  the  council  of  the  city  of  New
York  an  award  of  £150.  In  those  days  piracy  on
the  high  seas  prevailed  to  an  alarming  extent,
especially  in  the  Indian  ocean.  It  was  claimed  that
many  of  the  freebooters  came  from  America,  where
also  they  found  a  ready  market  for  their  spoils.
When,  in  1695,  Richard"  Coote,  Earl  of  Bellomont
(g.  v.),  who  had  been  appointed  governor  of  Xew
York  and  Massachusetts,  was  about  to  set  out  for
his  new  post,  King  William,  in  an  interview  with
him,  referred  in  strong  terms  to  the  piracy  that
had  become  the  disgrace  of  the  colonies.  "  I  send
you,  my  lord,  to  New  York,"  said  the  king,  "  be-
cause an  honest  and  intrepid  man  is  wanted  to  put
down  these  abuses,  and  because  I  believe  you  to  be
such  a  man." It  was  soon  known  at  New  York


that  the  new  governor  was  bent  on  the  suppression
of  piracy ;  and  some  of  the  more  prominent  colo-
nists, among  them  Robert  Livingston,  promptly
came  to  his  aid.  Kidd,  who  had  acquired  a  com-
petency, was  now  living  in  retirement  in  New  York,
and  was  well  known  to  Livingston  and  other  citi-
zens. It  was  suggested  to  the  governor  that  if
such  work  was  to  be  done,  Kidd  was  the  man  to  do
it.  He  had  all  the  requisite  qualifications — skill,
courage,  large  and  widely  extended  naval  experi-
ence, and  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  haunts  of
the  pirates,  "who  prowled  between  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope  and  the  Straits  of  Malacca";  and,
what  was  of  equal  importance,  he  was  willing  to
undertake  the  task.  With  a  single  ship  of  thirty
or  forty  guns  he  believed  himself  able  to  sweep
the  whole  race  of  pirates  from  the  ocean.  Bello-
mont was  pleased  with  the  suggestion,  and  made  it
known  to  the  king.  It  was  referred  to  the  admi-
ralty, who  raised  objections;  but  Bellomont  was
resolute.  A  private  company  was  organized,  in-
cluding Lord  Shrewsbury,  Lord  Romney,  Lord
Orford,  first  lord  of  the  admiralty,  and  Somers,
keeper  of  the  great  seal ;  £6,000  were  subscribed,
the  "  Adventure,"  a  galley  of  287  tons,  with  30  guns,
was  equipped  in  London,  and  Kidd  was  placed  in
command.  According  to  the  arrangement,  one
tenth  of  the  booty  was  to  be  set  aside  for  the  king,
and  was  to  be  put  into  the  treasury,  and  the  re-
mainder was  to  be  divided  among  the  share-holders,
the  captain,  and  the  crew.  Besides  the  ordinary
letters  of  marque,  Kidd  carried  with  him  two  com-
missions under  the  great  seal — one  authorizing
him  to  act  against  the  French,  and  another  em-
powering him  to  seize  pirates,  and  to  take  them  to
some  place  where  they  might  be  dealt  with  accord-
ing to  law.  Failing  to  find  his  full  complement  of
hands  in  England,  he  sailed  from  Plymouth,  23
April,  1696,  and  visited  New  York,  where  he  found
volunteers  in  abundance.  On  his  way  across  the
Atlantic,  when  off  Newfoundland,  he  captured  a
French  ship,  arriving  with  his  prize  at  New  York
early  in  July.  On  6  Sept.,  with  a  crew  of  154  men,
he  sailed  from  Hudson  river,  and  in  January,  1697,
reached  the  coast  of  Madagascar,  then  the  great
rendezvous  of  the  buccaneers.  It  seems  doubtful
whether  Kidd  meant  to  play  a  game  of  deception
from  the  first.  The  probability  is  that  he  set  out
with  honest  intentions,  but  he  shared  the  opinions
regarding  piracy  that  were  common  at  that  time
in  the  colonies,  and  it  was  so  also  with  his  crew.
To  a  man  of  easy  morals  the  temptation  was
strong.  In  any  case,  it  soon  began  to  be  rumored
that  Kidd  was  also  among  the  pirates,  and  on  23
Nov.,  1698,  orders  were  sent  to  all  the  governors
of  English  colonies  to  apprehend  him  if  he  came
within  their  jurisdiction.  In  April,  1699.  he  ar-
rived in  the  West  Indies  in  a  vessel  called  the
"  Quidah  Merchant,"  secured  her  in  a  lagoon  on  the
island  of  Saona,  southeast  of  Hayti,  and  then  in  a
sloop  called  "  San  Antonio,"  of  55  tons  and  about
40  men,  sailed  for  the  north.  Entering  Dela-
ware bay,  he  sailed  up  the  coast  to  Long  Island
sound,  and  went  into  Oyster  bay.  There  he  took
on  board  a  New  York  lawyer.  James  Emott,  and,
running  across  to  Rhode  Island,  he  sent  Emott  to
Boston  to  consult  Bellomont  as  to  a  safe  conduct.
Bellomont  was  evasive,  but  finally  Kidd  was  en-
couraged to  go  to  Boston,  where  he  arrived,  1  July,
1699.  Finally  it  was  deemed  necessary  to  summon
him  before  the  council,  and,  as  his  answers  to  ques-
tions were  not  satisfactory,  he  was  arrested,  and
ultimately,  with  several  of  his  men,  sent  to  Eng-
land. He  was  charged  not  only  with  piracy,  but
with  burning  houses,  massacring  peasantry,  brutal-


532


KIDDER


KIDDOO


ly  treating  prisoners,  and  particularly  with  mur-
dering one  of  his  men,  William  Moore.  Kidd  had
called  Moore  a  dog.  "  Yes,  I  am  a  dog,"  replied
Moore,  "but  it  is  you  that  have  made  me  so,"
whereupon  Kidd,  in  a  frenzy  of  rage,  struck  him
down  with  a  bucket,  killing  him  instantly.  It  was
not  found  possible  to  bring  home  the  charge  of

Siracy,  but  he  was  found  guilty  of  the  murder  of
[oore,  and  on  24  May,  1701,  he  was  hanged,  with
nine  of  his  accomplices,  at  Execution  dock,  Lon-
don. Kidd  protested  his  innocence  to  the  last.  He
claimed  that  he  had  been  coerced  by  his  men,  and
that  Moore  was  mutinous  when  he  struck  him,
and  there  are  many  who  are  of  the  opinion  that  his
trial  was  high-handed  and  unfair.  Bellomont  sent
a  vessel  in  search  of  the  "  Quidah  Merchant,"  but
it  was  found  that  it  had  been  burned  by  the  men
that  Kidd  had  left  in  charge.  Kidd  had  taken  ad-
vantage of  Emott's  absence  on  his  mission  to  Bos-
ton to  bury  several  bales  of  goods  and  some  treas-
ure on  Gardiner's  island.  This  was  recovered  and
taken,  with  that  which  was  found  in  Kidd's  pos-
session and  on  the  "  San  Antonio  " — gold  and  sil-
ver and  jewels,  with  bags  of  sugar  and  other  mer-
chandise ;  the  whole  amounted  to  £14,000.  Natu-
rally enough,  Kidd's  conduct  brought  all  his  friends
into  serious  trouble.  It  was  charged  by  their  po-
litical opponents  that  Bellomont,  Romney,  Somers,
and  the  others  had  a  guilty  knowledge  of  his  de-
signs, and  that  they  had  hoped  to  share  the  profits.
Their  participation  in  the  enterprise  was  made  the
subject  of  parliamentary  inquiry,  but  the  result
was  a  complete  vindication  of  the  men  that  had
fitted  out  the  privateer.

KIDDER,  Daniel  Parish,  clergyman,  b.  in
Darien,  Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  Oct.,  1815.  He  was
graduated  at  Wesleyan  university  in  1836,  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
and  was  stationed  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.  In  1837  he
went  as  missionary  to  Brazil,  and  during  1839  he
traversed  the  eastern  coast  from  San  Paolo  to  Para.
He  introduced  and  circulated  the  Scriptures  in
Portuguese  in  the  principal  cities  of  the  empire,  and
preached  the  first  Protestant  sermon  on  the  waters
of  the  Amazon.  He  returned  to  the  United  States
in  1840,  and  was  stationed  in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  in
1841  and  in  Trenton  in  1843.  In  1844  he  was  ap-
pointed official  editor  of  Sunday-school  publica-
tions and  tracts  in  charge  of  the  Methodist  book
concern,  which  post  he  held  for  twelve  years,  organ-
izing the  conference  Sunday-school  unions,  conven-
tions, and  institutes,  editing  the  "  Sunday-School
Advocate  "  and  more  than  800  books,  and  preparing
the  standard  catechisms  of  the  church.  He  was
professor  of  practical  theology  in  Garrett  biblical
institute,  Evanston,  111.,  from  1856  till  1871,  when
he  was  called  to  a  similar  chair  in  Drew  theologi-
cal seminary,  Madison,  N.  J.  From  1881  till  1887
he  was  secretary  of  the  board  of  education.  His
publications  are  "Mormonism  and  the  Mor-
mons "  (New  York,  1842) ;  a  translation  from  the
Portuguese  of  Diego  A.  Feijo,  entitled  "  Demon- '
stration  of  the  Necessity  of  abolishing  a  Con-
strained Clerical  Celibacy  "  (Philadelphia,  1844 ) ;
"  Sketches  of  a  Residence  and  Travels  in  Brazil  "
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1845 ;  2d  ed.,  London,  1849 ;
8th  ed.,  Boston,  1868);  "Brazil  and  the  Brazil-
ians," with  Rev.  James  C.  Fletcher  (Philadelphia,
1857;  6th  ed.,  Boston,  1866);  "Treatise  on  Homi-
letics  "  (New  York,  1864 ;  revised  ed.,  1868) ;  "  The
Christian  Pastorate"  (Cincinnati,  1871);  and
" Helps  to  Prayer"  (New  York,  1874).

KIDDER,  Frederic,  author,  b.  in  New  Ipswich,
N.  H.,  16  April,  1804;  d.  in  Melrose,  Mass.,  19
Dec,  1885. His  ancestors  came  from  England


and  settled  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1650,  and  his
grandfather,  Reuben  Kidder,  was  one  of  the  pur-
chasers of  New  Ipswich  from  the  proprietors.  His
father,  Isaac  Kidder,  is  said  to  have  been  among
the  first  to  introduce  merino  sheep  into  New
Hampshire,  and  was  one  of  the  first  manufacturers
of  cotton  in  this  country.  His  early  death  left  his
family  so  reduced  that  this  son  was  forced  to  leave
his  studies  and  to  aid  in  its  support.  He  became
a  clerk  in  Boston,  and  after  a  few  years  went  to
the  south,  where  he  engaged  in  business  with  his
brother  Edward.  In  about  eight  years  he  returned
to  Boston  and  entered  into  the  West  India  trade,
and  in  1840  engaged  in  the  southern  commission
business,  which  he  continued  for  six  years.  In
1854  he  removed  to  New  York  and  engaged  in
business  with  James  R.  Gilmore,  returning  to  Bos-
ton in  1857  and  renewing  his  partnership  with
Benjamin  F.  Copeland,  which  he  had  dissolved  in
1861.  In  1869  he  removed  to  Melrose,  where  he
aided  in  erecting  a  Unitarian  church,  and  was
active  in  establishing  a  public  library.  He  was
one  of  the  first  members  of  the  "  Roundabout
club,"  and  a  member  of  the  New  England  historic-
genealogical  society,  contributing  to  its  "Regis-
ter." He  was  an  antiquarian  of  authority,  and
gave  much  attention  to  the  history  of  the  New
England  Indians,  particularly  to  their  language
and  religion.  He  published,  with  Augustus  A.
Gould,  "  The  History  of  New  Ipswich.  N.  H.,  from
its  First  Grant  in  1736  to  1852  "  (Boston,  1852),
and  was  the  author  of  "  The  Expeditions  of  Capt.
John  Lovewell  "  (1865) ;  "  Military  Operations  in
Eastern  Maine  and  Nova  Scotia  during  the  Revo-
lution "  (Albany,  1867) ;  "  History  of  the  First  New
Hampshire  Regiment  in  the  War  of  the  Revolu-
tion "  (1868) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Boston  Massa-
cre, 5  March,  1770  "  (1870).

KIDDLE,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Bath,  Eng-
land, 15  Jan.,  1824.  He  came  as  a  boy  to  New
York  city,  where  he  studied  under  private  tutors
and  at  the  normal  school.  In  1843  he  was  made
principal  of  a  ward  school,  but  two  years  later
resigned  to  take  charge  of  one  connected  with
the  Leake  and  Watts  home.  In  1846-'56  he  was
principal  of  a  grammar-school,  and  he  was  then
appointed  deputy  superintendent  of  common
schools  in  New  York  city.  He  was  made  super-
intendent in  1870,  but  resigned  in  1879,  owing  to
an  adverse  public  sentiment  created  by  his  avowal
of  a  belief  in  spiritualism.  Mr.  Kiddle  received
the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Union  college  in  1848,
and  that  of  "  officier  d'academie  "  from  the  Uni-
versity of  France  in  1878.  He  has  published  in
pamphlet-form  various  addresses  on  education,
modern  spiritualism,  and  religious  topics.  He
edited  several  revisions  of  Goold  Brown's  "  Eng-
lish Grammar"  (last  ed.,  New  York,  1882)  and
other  school  text-books,  including  a  "  Text-Book
of  Physics  "  (1883),  and  has  written  "  A  Manual  of
Astronomy  and  the  Use  of  the  Globes"  (1882);
"New  Elementary  Astronomy"  (1868);  "Cyclo-
paedia of  Education  "  (1877), '  with  Alexander  J.
Schem ;  "  Year  Books  of  Education,  1878-'9,"  and
"  Spiritual  Communications  "  (1879).

KIDDOO,  Joseph  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania about  1840;  d.  in  New  York  city,  19  Aug.,
1880.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  en-
listed as  a  private  in  the  2d  Pennsylvania  volun-
teers, and  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Yorktown
and  in  the  battles  of  Williamsburg,  Fair  Oaks,  and
Malvern  Hill.  He  was  promoted  major  of  the  101st
Pennsylvania  volunteers,  and  engaged  in  the  bat-
tles of  South  Mountain,  Antietam,  and  Fredericks-
burg, and  served  as  colonel  at  Chancellorsville. In


I


K1DERLEX


KIEFT


533


October,  1863,  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  6th
and  in  June,  1864,  colonel  of  the  22d  U.  S.  colored
troops,  being  present  at  the  siege  of  Petersburg
with  the  Army  of  the  James.  He  was  severely
wounded  in  October,  1864.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  and  major-general  of  U.  S.  vol-
unteers, and  colonel  and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.
army.  On  28  July,  1866,  he  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  43d  U.  S.  infantry,  but  owing
to  his  wounds  he  was  unable  to  serve,  and  he  was
retired  on  15  Dec,  1870,  with  the  full  rank  of
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army.

KIDERLEN,  William  Ludwig  Joseph,  au-
thor, b.  in  Ulra,  Wiirtemberg,  Germanv,  in  1813 ;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  July,  1877.  He  was
educated  at  the  gymnasium  in  Ulm,  and  came  to
this  country  in  1836.  He  served  in  the  state  de-
partment in  Washington,  was  U.  S.  consul  to
Stuttgart,  and  subsequently  to  Zurich,  and  from
1860  till  1871  was  consul  of  Wiirtemberg  at  Phila-
delphia, where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He
was  the  editor  of  several  German  newspapers  in
this  country,  including  the  Philadelphia  "Stadt-
post "  and  the  Cincinnati  "  Republikaner,"  and
published  "  Deutsche  Grammatik "  (Philadelphia,
1837);  "Geographie  und  Geschichte  der  Vereinigten
Staaten"  (1838);  and  "Advice  to  Emigrants."

KIDWELL,  Zedekiah,  physician,  b.  in  Fair-
fax county,  Va.,  4  Jan.,  1814;  d.  in  Fairmount,
Va.,  27  April,  1872.  He  was  educated  by  his
father,  who  was  a  civil  engineer,  and  also  studied
at  Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadelphia,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1839.  After  practising  for
several  years  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1849,  and  practised  in  Fairmount,  Va.  He
served  in  the  state  house  of  representatives,  was  a
delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
1849,  and  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Pierce  and
King  ticket  in  1852.  He  was  a  representative  in
congress  from  1853  till  1857,  having  been  chosen
as  a  Democrat,  and  was  then  elected  one  of  the
three  commissioners  that  formed  the  Virginia
board  of  public  works,  serving  for  several  years.
From  1861  until  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  held  a
civil  office  near  Richmond.

K1EFER,  Herman,  physician,  b.  in  Salzburg.
Baden,  Germany,  19  Nov.,  1825.  He  was  educated
at  Freiburg,  Mannheim,  and  Carlsruhe,  and  studied
medicine  at  Freiburg,  Heidelberg,  Prague,  and
Vienna,  being  graduated  by  the  state  board  of  ex-
aminers at  Carlsruhe.  He  served  as  surgeon  in
the  volunteer  regiment  of  Emmendingen  during
the  revolution  of  1849,  taking  part  in  the  battle  of
Philippsburg  and  Upstadt.  He  came  to  this  coun-
try in  September,  1849,  and  settled  in  Detroit,
where  he  has  since  practised  medicine.  He  has
been  actively  interested  in  German-American  af-
fairs, and  was  a  founder  of  the  German-American
seminarv,  of  which  he  was  president  and  treasurer
from  1861  till  1872.  In  1866-'7  he  was  a  member
of  the  Detroit  board  of  education,  and  in  1882  he
became  a  member  of  the  public  library  commis-
sion, being  re-elected  in  1883  for  a  term  of  six
years,  and  adding  to  the  library  a  large  collection
of  German  works.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Ger-
man Republican  executive  committee  of  Utica  in
1854,  a  presidential  elector  in  1872,  and  a  delegate
to  the  Republican  national  convention  of  Cincin-
nati in  1876.  In  1883  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Arthur  U.  S.  consul  to  Stettin,  which  office
he  held  till  he  resigned  in  1885.  He  prepared
valuable  articles,  which  were  published  in  the
U.  S.  consular  reports,  and  include  "  American
Trade  with  Stettin,"  "How  Germany  is  Gov-
erned," and  "  Labor  in  Europe."


KIEFFER,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Letter-
kenny,  Franklin  co..  Pa.,  5  May,  1814.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Marshall  college,  Pa.,  in  1839,  and  ordained
to  the  ministry  of  the  German  Reformed  church.
He  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Reformed  church  in
Hagerstown,  Md.,  from  1840  till  1850,  when  he
was  called  to  found  and  build  the  2d  Reformed
church  in  Reading,  Pa.  In  1855  he  became  presi-
dent of  Heidelberg  college,  Tiffin,  Ohio,  which
post  he  held  till  1864,  serving  as  professor  in  the
theological  department  from  1855  till  1867.  After
holding  pastorates  in  Sandusky,  Ohio,  and  in
Greencastle,  Pa.,  he  became  connected  with  a
church  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  of  which  he  is  now
(1887)  pastor.  The  publications  of  his  church
were  under  his  care  from  1848  till  1863,  and  he
has  contributed  to  religious  periodicals.

KIEFT,  Wilhelm,  governor  of  New  Nether-
lands, b.  in  Holland  about  1600;  d.  off  the  coast
of  Wales  in  1647.  He  was  the  fifth  Dutch  gov-
ernor of  New  Netherlands,  and  was  coldly  re-
ceived on  his  arrival  there  in  "  The  Herring."  28
March,  1638.  It  was  said  that  he  had  failed  in
the  mercantile  business  in  Holland,  and  had  been
hanged  in  effigy,  which  was,  in  the  Dutch  estima-
tion, a  lasting  disgrace.  Subsequently  he  had
been  sent  by  the  government  as  minister  to  Turkey,
and  intrusted  with  money  to  procure  the  ransom
of  Christians  that  were  held  in  bondage ;  but
these  captives  were  left  in  their  chains,  and  the
money  never  refunded.  Kieft  was  energetic,  but
spiteful  and  rapacious,  and  utterly  ignorant  of  the
true  principles  of  government.  He  began  his  ad-
ministration by  concentrating  all  executive  power
in  his  own  hands,  with  one  councillor,  Dr.  Johannes
La  Montague.  He  found  New  Amsterdam  in  a
wretched  condition,  and  said  in  his  first  letter  to
Holland,  "  The  fort  is  open  at  every  side,  except
the  stone  point ;  the  guns  are  dismounted ;  the
houses  and  public  buildings  are  all  out  of  repair;
the  magazine  for  merchandise  has  disappeared  ;
every  vessel  in  the  harbor  is  falling  to  pieces  ;  only
one  wind-mill  is  in  operation ;  the  farms  of  the
company  are  without  tenants  and  thrown  into
commons."  Kieft  began  his  reformatory  work  by
pasting  proclamations  upon  the  trees  and  fences.
He  ordered  that  no  attestations  or  other  public
writings  should  be  valid  before  a  court  in  New
Netherlands  unless  they  were  written  by  the  colo-
nial secretary.  He  improved  the  appearance  of
the  town,  and  selected  Pearl  street,  then  a  simple
road  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  for  the  best  class  of
dwellings.  A  wind-mill  stood  on  State  street,  and
not  far  from  it  were  the  bakery,  the  brewery,  and
the  company's  warehouse.  He  repaired  Fort  Am-
sterdam, and  erected  a  private  distillery  on  Staten
island  in  1640,  which  produced  the  first  beer  that
was  ever  made  in  this  country;  but  he  forbade
"the  tapping  of  beer  during  divine  service,  and
after  one  o'clock  at  night."  He  prohibited  illegal
traffic  and  the  selling  of  guns  or  powder  to  the
Indians,  and  enforced  police  ordinances,  ordering
the  town-bell  to  be  rung  every  evening  at  nine
o'clock  to  announce  the  hour  for  retiring,  every
morning  and  evening  to  call  persons  to  and  from
labor,  and  on  Thursdays  to  summon  prisoners  to
court.  To  promote  agriculture  he  established  two
annual  cattle-fairs,  and  caused  orchards  to  be
planted  and  gardens  cultivated.  Owing  to  the
growth  of  the  town  and  the  increasing  number  of
travellers,  he  concluded  to  erect  a  public-house.
A  clumsv  stone  tavern  was  completed  in  1642  on
the  corner  of  Pearl  street  and  Coenties  slip,  front-
ing East  river.  He  was  also  active  in  the  erection
of  the  stone  church  in  the  fort,  and  caused  a  mar-


534


KIERNAN


KILLEN


ble  slab  to  be  placed  in  the  front  wall  with  the
inscription  "  Anno  Domini,  1642.  Wilhelm  Kieft,
Directeur  General,  Heeft  de  Gemeente  Desen  Tem-
pel  Doen  Bonwen."  This  slab  was  discovered  bur-
ied in  the  earth  when  the  fort  was  demolished  in
1687  to  make  room  for  the  government  house,  and
removed  to  the  belfry  of  the  old  Dutch  church  in
Garden  street,  where  it  remained  until  that  church
was  burned  in  1835.  In  after  years,  Kieft  absented
himself  from  service,  and  ordered  soldiers  to  prac-
tise noisy  amusements  under  the  church  win-
dows, owing  to  an  allusion  that  Dominie  Bogardus
had  made  to  his  despotism.  A  more  liberal  policy
in  respect  to  the  ownership  of  land  caused  emi-
gration to  increase,  the  only  obligation  required
from  foreigners  being  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  the
states-general  of  Holland.  Although  his  measures
of  reform  were  of  lasting  benefit  to  the  colony,
Kieft's  government  was  marked  by  such  bold
tyranny,  and  his  petty,  irritable  nature  found  vent
in  such  cruelty,  that  he  was  detested  by  the  peo-
ple. The  encroachments  of  the  Puritans  on  the
east  and  the  Swedes  on  the  Delaware  gave  Kieft
much  concern,  and  he  wrote  of  them  to  the  com-
pany, who  deemed  Sweden  too  powerful  to  attack.
Kieft's  maltreatment  of  the  Indians  caused  retalia-
tion on  their  part,  and  in  1641  the  governor  called
an  assembly  of  the  "  masters  and  heads  of  families  "
in  the  town  to  co-operate  with  the  council.  Twelve
men  were  chosen,  and  this  was  the  first  representa-
tive assembly  in  New  Netherlands.  The  assembly,
on  their  third  session,  in  February,  1642,  devised
a  plan  for  a  municipal  government  in  New  Am-
sterdam, whereupon  Kieft  was  alarmed,  dissolved
the  assembly,  and  forbade  its  reorganization.  In
the  winter  of  1643  Kieft  made  an  attack  at  Hobo-
ken  on  the  Mohawk  Indians,  who  had  made  a  de-
scent to  collect  tribute  from  the  river  tribes.  The
Long  Island  tribes  now  took  up  arms,  and  for  a
time  the  Dutch  colony  was  threatened.  The  colo-
nists finally  petitioned  for  Kieft's  recall,  and  cele-
brated his  departure  with  salutes.  He  sailed  for
Holland  on  16  Aug.,  1647,  in  the  ship  "  Princess,"
with  more  than  $100,000.  The  vessel  was  wrecked
on  the  coast  of  Wales,  and  Dominie  Bogardus,
Kieft,  and  81  others  were  drowned.

KIERNAN,  James  Lawlor,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city  in  1837 ;  d.  there,  26  Nov.,  1869.
He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  New  York  in  1857,  became  a  teacher  in
the  public  schools  of  New  York,  and  was  editor  of
the  "Medical  Press"  in  that  city  from  1859  till
1861,  when  he  volunteered  as  assistant  surgeon  in
the  69th  New  York  regiment.  He  subsequently
became  surgeon  of  the  6th  Missouri  cavalry,  serv-
ing with  Fremont  in  Missouri  and  at  the  battle  of
Pea  Ridge ;  but  he  resigned  in  1863,  owing  to  severe
wounds  that  he  received  near  Port  Gibson,  where
he  was  captured,  but  escaped.  He  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  1  Aug.,  1863,  but
his  resignation  was  accepted  to  take  effect  3  Feb.,
1864,  and  his  name  was  not  sent  to  the  senate  for
confirmation.  He  served  as  surgeon  of  the  U.  S.
pension  bureau,  and  after  the  war  became  U.  S.
consul  to  Chin  Kiang,  China.

KILBOURNE,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  New
Britain,  Conn.,  19  Oct.,  1770 ;  d.  in  Worthington,
Ohio,  9  April,  1850.  While  apprenticed  to  a  farmer
he  was  instructed  in  the  classics  and  mathematics
by  the  son  of  his  employer.  He  became  a  mechanic,
subsequently  acquired  a  competence  as  a  merchant
and  manufacturer,  and  about  1800  took  orders  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In  1801  he  or-
ganized the  Scioto  company,  and  in  the  following
year  emigrated  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  100  persons


to  Ohio.  They  settled  in  1803  in  a  place  that  was
afterward  called  Worthington.  There  he  organized
St.  John's  and  other  parishes,  and  at  the  general
convention  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  pro-
cured the  establishment  of  a  western  diocese.  He
retired  from  the  ministry  in  1804,  and  in  1805  was
appointed  by  congress  surveyor  of  public  lands.
He  was  a  trustee  of  Ohio  college,  Athens,  one  of
the  commissioners  to  locate  Miami  university,  and
for  thirty-five  years  president  of  the  trustees  of
Worthington  college.  In  1812  he  was  appointed
by  the  president  on  the  commission  to  settle  the
boundary  between  the  public  lands  and  the  Virginia
reservation.  He  was  also  colonel  of  the  frontier
regiment.  He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress
from  Ohio  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from  24  May,
1813,  till  3  March,  1817.  The  proposition  to  grant
lands  in  the  northwest  territory  to  actual  settlers
originated  with  him,  and  as  chairman  of  a  select
committee  he  drew  up  a  bill  for  that  purpose.  He
was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1823,  and  again  in
1828. — His  nephew,  John,  author  and  publisher,
b.  in  Berlin,  Conn.,  7  Aug.,  1787;  d.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  12  March,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  Ver-
mont university  in  1810,  and  was  for  several  years
principal  of  Worthington  college,  Ohio.  Subse-
quently he  became  a  bookseller  and  publisher  in
Columbus,  Ohio.  He  published  a  "  Gazetteer  of
Vermont,"  a  "Gazetteer  of  Ohio"  (1816),  a  map
of  Ohio,  a  volume  of  "  Public  Documents  concern-
ing the  Ohio  Canals"  (Columbus,  1832),  and  a
"  School  Geography."

KILBOURNE,  Payne  Kenyon,  author,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  26  July,  1815 ;  d.  there,  19  July,
1859.  He  learned  the  printer's  trade,  assisted  in
publishing  a  literary  paper  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
and  was  afterward  owner  and  editor  of  the  Litch-
field "Enquirer"  from  1845  till  1853.  In  1857
he  was  private  secretary  to  Gov.  Alexander  H.
Holley.  Mr.  Kilbourne  was  an  enthusiastic  stu-
dent of  local  history,  and  wrote  both  in  prose
and  verse.  He  published  "  The  Skeptic  and  Other
Poems  "  (1843) ;  "  History  of  the  Kilbourne  Family,
from  1635  to  the  Present  Time  "  (Hartford,  1845) ;
"  Biographical  History  of  the  County  of  Litchfield  "
(New  York,  1851);  and  "Sketches  and  Chronicles
of  the  Town  of  Litchfield,"  which  was  put  in  type
entirely  by  himself  (Hartford,  1859).  He  also  com-
piled and  arranged  the  appendices  to  Hollister's
"History  of  Connecticut  '  (2  vols.,  New  Haven,
1855),  and  prepared  most  of  the  notes  for  that  work.

KILBURN,  Charles  Lawrence,  soldier,  b.  in
Lawrence ville,  Tioga  co.,  Pa.,  9  Aug.,  1819.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1842  and  appointed  a  lieutenant  of  artillery,
served  in  the  occupation  of  Texas  and  the  Mexican
war.  doing  good  service  at  Monterey  and  Buena
Vista,  and  after  the  war  became  captain  and  com-
missary of  subsistence.  He  was  promoted  major
on  11  May,  1861,  made  lieutenant-colonel  and  as-
sistant commissary-general  on  9  Feb.,  1863,  colonel
on  29  June,  1864,  and  served  as  chief  commissary
of  various  departments.  At  the  close  of  the  civil
war  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  After  the
war  he  served  as  chief  commissary  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Atlantic,  and  then  of  the  military
division  of  the  Pacific  until  he  was  retired  on  20
May,  1882.

KILLEN,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1722  ;  d.  in  Dover,  Del.,  3  Oct.,  1805.  He  came  to
this  country  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  found  a  home
with  the  father  of  John  Dickinson,  acquired  a  clas-
sical education,  and  held  the  office  of  county
surveyor  for  several  years.  Subsequently  he  studied
law,  and  obtained  a  large  practice,  especially  in


KILPATRICK


KILTY


535


land-suits.  For  many  years  he  was  a  member  of
the  Delaware  assembly,  and  he  took  an  active  part
in  the  Revolutionary  contest.  In  1776  he  was  ap-
pointed the  first  chief  justice  of  Delaware,  and
held  that  office  till  1793,  when  he  was  made  chan-
cellor. In  1801  he  retired  from  the  bench.

KILPATRICK,  Hugh  Judson,  soldier,  b.  near
Deckertown,  N.  J.,  14  Jan.,  1836 ;  d.  in  Valpa-
raiso, Chili,  4  Dec,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1861,  was  appointed
a  captain  of  volunteers  on  9  May,  promoted  1st
lieutenant  of  artillery  in  the  regular  army  on  14

May,  1861,  and  was
wounded  at  Big
Bethel  and  disabled
for  several  months.
In  August,  1861,  he
assisted  in  raising
a  regiment  of  New
York  cavalry,  of
which  he  was  made
lieutenant  -  colonel .
He  went  to  Kansas
in  January,  1862,
in  order  to  accom-

Eany  Gen.  James  H.
lane's  expedition
to  Texas  as  chief  of
artillery.  On  the
abandonment  of
the  expedition  he
rejoined  his  regi-
ment in  Virginia,
and  was  engaged  in  skirmishes  near  Falmouth,  the
movement  to  Thoroughfare  Gap,  raids  on  the  Vir-
ginia Central  railroad  in  July,  1862,  various  skir-
mishes in  the  northern  Virginia  campaign,  and  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  In  an  expedition  to
Leesburg  on  19  Sept.,  1862,  he  commanded  the
cavalry  brigade.  After  several  months  of  absence
on  recruiting  service,  during  which  he  became
colonel,  he  returned  to  the  field,  and  commanded
a  brigade  of  cavalry  in  the  Rappahannock  cam-
paign, being  engaged  in  Stoneman's  raid  toward
Richmond,  and  in  the  combat  at  Beverly  Ford.
He  was  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  13  June,  1863,  and  commanded  a  cavalry  divis-
ion in  the  latter  part  of  the  Pennsylvania  cam-
paign. He  was  in  command  at  the  battle  of  Aldie,
and  was  brevetted  for  bravery  on  that  occasion.
He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  earning
there  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  U.  S.
army,  and  in  the  subsequent  pursuit  of  the  enemy
was  engaged  in  constant  fighting  at  Smithsburg,
Hagerstown,  Boonsborough,  and  Falling  Waters.
In  the  operations  in  central  Virginia,  from  August
till  November,  1863,  he  commanded  a  cavalry  divis-
ion, and  took  part  in  an  expedition  to  destroy  the
enemy's  gunboats  "  Satellite  "  and  "  Reliance  "  in
Rappahannock  river,  the  action  at  Culpeper  on  13
Sept.,  and  the  subsequent  skirmish  at  Somerville
Ford,  the  fights  at  James  City  and  Brandy  Station,
and  in  the  movement  to  Centreville  and  the  action
of  19  Oct.  at  Gainsville.  In  March,  1864,  he  was
engaged  in  a  raid  toward  Richmond  and  through
the  peninsula,  in  which  he  destroyed  much  prop-
erty and  had  many  encounters  with  the  enemy,  be-
f  inning  with  the  action  at  Ashland  on  1  March.  In
[ay,  1864,  he  took  part  in  the  invasion  of  Georgia
as  commander  of  a  cavalry  division  of  the  Army  of
the  Cumberland,  and  was  engaged  in  the  action  at
Ringgold  and  in  the  operations  around  Dalton
until,  on  13  May,  he  was  severely  wounded  at  the
battle  of  Resaca.  His  injuries  kept  him  out  of  the
field  till  the  latter  part  of  July,  when  he  returned


to  Georgia,  and  was  engaged  in  guarding  the  com-
munications of  General  Sherman's  army,  and  in
making  raids,  which  were  attended  with  much
severe  fighting.  He  displayed  such  zeal  and  con-
fidence in  destroying  the  railroad  at  Fairburn  that
Sherman  suspended  a  general  movement  of  the
army  to  enable  him  to  break  up  the  Macon  road,
in  the  hope  of  thus  forcing  Hood  to  evacuate  At-
lanta. Kilpatrick  set  out  on  the  night  of  18  Aug.,
1864,  and  returned  on  the  22d  with  prisoners  and
a  captured  gun  and  battle-flags,  having  made  the
circuit  of  Atlanta,  torn  up  three  miles  of  railroad
at  Jonesborough,  and  encountered  a  division  of
infantry  and  a  brigade  of  cavalry.  In  the  march
to  the  sea  he  participated  in  skirmishes  at  Walnut
Creek,  Sylvan  Grove,  Rocky  Creek,  and  Waynes-
borough.  In  the  invasion  of  the  Carolinas  his  di-
vision was  engaged  at  Salkehatchie,  S.  C,  on  3
Feb.,  1865,  near  Aiken  on  11  Feb.,  at  Monroe's  Cross
Roads,  N.  G,  on  10  March,  near  Raleigh  on  12
April,  at  Morristown  on  13  April,  and  in  other  ac-
tions and  skirmishes.  He  was  brevetted  colonel
for  braverv  at  Resaca.  promoted  captain  in  the  1st
artillery  oh  30  Nov.,  1864,  and  on  13  March,  1865,
received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  for  the
capture  of  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  and  that  of  major-
general  for  services  throughout  the  Carolina  cam-
paign. He  commanded  a  division  of  the  cavalry
corps  in  the  military  division  of  Mississippi  from
April  to  June,  1865,  was  promoted  major-general
of  volunteers  on  18  June,  1865,  and  resigned  his
volunteer  commission  on  1  Jan.,  1866.  lie  was  a
popular  general,  inspiring  confidence  in  the  soldiers
under  his  command,  and  gained  a  high  reputation
as  a  daring,  brilliant,  and  successful  cavalry  leader.
He  resigned  his  commission  in  the  regular  army  in
1867.  In  1865  he  had  been  appointed  minister  to
Chili  by  President  Johnson,  and  he  was  continued
in  that  office  by  President  Grant,  but  was  recalled
in  1868.  He  then  devoted  himself  chiefly  to  lec-
turing, and  took  an  active  interest  in  politics  as  an
effective  platform  speaker  on  the  Republican  side.
In  1872  he  supported  Horace  Greeley,  but  returned
to  his  former  party  in  1876,  and  in  1880  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  congress  in  New  Jersey.
In  March,  1881,  President  Garfield  appointed  him
again  to  the  post  of  minister  to  Chili.  During
his  last  diplomatic  mission  he  had  a  conflict  with
Stephen  A.  Hurlbut,  U.  S.  minister  to  Peru,  and
disregarded  Sec.  Blaine's  instructions  to  interfere
in  behalf  of  the  Calderon  government  in  the  latter
country.  His  remains  were  brought  from  Chili  for
burial  "in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,  in  October,  1887.  See
"Kilpatrick  and  our  Cavalry,"  by  John  Moore
(New  York,  1865).

KILTY,  Augustus  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  25  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  Baltimore,
10  Nov.,  1879.  He  was  appointed  a  midshipman  in
1821,  served  on  the  "  Franklin  "  and  the  "  Consti-
tution," became  a  passed  midshipman  on  28  April,
1832,  was  in  the  West  Indies  for  the  next  three
years,  and  then  on  shore  duty  till  he  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant  on  6  Sept.,  1837.  Afterward  he
was  sent  to  the  East  Indies.  He  also  served  in
the  Mediterranean,  in  Brazil,  and  on  the  coast  of
Africa,  was  commissioned  commander  on  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  in  1861  was  ordered  to  St.  Louis  to  or-
ganize the  Mississippi  flotilla.  He  commanded  the
gun-boat  "  Mound  City  "  at  Island  No.  10  and  at
Fort  Pillow,  where  his  vessel  was  sunk,  but  was
afterward  raised  and  repaired.  In  June,  1862,  he
commanded  an  expedition  to  White  river,  Ark.,
and  on  17  June  he  attacked  and  captured  Fort  St.
Charles  with  the  support  of  a  land  force.  Near
the  close  of  this  action  he  lost  over  one  hundred


536


KIMBALL


KIMBALL


of  his  crew  by  an  explosion,  caused  by  a  shot
which  entered  the  steam  drum,  and  was  himself  so
badly  scalded  that  the  amputation  of  his  left  arm
was  necessary.  He  received  his  commission  as
captain  on  16  July,  1862,  was  made  a  commodore
on  25  July,  1866,  and  commanded  the  Norfolk
navy-yard  till  1870,  when  he  was  retired  from  ac-
tive* service  with  the  rank  of  rear-admiral.

KIMBALL,  Edgar  Allison,  soldier,  b.  in  Pem-
broke, N.  H.,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  Suffolk,  Va.,  12  April,
1863.  He  was  trained  as  a  printer,  and  became
the  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  "  Age,"  a  liberal
Democratic  newspaper  published  at  Woodstock,
Vt.  He  was  appointed  a  captain  of  infantry  in
the  U.  S.  army  on  9  April,  1847,  and  served  till  his
regiment  was  disbanded  on  26  Aug.,  1848,  earning
the  brevet  of  major  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco.
He  was  the  first  man  to  scale  the  walls  of  Chapul-
tepec,  and  received  the  surrender  of  the  castle  from
Gen.  Bravo.  After  his  return  he  was  for  some
time  employed  in  the  office  of  a  New  York  journal.
In  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  joined  a  New
York  regiment  of  zouaves,  and  was  commissioned
major  of  volunteers  on  13  May,  1861.  At  the
battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C,  on  7  Feb.,  1862,
he  carried  the  enemy's  works,  and  on  14  Feb.  he
was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  soon  after-
ward succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  regiment.
He  participated  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Macon,
and  in  the  battles  of  Antietam  and  Fredericks-
burg. While  the  regiment  was  encamped  at  Suf-
folk he  was  killed  by  Col.  Michael  Corcoran,  who,
according  to  one  account,  was  kept  back  while
passing  through  the  lines  on  urgent  business,  and
shot  the  officer  who  detained  him.  Another  ver-
sion is,  that  Corcoran  either  mistook,  or  pretended
to  mistake,  the  rival  leader  for  an  assassin.

KIMBALL,  Gilman,  surgeon,  b.  at  Hill,  N.  H.,
8  Dec,  1804.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at
Dartmouth  in  1827,  and  practised  for  a  short  time
at  Chicopee,  Mass.  He  then  visited  Europe,  at-
tended clinics  in  Paris,
and  in  1830  settled  in
Lowell,  Mass.  He  was
elected  professor  of  sur-
gery in  Vermont  medi-
cal college,  Woodstock,
in  1844,  and  in  Berk-
shire medical  college,
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  the
year  following,  but
subsequently  resigned
both  professorships  in
order  to  assume  the  di-
rection of  the  Lowell
hospital,  which  was  es-
tablished by  the  pro-
prietors of  factories  in
that  town  for  the  bene-
fit of  the  operatives.
He  served  for  four
months  as  brigade  sur-
geon under  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  in  the  be-
f inning  of  the  civil  war,  and  at  Annapolis  and
'ortress  Monroe  superintended  the  organization
of  the  first  military  hospitals  that  were  established
for  National troops. In 1882  Dr.  Kimball  was

E resident  of  the  American  gynecological  society.
>uring  his  surgical  practice,  extending  over  nearly
sixty  years,  he  performed  many  successful  opera-
tions. He  has  contributed  to  medical  literature
papers  on  gastrotomy,  ovariotomy,  uterine  extirpa-
tion, and  the  treatment  of  fibroid  tumors  by  elec-
tricity, and  was  the  first  practically  to  illustrate
the  value  of  the  latter  method.


KIMBALL,  Harriet  McEwen,  poet,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  2  Nov.,  1834.  Her  works  con-
sist chiefly  of  religious  lyrics.  She  has  published
several  volumes,  including  "  Hymns "  (Boston,
1867);  "Swallow  Flights  of  Song"  (New  York,
1874);  and  "The  Blessed  Company  of  all  Faith-
ful People"  (New  York,  1879).

KIMBALL,  Heber  Chase,  Mormon  leader,  b.
in  Sheldon,  Franklin  co.,  Vt.,  14  June,  1801 ;  d.  in
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  22  June,  1868.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  worked  in  his  father's
blacksmith-shop  in  West  Bloomfield,  N.  Y.,  after-
ward learned  the  potter's  trade  with  a  brother,  pur-
chased the  business,  and  carried  it  on  for  ten
years  in  Mendon,  Monroe  co.,  N.  Y.  He  married
at  the  age  of  twenty-one.  On  15  April,  1832,  he
was  baptized  into  the  church  of  the  Latter  Day
Saints  in  Victor,  N.  Y.,  being  ordained  an  elder  by
Joseph  Smith  in  1832,  and  was  chosen  one  of  the
twelve  Mormon  apostles  on  14  Feb.,  1835.  In  the
autumn  of  1838  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the
troops,  but,  not  being  so  well  known  in  Missouri  as
the  other  leaders,  was  released  with  Brigham
Young,  and  with  him  led  the  Mormons  into  Illinois,
where  they  established  their  church  at  Commerce,
and  afterward  at  Nauvoo.  He  went  with  Young
on  a  mission  to  England,  and  remained  nearly
two  years,  returning  in  the  summer  of  1841.  He
left  Nauvoo  on  17  Feb.,  1846,  after  the  exodus
had  begun,  and  was  one  of  the  pioneer  band  that
encamped  in  the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake  on
24  July,  1847.  In  the  autumn  he  returned  to  the
winter-quarters  on  the  Missouri  river  to  assist  in
the  next  season's  emigration.  On  27  Dec,  1847,
he  was  chosen  to  be  a  counsellor  of  Brigham  Young
in  the  presidency  of  the  Mormon  church.

KIMBALL,  Increase,  inventor,  b.  in  Concord,
N.  H.,  26  Oct.,  1777 ;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  16  Sept.,
1856.  He  learned  the  tinman's  trade,  and  fol-
lowed it  in  Hanover.  About  1804  he  invented  cut
nails,  and  devised  the  first  machinery  for  their
manufacture.  He  refused  a  large  sum  for  the
patent,  but  never  profited  by  it,  because  the  man-
ufacture was  carried  on  with  improved  machinery,
under  patents  that  were  obtained  by  others,  fn
later  life  religious  excitement  affected  his  mind.

KIMBALL,  James  Putnam,  geologist,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  26  April,  1836.  He  was  educated
at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  the
universities  of  Berlin  and  Gottingen,  and  the  Frei-
berg school  of  mining.  Subsequently  he  fol-
lowed a  practical  course  in  engineering,  mining,
and  metallurgy  at  Freiberg,  Saxony.  On  his
return  to  the  United  States  he  became  connected
with  the  state  geological  surveys  of  Wisconsin
and  Illinois.  He  was  professor  of  chemistry  and
economic  geology  at  the  New  York  state  agri-
cultural college  at  Ovid  in  1861-2,  and  then  be-
came assistant  adjutant-general  of  volunteers,  with
the  rank  of  captain.  In  this  capacity  he  served
during  the  civil  war  as  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.
Marsena  R.  Patrick,  participating  in  the  cam-
paigns of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  after-
ward served  on  the  general  staff  under  McClellan,
Burnside,  Hooker,  and  Meade,  successively.  Fail-
ing health  led  to  his  resignation  from  the  army  in
1863,  and  then  making  New  York  city  his  residence
he  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  In
1874  he  became  honorary  professor  of  geology  at
Lehigh  university,  and  thenceforth  'until  1885  re-
sided in  Bethlehem,  Pa.  He  was  appointed  in
June,  1885,  director  of  the  U.  S.  mint,  at  the  head
of  the  bureau  in  Washington,  under  the  control  of
which  all  the  mints  and  assav-offices  of  the  United
States  were  placed  in  1873. Dr.  Kimball  is  a  mem-


KIMBALL


KIMBERLY


537


ber  of  scientific  societies,  and  was  vice-president  of
the  American  institute  of  mining  engineers  in
1881-'2.  His  publications,  mostly  on  geological
and  metallurgical  subjects,  have  been  contributed
to  American  and  foreign  technical  journals,  and
also  include  his  official  reports  to  the  National
government  as  director  of  the  mint.

KIMBALL,  James  William,  author,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  4  Feb.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,
28  March,  1885.  He  entered  Yale  with  a  view  to
studying  for  the  ministry,  but  feeble  health  obliged
him  to  leave,  and,  after  a  visit  to  Europe  in  1835,
he  devoted  himself  to  commercial  pursuits.  Dur-
ing the  intervals  of  active  business  he  wrote  on
religious  subjects,  publishing  about  fifty  tracts,
and  in  book-form  "  Heaven,  my  Father's  House  "
(Boston,  1857);  "Friendly  Words  with  Fellow-
Pilgrims  "  (1867) ;  "  Encouragements  to  Faith "
(1873);  "How  to  see  Jesus"  (1877);  and  "The
Christian  Ministry  "  (1884).

KIMBALL,  Joseph  Horace,  author,  b.  in
Pembroke,  N.  H.,  in  1813;  d.  in  Pembroke,  N.  H.,
11  April,  1838.  He  resided  in  Concord,  N.  H.,
where  he  edited  "  The  Herald  of  Freedom,"  an  anti-
slavery  journal.  After  a  visit  to  the  West  India
islands  he  published  jointly  with  two  friends
"  Emancipation  in  the  West  Indies :  a  Six  Months'
Tour  in  Antigua,  Barbadoes,  and  Jamaica  in  1837  "
(New  York,  1838).

KIMBALL,  Nathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Indiana.
He  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  captain  of  vol-
unteers, and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
was  appointed  colonel  of  a  regiment  of  Indiana
infantry.  He  took  part  in  operations  in  Cheat
Mountain  in  September,  and  at  the  battle
of  Greenbrier  in  October,  1861,  commanded  a
brigade  at  the  battle  of  Winchester,  and  was  com-
missioned as  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
15  April,  1862.  At  Antietam  his  brigade  held  its
ground  with  desperate  courage,  losing  nearly  six
hundred  men.  At  Fredericksburg  he  was  wounded
in  the  thigh.  Subsequently  Gen.  Kimball  served
in  the  west,  commanding  a  division  at  the  siege  of
Vicksburg  in  June  and  July,  1863,  and  at  the  bat-
tle of  Franklin  on  30  Nov.,  1864.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  on  1  Feb.,  1865,  and  mustered  out
of  the  service  on  24  Aug.,  1865.

KIMBALL,  Richard  Burleigh,  author,  b.  in
Plainfield,  N.  H.,  11  Oct.,  1816.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1834,  studied  law,  and  in  1836
went  to  Paris,  continuing  his  studies  in  the  uni-
versity there.  On  his  return  he  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Waterford,
N.  Y.,  and  afterward
in  New  York  city.  He
founded  the  town  of
Kimball, in  Texas, and
built  the  first  railroad
that  was  constructed
in  that  state,  running
from  Galveston  to
Houston  and  beyond,
of  which  he  was  presi-
dent from  1854  till
1860.  In  1873  he
received  from  Dart-
mouth the  degree  of
LL.  D.  He  has  pub-
lished in  magazines
many  tales,  sketches
of  travel,  and  essays
on  biographical,  his-
torical, and  financial  subjects.  Of  his  books  four
have  been  translated  into  Dutch,  and  several  into
French  and  German. They  include  "  Letters  from


/f.  /i^U-t^-tZ^G


England  "  (New  York,  1842) ;  "  St.  Leger,  or  the
Threads  of  Life,"  a  novel  that  had  previously  ap-
peared in  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "  (1850) ;
"Cuba  and  the  Cubans"  (1850);  "Letters  from
Cuba  "  (1850) ;  "  Romance  of  Student  Life  Abroad  "
(1852) ;  "  Lectures  before  the  Law  Institute  of  New
York  City"  (1853) :  "  Undercurrents  of  Wall  Street"
(1861) ;  "  In  the  Tropics,  by  a  Settler  in  Santo  Do-
mingo," edited  (1862) ;  "  Was  he  Successful  %  "  a  nov-
el (1863) ;  "  The  Prince  of  Kashna,"  a  West  Indian
story,  edited  (1864) ;  "  Henry  Powers,  Banker,  and
how  he  Achieved  a  Fortune  and  Married  "  (1868) ;
"  To-Day  in  New  York  "  (1870) ;  and  "  Stories  of
Exceptional  Life  "  (1887).  He  was  also  an  editor
of  the  "  Knickerbocker  Gallery  "  (New  York,  1853).

KIMBALL,  Sunnier  Increase,  general  super-
intendent of  the  U.  S.  life-saving  service,  b.  in  Leb-
anon, York  co..  Me.,  2  Sept.,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Bowdoin  in  1855,  studied  law  with  his  fa-
ther, was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858,  and  began
practice  at  North  Berwick,  Me.  In  1859  he  sat  in
the  legislature,  and,  though  the  youngest  member,
took  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings,  serving  on
the  committee  on  the  judiciary.  In  January,  1861,
he  became  a  clerk  in  the  treasury  department  at
Washington.  He  rose  to  be  chief  clerk  in  the  sec-
ond auditor's  office,  and  in  1871  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  revenue  marine  service,  which  he  re-
organized and  reformed,  greatly  reducing  the  ex-
penses of  maintenance,  while  increasing  its  effi-
ciency more  than  fivefold.  While  retaining  this
post  he  acted  during  the  secretaryship  of  Lot  M.
Morrill  in  1876-'7  as  chief  clerk  of  the  treasury  de-
partment, after  twice  declining  a  regular  appoint-
ment to  that  office.  When  Kimball  was  made  chief
of  the  revenue  marine  division,  there  were  several
buildings  on  the  coasts  of  New  Jersey  and  Long
Island  in  which  were  stored  surf-boats  and  simple
appliances  for  the  use  of  fishermen  and  wreckers
in  the  rescue  of  shipwrecked  persons.  The  keepers
of  these  stations  were  scarcely  more  than  mere
custodians  of  the  government  property,  and  had
generally  been  appointed  on  political  grounds.
During  the  winter  of  1870-'l  there  had  occurred
several  fatal  disasters  on  these  coasts,  and  when
Mr.  Kimball  assumed  office  he  made  a  tour  of  in-
spection, and  found  that  the  stations  were  in  a
dilapidated  condition,  the  keepers  negligent  and
incapable,  and  the  whole  service  inefficient.  Con-
gress appropriated  $200,000  for  fitting  out  and
manning  the  stations,  and  the  service  was  reorgan-
ized by  Mr.  Kimball  so  thoroughly  that  during
the  following  winter  every  person  who  was  im-
perilled by  shipwreck  on  those  coasts  was  rescued.
The  number  of  stations  was  increased,  life-saving
crews  and  modern  appliances  were  provided  for  all
of  them,  the  incapable  keepers  were  supplanted  by
expert  surfmen  without  regard  to  politics,  and  the
patrol  system  for  constantly  watching  the  entire
coast  was  introduced.  The  success  of  the  life-sav-
ing service  during  the  first  year  caused  it  to  be  ex-
tended in  1872  to  Cape  Cod,  and  afterward  to  other
parts  of  the  Atlantic  coast.  In  1878  the  life-saving
service  was  organized  as  a  separate  bureau,  with
Mr.  Kimball  at  its  head,  and  stations  were  estab-
lished on  the  Pacific  coast  and  on  the  Great  Lakes.

KIMBERLY,  Lewis  Ashfleld,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  2  April,  1830.  He  was  appointed
a  midshipman  in  the  navy  from  Illinois,  8  Dec,
1846,  commissioned  lieutenant  in  1855,  and  lieu-
tenant-commander, 16  July,  1862.  He  served  on
the  frigate  "  Potomac  "  of  the  Western  Gulf  block-
ading squadron  in  1861-'2.  and  on  the  "  Hartford  "
in  1862-'4,  taking  part  in  all  the  engagements
in  which  that  vessel  participated. Capt.  Percival


538


KINCAID


KING


Drayton,  in  his  official  report  of  the  battle  of
Mobile  bay,  said :  "  To  Lieut.-Com.  Kimberly,  the
executive  officer,  I  am  indebted  not  only  for  the
fine  example  of  coolness  and  self-possession  which
he  set  to  those  around  him,  but  also  for  the  excel-
lent condition  to  which  he  had  brought  everything
belonging  to  the  fighting  department  of  the  ship,
in  consequence  of  which  there  was  no  confusion
anywhere,  even  when,  from  the  terrible  slaughter
at  some  of  the  guns,  it  might  have  been  looked
for."  Kimberly  was  commissioned  commander,
25  Julv,  1866;  captain,  3  Oct.,  1874:  commodore,
27  Sept.,  1884;  and  rear-admiral,  26  Jan.,  1887.
He  was  on  shore  duty  from  1878  till  1887,  when
he  was  ordered  from  the  command  of  the  Boston
navy-yard  to  that  of  the  Pacific  station.

KINCAID,  Eugenio  (kin-kade'),  missionary,  b.
in  Westfield,  Conn.,  in  1798 ;  d.  in  Girard,  Kan.,
3  April,  1883.  He  was  one  of  five  students  that
formed  the  first  class  in  Madison  university,  and
became  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Galway,
N.  Y.,  subsequently  removing  to  Milton,  Pa.  In
1830  he  was  appointed  a  missionary  to  Burmah,
where  he  labored  with  success  at  Rangoon,  Ava,
and  Prome.  In  1842  he  returned  to  this  country,
and  spent  twelve  years  in  home  work,  devoting  a
portion  of  his  time  to  raising  the  endowment  of  the
university  at  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  but  his  efforts  were
chiefly  directed  to  the  development  of  a  missionary
spirit  in  the  churches.  In  1854  he  again  visited
Burmah,  and  labored  at  Prome  until  compelled  by
his  wife's  impaired  health  to  return  to  the  United
States  in  1865.  See  "  The  Hero  Missionarv,"  by
Rev.  Alfred  S.  Patton,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1858).

KINCAID,  John,  lawyer,  b.  near  Danville,  Ky.,
15  Feb.,  1791 ;  d.  7  Feb.,  1873.  He  was  repeatedly
elected  to  the  legislature,  was  commonwealth's
attorney,  was  in  congress  from  1829  till  1833,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  and  an  elector  on
the  Clay  ticket  in  1844.  He  was  an  ardent  friend
and  admirer  of  Henry  Clay,  and  enjoyed  to  a
large  degree  his  intimate  confidence.  He  was  over
six  feet  two  inches  in  height,  erect  in  carriage,
spare  and  sinewy,  but  graceful  in  action.  His
social  qualities  made  him  widely  popular.  He
held  high  rank  as  a  lawyer,  and  was  effective  as  a
public  speaker. — His  grandson,  Charles  K  a  si  on,
journalist,  b.  in  Danville,  Ky.,  in  1855,  was  gradu-
ated at  Centre  college  in  1878,  took  charge  of  the
"  Anderson  News  "  at  Lawrenceburg,  and  was  elect-
ed county  judge  the  next  year.  Resigning,  he  was
reporter  and  correspondent  of  the  "  Courier-Jour-
nal," at  Frankfort,  and  was  then  appointed  on  the
first  board  of  railroad  commissioners  for  Kentucky,
serving  two  years.  He  was  selected  by  the  gov-
ernor to  accompany  to  this  country  from  Italy  the
remains  of  the  sculptor  Joel  T.  Hart.  Since  his
return  he  has  acted  as  Washington  correspondent
of  the  Louisville  "  Daily  Times."

KING,  Alonzo,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wilbraham,
Mass.,  1  April,  1796;  d.  in  Westborough,  Mass.,  29
Nov.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Waterville  col-
lege (now  Colby  university)  in  1825,  and  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Yarmouth,
Me.,  24  Jan.,  1826.  Impaired  health  compelled  him
to  resign  in  1831,  but  in  1832  he  became  pastor  at
Northborough,  Mass.,  where  he  was  also  for  some
time  agent  of  the  Massachusetts  Baptist  conven-
tion, and  agent  to  raise  funds  for  the  endowment
of  the  Newton  theological  institution.  For  a  short
time  before  his  death  he  was  pastor  at  Westbor-
ough. Mass.  He  wrote  some  lyric  poetry,  and
many  of  his  productions  are  in  circulation  without
his  name.  He  also  published  a  memoir  of  his
friend,  George  Dana  Boardman  (Boston,  1835).


KING,  Austin  Augustus,  statesman,  b.  in  Sul-
livan county,  Tenn.,  20  Sept.,  1801 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis.
Mo.,  22  April,  1870.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1822,  and  in  1830  removed  to  Mis-
souri, where  he  continued  to  practise.  In  1834  he
was  chosen  to  the  legislature,  and  he  was  re-elected
in  1836.  In  1837  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the
circuit  court,  holding  the  office  till  1848,  when  he
was  chosen  governor  of  Missouri,  his  term  expiring
in  1853.  In  1860  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Demo-
cratic national  convention  at  Charleston,  where  he
made  an  effective  speech  in  behalf  of  Stephen  A.
Douglas.  He  subsequently  took  the  ground  that
the  war  for  the  Union  was  unnecessary.  In  1862
he  was  restored  to  his  old  place  as  circuit  judge,
but  shortly  afterward  resigned  to  take  a  seat  in  the
38th  congress,  to  which  he  had  been  elected,  serv-
ing from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,  1865.  He  then
devoted  himself  to  the  practice  of  his  profession
and  the  cultivation  of  his  farm.

KING,  Charles  Bird,  artist,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  in  1785 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  19  March,
1862.  He  studied  with  Leslie  and  Allston  in  Lon-
don, where  he  resided  and  painted  portraits  for
several  years.  He  finally  established  himself  in
Washington,  D.  C,  in  1822,  where  he  remained  un-
til his  death.  Here  he  numbered  among  his  sit-
ters eminent  men  of  all  countries.  His  pictures
were  prized  for  their  truthfulness  rather  than  for
delicacy  of  finish.  During  his  life  and  by  bequest
he  presented  to  the  Redwood  library  of  his  native
city  the  sum  of  $9,000  in  money,  nearly  three  hun-
dred valuable  books,  fourteen  bound  volumes  of
engravings,  and  over  two  hundred  paintings.

KING,  Dan,  physician,  b.  in  Mansfield,  Conn.,
27  Jan.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Smithfield,  R.  I.,  13  Nov.,
1864.  Having  studied  medicine  at  New  Haven
and  in  his  native  town,  he  began  its  practice  in
Preston,  Conn.  After  spending  five  years  there
and  at  Groton,  he  removed  to  Charlestown,  R.  I.,
where  he  continued  to  practise  for  eighteen  years.
He  also  took  part  in  public  affairs,  both  as  a  magis-
trate and  as  a  member  of  the  general  assembly,
serving  from  1828  till  1834.  With  Thomas  W.
Dorr  (q.  v.)  he  was  active  in  the  organization  of  the
Suffrage  party,  and  was  nominated  by  it  for  first
senator,  and  afterward  for  congress.  Dr.  King
disapproved  of  the  so-called  Dorr  war,  and  took  no
part  in  it.  He  was  an  earnest  friend  of  the  remnant
of  the  Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians,  and  with
Benjamin  B.  Thurston  was  appointed  by  the
Rhode  Island  house  of  representatives  to  report
a  plan  of  treating  and  governing  the  Indians.
It  was  through  his  influence  and  exertions  that  a
considerable  annual  appropriation  was  made  by
the  state  for  the  support  of  an  Indian  school.  He
afterward  removed  to  Woonsocket  and  then  to
Taunton,  Mass.,  but  returned  to  Rhode  Island,  and
soon  afterward  began  writing  his  "  Life  and  Times
of  Thomas  Wilson  Dorr,  with  Outlines  of  the  Po-
litical History  of  Rhode  Island"  (Boston,  1859).
Dr.  King  invented  a  valuable  surgical  instrument
for  the  adjusting  of  fractured  bones,  which  he  free-
ly gave  for  the  use  of  the  profession.  He  contrib-
uted frequently  to  professional  periodicals,  and
published,  among  other  books  and  pamphlets,  "  An
Address  on  Spiritualism  "  (Taunton,  1857),  "  Quack-
ery Unmasked  "  (Boston,  1858),  and  "  Tobacco :
What  it  Is  and  What  it  Does  "  (New  York,  1861).

KING,  Daniel  Putnam,  statesman,  b.  in  Dan-
vers,  Mass.,  8  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  there,  26  July,  1850.
He  was  a  descendant  of  William  Kinge,  who  came
in  1635  from  England  to  Salem,  Mass.  Daniel
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1823,  and  began  the
study  of  law,  but  found  it  uncongenial,  and  turned


KING


KING


539


his  attention  to  agriculture.  After  filling  various
municipal  offices  in  his  native  town,  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature  in  1835,  and  after  serving  two
vears  was  returned  as  senator  from  Essex  county.
He  held  this  office  for  four  years,  and  during  the
latter  half  of  the  term  was  president  of  the  senate.
Again  in  1842  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  house
of  representatives  and  speaker  of  that  bodv.  In
1S42  .Mr.  King  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
and  he  kept  his  seat  until  the  end  of  his  life,  tak-
ing an  active  part  in  debate  in  opposition  to  the
war  with  Mexico.  Robert  C.  Winthrop  delivered
a  memorial  address  on  his  death. — His  son.  Ben-
jamin Flint,  lawyer,  b.  in  Danvers,  Mass.,  12  Oct.,
1830 ;  d.  in  Boston,  24  Jan.,  1868,  entered  Harvard
in  the  class  of  1848,  and  afterward  practised  law  in
partnership  with  Joseph  Story.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  44th  Massa-
chusetts regiment,  and  in  1863  was  an  officer  in
the  18th  U.  S.  colored  troops.  The  following  year
he  was  appointed  judge-advocate  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  George  L.  Andrews,  and  was  afterward  de-
tailed as  provost-marshal.  He  returned  to  his
regiment  in  1864,  and  he  was  honorably  discharged
from  the  service  that  year,  when  he  resumed  his
law  practice  in  Boston.

KING,  David,  physician,  b.  in  Ravnham,  Mass.,
in  1774 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  L,  14  Nov.,  1836.  He
was  graduated  at  Rhode  Island  college  (now  Brown
university)  in  1796,  and  pursued  his  medical  studies
under  Dr.  James  Thatcher,  of  Plymouth.  In  1799
he  settled  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  and  also  held  the  ap-

E ointment  of  surgeon  at  Fort  Wolcott.  Newport
arbor.  In  1819,  during  the  prevalence  of  yellow
fever,  his  skill  and  experience  were  successfully
called  into  operation  in  combating  that  malady,
which  he  considered  non-contagious.  He  was  one
of  the  earliest  promoters  of  the  Rhode  Island  medi-
cal society,  and  served  as  its  president  from  1830
till  1834.  In  1821  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  Brown. — His  son,  David,  physician,  b.  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  12  May,  1812;  d.  there.  7  March.
1882,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1831,  studied
medicine  with  his  father  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college,  Philadelphia,  and  received  the  degree  of
M.  D.  in  1834.  He  settled  in  Newport,  where  he
soon  secured  a  large  practice,  and  in  1850-'l,  1872-'4.
and  1880,  visited  Europe  for  study.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  the  Rhode  Island  medical  society  in
1834,  and  subsequently  served  as  its  president.  He
was  also  president  of  the  Newport  historical  soci-
ety, the  Rhode  Island  state  board  of  health,  and  the
Redwood  library,  and  a  founder  of  the  American
medical  association.  His  collection  of  several  thou-
sand rare  books  was  sold  at  auction  in  New  York
in  1884.  Many  of  his  literary  treasures,  consisting
chiefly  of  Americana,  bring  exceedingly  high  prices.
Among  his  publications  were  three  Fiske  prize  es-
savs,  entitled  "Purpura  Haemorrhagica "  (Boston,
1837);  "Cholera  Infantum"  (Boston,  1837);  and
"Erysipelas"  (Boston.  1840).  He  also  wrote  "  His-
tory of  Redwood  Library  "  (Boston,  1860),  and  an
"Historical  Sketch  of  the  Island  Cemetery  Com-
pany at  Newport,  R.  I."  (1872).

KING,  David  Bennett,  lawyer,  b.  near  Mt.
Pleasant,  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.,  20  June,  1848.
He  was  graduated  at  Lafayette  in  1871,  and  for
the  next  three  years  was  a  tutor  there.  In  1874-'7
he  was  adjunct  professor,  and  from  1877  till  1886
professor  of  Latin.  Meanwhile  he  studied  law,
being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1883,  and  in  1886
opened  an  office  in  New  York  city.  In  1881-'2  he
wrote  for  the  Philadelphia  "  Press  "  a  series  of  let-
ters from  England  and  Ireland.  He  has  contrib-
uted largely  to  periodicals,  on  topics  of  govern-


ment and  political  economy,  and  has  published  in
book-form  "  The  Irish  Question  "  (New  York,  1882).

KING,  Edward,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1794:  d.  there,  8  May,  1873.  He  was  well  edu-
cated, but  without  the  benefit  of  a  collegiate  course,
studied  law  with  Charles  Chauncey,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1816.  He  entered  politics
early  in  life,  first  as  a  Federalist,  and  then  as  a
Democrat,  and  before  he  was  thirty  years  of  age
was  recognized  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Demo-
cratic party  in  his  state.  He  became  clerk  of  the
orphans'  court  in  1824,  and  the  next  year  was  ap-
pointed president  judge  of  the  court"  of  common
pleas,  attaining  eminence  as  a  jurist,  and  doing  more
to  establish  the  system  of  equity  in  Pennsylvania
than  all  the  judges  of  the  state  had  done  at  the
time  of  his  retirement.  He  left  the  bench  in  Jan-
uary, 1852,  and  shortly  afterward  was  appointed
by  the  governor  on  a  commission  to  revise  the
criminal  code  of  the  state,  which  work  was  per-
formed chiefly  by  Judge  King.  The  new  code,
written  by  him,  and  reported  to  the  legislature,
was  adopted  almost  literally  as  prepared.  Most  of
the  remaining  years  of  his  life  he  passed  in  travel
abroad  and  in  study.  He  was  a  member  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  and  for  many  years
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Jefferson
medical  college.  His  decisions  are  contained  in
Ashmead's  and  in  Parsons's  reports.

KING,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Middlefield.  Mass.,
31  July,  1848.  Mr.  King  was  liberally  educated,
and  early  began  writing  for  the  press.  His  con-
tributions, both  of  prose  and  poetry,  have  been
very  numerous  and  cover  a  wide  field,  comprising
American  and  foreign  topics.  He  has  made  a  spe-
cialty of  the  physical  characteristics  and  present
condition  of  the  southern  states  and  of  French  sub-
jects, having  resided  for  nearly  twenty  years  in
Paris.  Mr.  King  acts  as  Paris  correspondent  for
several  American  journals,  and  accompanied  the
Russian  army  into  the  Balkans  during  the  Russo-
Turkish  war  in  that  capacity.  He  has  published
"My  Paris,  or  French  Character  Sketches"  (Bos-
ton," 1868)  ;  "  Kentucky's  Love  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Great
South'"  (Hartford,  1875);  "  French  Political  Lead-
ers" (New  York.  1876);  "Echoes  from  the  Orient."
poems  (London,  1880):  "Europe  in  Storm  and
Calm"  (Springfield,  1885);  "The  Golden  Spike"
(Boston,  1885):  "A  Venetian  Lover,"  poem  (London,
1887) ;  and  "  The  Gentle  Savage  "  (London,  1888).

KING.  Gamaliel,  architect,  b.  on  Long  Island
about  1790 :  d.  about  1865.  He  learned  the  trade
of  a  carpenter,  but  subsequently  became  a  builder,
and  afterward,  by  hard  study,  prepared  himself
for  the  professionof  architect."  In  1846  he  offered
his  foreman,  John  Kellum,  a  partnership  in  his
business,  which  connection  lasted  until  1860.  Mr.
King's  most  important  work,  apart  from  Mr.  Kel-
lum, was  the  Brooklyn  city  hall.  He  is  credited
by  his  contemporaries"  with  "  a  good  deal  of  clever-
ness, great  industry,  and  a  touch  of  genius."

KING,  Horatio",  postmaster-general,  b.  in  Paris,
Oxford  co.,  Me.,  21  June,  1811.  His  grandfather,
George  King,  fought  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.
Horatio  received  a  common-school  education,  and  at
the  age  of  eighteen  entered  the  office  of  the  Paris,
Me.,  "  Jeffersonian,"  where  he  learned  printing,
afterward  becoming  owner  and  editor  of  the  pa-
per. In  1833  he  moved  it  to  Portland,  where  he
published  it  until  1  Jan.,  1838.  In  1839  he  went
to  Washington,  D.  C,  having  been  appointed  clerk
in  the  post-office  department,  and  was  gradually
promoted.  In  1854  he  was  appointed  first  assist-
ant postmaster-general,  and  in  January,  1861,
while  acting  as  postmaster- general,  he  was  ques-


;>4<>


KING


KING


tioned  by  a  member  of  congress  from  South  Caro-
lina with  regard  to  the  franking  privilege.  In  his
reply  Mr.  King  was  the  first  officially  to  deny  the
power  of  a  state  to  separate  from  the  Union.  He
was  then  appointed  postmaster-general,  serving
from  12  Feb.  until  7  March,  1861.  On  retiring
from  office  he  remained  in  Washington  during  the
civil  war,  serving  on  a  board  of  commissioners  to
carry  into  execution  the  emancipation  law  in  the
District  of  Columbia.  Since  his  retirement  from
office  Mr.  King  has  practised  in  Washington  as  an
attorney  before  the  executive  department  and  in-
ternational commissions.  He  was  active  in  pro-
curing the  passage  of  three  acts  in  1874,  1879.  and
1885  respectively,  requiring  the  use  of  the  official
"  penalty  envelope,"  which  has  secured  a  large  sav-
ing to  the  government.  He  also  took  an  active
part  in  the  work  of  completing  the  Washington
monument,  serving  as  secretary  of  the  Monument
society  from  1881.  Mr.  King  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  press,  and  has  published  "  An
Oration  before  the  Union  Literary  Society  of  Wash-
ington "  (Washington,  D.  C,  1841),  and  "  Sketches
of  Travel ;  or,  Twelve  Months  in  Europe  "  (1878).
— His  son,  Horatio  Collins,  lawyer,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me.,  22  Dec,  1887,  was  graduated  at  Dickin-
son in  1858,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  New  York  city  in  1861.  He  served  in  the
armies  of  the  Potomac  and  Shenandoah  during  the
civil  war  from  August,  1862,  till  October,  1865,
when  he  resigned  with  the  rank  of  brevet-colonel.
He  then  practised  law  until  1870,  when  he  be-
came connected  with  the  press.  In  1883  he  was
appointed  judge-advocate-general  of  New  York.
He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Plymouth  Silver  Wed-
ding" (New  York,  1873);  "  The  Brooklyn  Congre-
gational Council "  (1876) ;  "  King's  Guide  to  Regi-
mental Courts-Martial "  (1882) ;  and  edited  "  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac "  (1879-87).

KING,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  about
1750 ;  d.  near  Raleigh,  N.  C,  about  1830.  Nothing
is  known  of  his  early  history  prior  to  his  coming
to  the  United  States  from  London  in  1769.  He
was  one  of  the  first  lay  evangelists  that  assisted  in
introducing  Methodism  into  this  country.  The
church  authorities  hesitated  when  he  presented
himself  for  license;  but  he  called  a  meeting  "in
the  Potter's  field,"  where  he  preached  his  first
sermon  over  the  graves  of  the  poor.  He  was  after-
ward licensed  and  stationed  at  Wilmington,  Del.,
whence  he  removed  to  Maryland,  and  was  the  first
to  teach  the  tenets  of  his  sect  to  the  people  of
Baltimore,  often  preaching  from  tables  in  the
streets  and  suffering  much  from  mob  violence.
He  was  subsequently  received  into  the  regular
itinerancy,  was  a  member  of  the  first  conference  in
1773,  and  was  appointed  to  New  Jersey.  He  soon
after  went  to  Virginia,  and  later  returned  to  New
Jersey.  He  "  located  "  during  the  Revolution,  but
in  1801-'3  served  as  an  itinerant  in  Virginia.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  probably  the  only  sur-
viving preacher  of  the  ante-Revolutionary  period.

KING,  John  Crookshanks,  sculptor,  b.  in
Kilwinning,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  11  Oct.,  1806;  d.
in  Boston,*  Mass.,  21  April,  1882.  He  was  edu-
cated as  a  practical  machinist,  and,  after  coming
to  the  United  States  in  1829,  was  employed  for
several  years  as  superintendent  of  factories  in  Cin-
cinnati and  Louisville.  In  1834,  at  the  suggestion
of  Hiram  Powers,  he  made  a  clay  model  of  his
wife's  head,  and  his  success  encouraged  him  to
adopt  the  profession  of  sculptor.  From  1837  till
1840  he  resided  in  New  Orleans,  modelling  busts  of
public  men  and  making  cameo  likenesses.  Subse-
quently he  removed  to  Boston. His  works  include


busts  of  Daniel Webster,  John  Quincy  Adams,
Louis  Agassiz,  and  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson.

KING,  John  Glen,  lawyer,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.
19  March,  1787 ;  d.  there,  26  July,  1857.  He  was
a  descendant  of  Daniel  King,  an  early  settler  in
Lynn,  Mass.  Mr.  King  studied  at  Harvard  with  the
class  of  1807,  but  did  not  receive  his  degree  until
1818,  having  with  others  left  college  during  what
is  known  as  the  "grand  commons  rebellion."  He
afterward  studied  law  with  William  Prescott  and
Judge  Story,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1810.
He  was  a  member  of  both  branches  of  the  Massa-
chusetts legislature  for  many  years,  and  also  of
the  executive  council.  In  1821,  while  a  member  of
the  house  of  representatives,  he  rendered  impor-
tant service  in  conducting  the  Prescott  impeach-
ment case.  When  the  city  government  of  Salem
was  organized,  Mr.  King  acted  as  first  president  of
the  common  council,  and  prepared  the  code  of  rules
that  is  still  in  use.  He  was  eminent  in  his  pro-
fession, and  held  the  offices  of  master  in  chancery
and  commissioner  of  insolvency  for  Essex  county.

KING,  John  H.,  soldier,  b.  in  Michigan  about
1818 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7  April,  1888.  He
was  appointed  2d  lieutenant  2  Dec,  1837;  1st
lieutenant,  2  March,  1839 ;  captain,  31  Oct.,  1846 ;
and  major,  15th  infantry,  14  May,  1861.  He  was
stationed  in  Florida  and  on  the  western  frontier
up  to  1846,  and  was  at  Vera  Cruz  in  1847.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  in  command  of  battalions  of
the  15th,  16th,  and  19th  regiments,  U.  S.  A.,  in
1862,  and  was  engaged  with  the  15th  and  16th  at
the  battle  of  Shiloh,  the  advance  on  Corinth,  the
march  to  the  Ohio  river,  and  the  battle  of  Mur-
freesboro'.  From  April,  1863,  he  commanded  a
brigade  of  regular  troops  until  the  end  of  the  war.
He  was  also  in  the  battles  of  Chickamauga,  Resa-
ca,  New  Hope  Church,  Kenesaw  Mountain,  and
Peach  Tree  and  Utoy  Creeks,  and  commanded  a
division  for  thirty  days  during  the  Atlanta  cam-
paign. He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  brevet  major-gen-
eral, 31  May,  1865.  He  was  also  brevetted  colonel,
U.  S.  A.,  for  gallantry  at  Chickamauga,  Ga.,  briga-
dier-general for  meritorious  services  at  Ruff's  Sta-
tion, Ga.,  and  major-general  for  gallantry  in  the
field  during  the  war.  He  was  commissioned  colonel
of  the  9th  infantry,  30  July,  1865,  and  on  6  Feb.,
1882,  he  was  retired  from  active  service.

KING,  John  Pendleton,  senator,  b.  near  Glas-
gow, Barren  co.,  Ky.,  3  April,  1799 ;  d.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  19  March,  1888.
His  father  took  him  to
Tennessee,  and  in  1815
the  son  made  his  way  to
Georgia,  where  he  stud-
ied law  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1819.
After  spending  two
years  in  Europe,  where
he  completed  his  pro-
fessional education,  he
returned  to  Augusta,
rising  rapidly,  and  in  a
few  years  he  acquired  a
large  estate.  In  1833  he
was  chosen  a  member  of
the  Constitutional  con-
vention of  Georgia,  in
which  he  became  a  lead-
er of  the  Jackson  Demo-
crats, and  by  his  speeches  before  the  convention,  and
especially  by  his  discussion  with  W.  H.  Crawford,
ex-secretary  of  the  treasury  and  once  a  candidate
for  the  presidency,  King  took  rank  among  the  most


KING


KING


541


eloquent  public  men  in  Georgia. The  same  year
he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  an  unex-
pired term,  and,  being  re-elected  in  1834  for  the  full
erm,  he  served  from  2  Dec,  1833,  till  1  Nov.,  1837,
rhen  he  resigned  on  account  of  newspaper  criti-
cism of  a  notable  speech  that  he  had  made  against
)me  of  the  measures  of  the  Van  Buren  adminis-
ition. In  1842,  when  the  country  was  in  a  state
yf financial  depression, he  took  charge  of the
Georgia  railroad,  which,  like  many  others, had
liled. Under  Mr. King's  management  it  was
speedily  revived  and  the  road  finished. Various
Dther roads, extending  the connections of the
argia  road  northwest  and  southwest,  were  pro-
jected and  completed  mainly  under  his  supervis-
ion. He  received  the  title  of  judge  by  executive
appointment,  but  at  the  close  of  the  term  declined
a  re-election. — His  daughter,  Louise  Woodward,
b.  in  Sand  Hills,  near  Augusta,  Ga.,  6  July,  1850 ;
d.  in  Augusta,  7  Dec,  1878,  was  educated  at  home
and  in  a  private  school  in  Switzerland. She  estab-
lished in  Georgia  the  Society  for  the  prevention  of
cruelty  to  animals,  and  was  the  founder  of  the
"  Louise  King  home  "  for  widows  in  Augusta. She
contributed  several  sketches  and  poems  to  periodi-
cals.— Another  daughter  is  the  present  Marchion-
ess of  Anglesea,  having  married  the  marquis  after
the  death  of  her  first  husband.

KING,  Jonas,  missionary,  b.  in  Hawlev,  Mass.,
29  July,  1792 ;  d.  in  Athens)  Greece,  22  May,  1869.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1816,  and  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1819,  and  was
ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  on  17  Dec.  of  that
year.  After  doing  missionary  work  in  South  Caro-
lina, he  was  appointed  professor  of  the  Oriental
languages  and  literature  in  Amherst,  on  the  foun-
dation of  that  college  in  1821,  and  held  the  chair
till  1828.  While  preparing  himself  for  his  duties
in  Paris,  he  became  a  missionary  of  the  American
board,  and  spent  three  years  in  Syria.  After  a
brief  stay  in  the  United  States  in  1827-'8,  he  was
invited  to  accompany  one  of  the  vessels  sent
with  supplies  to  the  Greeks.  He  married  a  Greek
lady  in  1829,  resumed  his  connection  with  the
American  board  in  December  of  that  year,  and
in  1831  removed  to  Athens,  where  he  spent  the
rest  of  his  life  as  a  missionary.  In  1832  he  had
established  five  schools,  and  in  1835  began  to  in-
struct a  class  in  theology.  In  1839  a  schoolhouse
was  finished.  His  teachings  soon  attracted  the
attention  of  the  authorities  of  the  Greek  church,
and  in  1845  he  was  excommunicated  by  the  synod
of  Athens.  In  1846,  and  again  in  1847,  he  was
cited  to  appear  before  a  criminal  court,  and  in  the
latter  year  an  adventurer  named  Simonides  pub-
lished in  a  newspaper  at  Athens  a  series  of  articles
entitled  "  The  Orgies  of  King,"  purporting  to  de-
scribe shameful  ceremonies  that  had  been  enacted
at  the  missionary's  house.  In  consequence  of  a
popular  clamor,  King  now  fled  to  Italy,  but  in
1848  a  friendly  ministrv  came  into  power,  and  he
returned  to  Athens.  In  1851  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  consular  agent  there,  and  on  23  March  of
that  year  some  Greeks,  who  had  come  to  one  of  his
services  at  his  house  for  the  purpose  of  making  a
disturbance,  were  dispersed  only  by  his  display  of
the  American  flag.  After  this  a  new  prosecution
was  begun  against  him,  and  in  March,  1852,  he
was  condemned  to  fifteen  days'  imprisonment  and
to  exile.  He  had  been  accused  of  "reviling  the
God  of  the  universe  and  the  Greek  religion,"
though  he  had  done  no  more  than  preach  the
ordinary  Calvinistic  doctrines,  and  though  Greece
enjoyed  nominal  religious  freedom. Dr.  King  ap-


pealed from  his  prison  to  the  Areopagus,  which
refused  to  reverse  the  decision  of  the  lower  court,
and  he  then  formally  protested  against  his  sen-
tence in  the  name  of  the  U.  S.  government.  Dr.
King  was  now  temporarily  released,  and  in  the
following  summer  George  P.  Marsh,  then  minister
to  Turkey,  was  charged  by  the  U.  S.  government
with  the  special  investigation  of  his  case,  and  also
of  Dr.  King's  title  to  a  lot  of  land,  of  the  use  of
which  he  had  been  deprived  by  the  Greek  govern-
ment for  twenty  years  with  no  compensation.  The
diplomatic  correspondence,  which  fills  200  printed
pages  of  executive  documents,  resulted  in  the  issue
of  an  order  by  the  king  in  1854,  freeing  him  from
the  penalty  that  had  been  imposed.  The  action
of  the  U.  S.  government  in  this  case  was  of  great
service  to  the  cause  of  religious  liberty  in  Greece.
After  this  Dr.  King  remained  in  Athens  till  his
death.  He  was  a  man  of  indomitable  energy,  and
a  fine  Oriental  scholar.  As  the  fruit  of  his  labors
a  Greek  Protestant  church  was  erected  in  Athens
in  1874.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1832.  Besides  revising  and  translating  into
modern  Greek  sixteen  volumes,  among  which  were
Baxter's  "  Saints'  Rest "  and  Lyman  Beecher's
"  Sermons  on  Intemperance,"  he  published  a  "  Fare-
well Letter"  in  Arabic  to  his  friends  in  Syria
(1825),  which  was  translated  into  various  European
languages,  put  on  the  Index  Expurgatorius  at
Rome,  and  produced  a  great  effect  in  the  eastern
churches  ;  "  The  Defence  of  Jonas  King,"  in  Greek
(Athens,  1845) ;  his  "  Speech  before  the  Areopa-
gus," in  Greek  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  Exposition  of
an  Apostolic  Church,"  in  Greek  (Cambridge,  Mass.,
1851 ;  French  and  Italian  translations  at  Malta) ;
"  Religious  Rites  of  an  Apostolical  Church,"  in
Greek  (Athens,  1851) ;  "  Hermeneutics  of  the  Sacred
Scriptures,"  in  Greek  (1857) ;  "  Sermons,"  in  Greek
(2  vols.,  1859) ;  and  "  Synoptical  View  of  Palestine
and  Syria,"  in  French  (Greek  translation,  Athens,
1859).  His  "Miscellaneous  Works,"  in  modern
Greek,  with  the  documents  relating  to  his  various
trials,  were  afterward  printed  in  one  volume  (Ath-
ens, 1859-60).  See  " Life  of  Jonas  King,"  bv  F.
E.  H.  H.  (New  York,  1879).

KING,  Mitchell,  lawyer,  b.  in  Crail,  Fifeshire,
Scotland.  8  June,  1783 ;  d.  in  Flat  Rock,  N.  C,  12
Nov.,  1862.  In  youth  he  was  an  eager  student  of
science  and  metaphysics.  In  1804  he  went  to  Lon-
don to  obtain  employment,  and  on  his  return  from
a  trip  to  Malta  in  that  year  he  was  captured  by  a
Spanish  privateer  and  taken  to  Malaga,  whence  he
escaped  in  1805,  and  landed  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  on
17  Jsov.  He  opened  a  school  there  in  1806,  on  1
March  of  that  year  was  made  an  assistant  teacher
in  Charleston  college,  and  in  1810  was  its  princi-
pal. He  had  begun  to  study  law  in  1807,  was  ad-
mitted to  practice  in  1810,  and  attained  note  at
the  bar.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  Philosophical
society  in  1809,  delivered  lectures  before  it  on  as-
tronomy, and  was  also  judge  of  the  city  court  in
1819,  and  again  in  1842-'4.  In  1830-'2  he  was  an
active  opponent  of  nullification.  Judge  King  was
connected  with  many  financial  and  benevolent  en-
terprises, was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional
convention,  and  the  author  of  manjr  essays  and
addresses,  including  one  before  the  State  agricul-
tural society  at  Columbia  on  "  The  Culture  of  the
Olive"  (1846).  Charleston  college  gave  him  the
decree  of  LL.  D.  in  1857.

KING,  Preston,  senator,  b.  in  Ogdensburg,
N.  Y.,  14  Oct.,  1806;  drowned  in  Hudson  river,  12
Nov.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1827,
studied  law,  and  practised  in  St.  Lawrence  county,
N.  Y. He  entered  politics  in  early  life,  was  a


542


KING


KING


strong  friend  of  Silas  Wright,  and  an  admirer  of
Andrew  Jackson,  and  established  the  "St.  Law-
rence Republican  "  at  Ogdensburg  in  1830,  in  sup-
port of  the  latter.  He  was  for  a  time  postmaster
there,  and  in  1834-'7  a  member  of  the  state  assem-
bly. He  was  a  representative  in  congress  in
1843-'7  and  in  1849-'53,  having  been  elected  as  a
Democrat,  but  in  1854  joined  the  Republican  party,
was  its  candidate  for  secretary  of  state  in  1855,  and
in  1857-63  served  as  U.  S.  senator.  Early  in  1861,
in  the  debate  on  the  naval  appropriation  bill,  Mr.
King  said  that  the  Union  could  not  be  destroyed
peaceably,  and  was  one  of  the  first  to  give  his
opinion  thus  plainly.  In  closing,  he  said :  "  I  tell
these  gentlemen,  in  jny  judgment  this  treason
must  come  to  an  end — peacefully,  I  hope;  but
never,  in  my  judgment,  peacefully  by  the  igno-
minious submission  of  the  people  of  this  country  to
traitors — never.  I  desire  peace,  but  I  would  am-
ply provide  means  for  the  defence  of  the  country
by  war,  if  necessary."  After  the  expiration  of  his
term,  Mr.  King  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  New
York  city.  He  was  a  warm  friend  of  Andrew
Johnson,  and,  as  a  member  of  the  Baltimore  con-
vention of  1864,  did  much  to  secure  his  nomination
for  the  vice-presidency.  After  his  accession  to  the
presidency,  Mr.  Johnson  appointed  Mr.  King  col-
lector of  the  port  of  New  York.  Financial  trou-
bles and  the  responsibilities  of  his  office  unsettled
his  mind,  and  he  committed  suicide  by  jumping
from  a  ferry-boat  into  the  Hudson  river.

KING,  Rufus,  statesman,  b.  in  Scarborough,
Me.,  in  1755 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  29  April,  1827.
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Richard  King,  a  suc-
cessful merchant  of  Scarborough,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in

1777,  having  contin-
ued his  studies  while
the  college  buildings
were  occupied  for
military  purposes.
He  then  studied  law
with  Theophilus  Par-
sons at  Newburyport.
While  so  engaged,  in

1778,  he  became  aide
to  Gen.  Sullivan  in
his  expedition  to
Rhode  Island,  and
after  its  unsuccessful
issue  was  honorably
discharged.  In  due
time  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  where  he
took  high  rank,  and
was  sent  in  1783  to
the  general  court  of

Massachusetts.  Here  he  was  active  in  the  discus-
sion of  public  measures,  and  especially  in  carry-
ing against  powerful  opposition  the  assent  of  the
legislature  to  grant  the  5-per-cent  impost  to  the
congress  of  the  confederation,  which  was  requisite
to  enable  it  to  insure  the  common  safety.  In  1784,
by  an  almost  unanimous  vote  of  the  legislature,
Mr.  King  was  sent  a  delegate  to  the  old  congress,
sitting  at  Trenton,  and  again  in  1785  and  1786.  In
this  body,  in  1785,  he  moved  "  that  there  should  be
neither  slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude  in  any  of
the  states  described  in  the  resolution  of  congress
in  April,  1784,  otherwise  than  in  punishment  of
crime  whereof  the  party  shall  have  been  personally
guilty ;  and  that  this  regulation  shall  be  made  an
article  of  compact,  and  remain  a  fundamental  prin-
ciple of  the  constitution  between  the  original  states
and  each  of  the  states  named  in  the  said  resolve."


vcLLi£J^y


Though  this  was  not  at  the  time  acted  upon,  the
principle  was  finally  adopted  almost  word  for  word
in  the  famous  ordinance  of  1787  for  the  govern*
ment  of  the  northwestern  territory,  a  provision
which  had  been  prepared  by  Mr.  King,  and  which
was  introduced  into  congress  by  Nathan  Dane,  his
colleague,  while  Mr.  King  was  engaged  in  Phila-
delphia as  a  member  from  Massachusetts  of  the
convention  to  form  a  constitution  for  the  United
States.  He  was  also  appointed  by  his  state  to
the  commissions  to  settle  the  boundaries  between
Massachusetts  and  New  York,  and  to  convey  to  the
United  States  lands  lying  west  of  the  Alleghanies.
While  in  congress  in  1786  he  was  sent  with  James
Monroe  to  urge  upon  the  legislature  of  Pennsyl-
vania the  payment  of  the  5-per-cent  impost,  but
was  not  so  successful  as  he  had  been  in  Massaehu-
setts.  In  1787  Mr.  King  was  appointed  one  of  the
delegates  from  his  state  to  the  convention  at  Phila-
delphia to  establish  a  more  stable  government  for
the  United  States.  In  this  body  he  bore  a  con-
spicuous and  able  part.  He  was  one  of  the  mem-
bers to  whom  was  assigned  the  duty  of  making  a
final  draft  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.
When  the  question  of  its  adoption  was  submitted
to  the  states,  Mr.  King  was  sent  to  the  Massachu-
setts convention,  and,  although  the  opposition  to  it
was  carried  on  by  most  of  the  chief  men  of  the
state,  his  familiarity  with  its  provisions,  his  clear
explanation  of  them,  and  his  earnest  and  eloquent
statement  of  its  advantages,  contributed  greatly  to
bring  about  its  final  adoption.  Mr.  King  had  now
given  up  the  practice  of  law,  and  having  in  1786
married  Mary,  the  daughter  of  John  Alsop,  a  dep-
uty from  New  York  to  the  first  Continental  con-
gress, he  took  up  his  residence  in  New  York  in
1788.  The  next  year  he  was  elected  to  the  assem-
bly of  the  state,  and  while  serving  in  that  body
"  received  the  unexampled  welcome  of  an  imme-
diate election  with  Schuyler  to  the  senate  "  of  the
United  States.  In  this  body  he  was  rarely  absent
from  his  seat,  and  did  much  to  put  the  new  gov-
ernment into  successful  operation.  One  of  the
grave  questions  that  arose  was  that  of  the  ratifica-
tion of  the  Jay  treaty  with  Great  Britain  in  1794.
Of  this  he  was  an  earnest  advocate,  and  when  he
and  his  friend  Gen.  Hamilton  were  prevented  from
explaining  its  provisions  to  the  people  in  public
meeting  in  New  York,  they  united  in  publishing,
under  the  signature  of  "  Camillus,"  a  series  of  ex-
planatory papers,  of  which  those  relating  to  com-
mercial affairs  and  maritime  law  were  written  by
Mr.  King.  This  careful  study  laid  the  foundation
of  much  of  the  readiness  and  ability  that  he  mani-
fested during  his  residence  in  England  as  U.  S.
minister,  to  which  post,  while  serving  his  second
term  in  the  senate,  he  was  appointed  by  Gen.  Wash-
ington in  1796,  and  in  which  he  continued  during
the  administration  of  John  Adams  and  two  years
of  that  of  Thomas  Jefferson.  The  contingencies
arising  from  the  complicated  condition  of  affairs,
political  and  commercial,  between  Great  Britain
and  her  continental  neighbors,  required  careful
handling  in  looking  after  the  interests  of  his  coun-
try :  and  Mr.  King,  by  his  firm  and  intelligent  pres-
entation of  the  matters  intrusted  to  him,  did  good
service  to  his  country  and  assisted  largely  to  raise
it  to  consideration  and  respect.  In  1803  he  was
relieved,  at  his  own  request,  from  his  office,  and,
returning  to  this  country,  removed  to  Jamaica,
L.  I.  There,  in  the  quiet  of  a  country  life,  he  in-
terested himself  in  agriculture,  kept  up  an  exten-
sive correspondence  with  eminent  men  at  home
and  abroad,  and  enriched  his  mind  by  careful  and
varied  reading. He  was  opposed  on  principle  to


KING


KING


543


the  war  of  1812  with  England,  when  it  was  finally
declared,  but  afterward  gave  to  the  government
his  support,  both  by  money  and  by  his  voice  in
private  and  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  to  which  he  was
again  elected  in  1813.  In  1814  he  made  an  eloquent
appeal  against  the  proposed  desertion  of  Washing-
ton after  the  British  had  burned  the  capitol.  In
1816,  without  his  knowledge,  he  was  nominated  as
governor  of  New  York,  but  was  defeated,  as  he  was
also  when  a  candidate  of  the  Federal  party  for  the
presidency  against  James  Monroe.  During  this
senatorial  term  he  opposed  the  establishment  of  a
national  bank  with  $50,000,000  capital ;  and,  while
resisting  the  efforts  of  Great  Britain  to  exclude  the
United  States  from  the  commerce  of  the  West
Indies,  contributed  to  bring  about  the  passage  of
the  navigation  act  of  1818.  The  disposal  of  the
public  lands  by  sales  on  credit  was  found  to  be
fraught  with  much  danger.  Mr.  King  was  urgent
in  calling  attention  to  this,  and  introduced  and
carried  a  bill  directing  that  they  should  be  sold  for
cash,  at  a  lower  price,  and  under  other  salutary  re-
strictions. In  1819  he  was  again  elected  to  the
senate  by  a  legislature  that  was  opposed  to  him  in
politics  as  before.  Mr.  King  resisted  the  admission
of  Missouri  with  slavery,  and  his  speech  on  that
occasion,  though  only  briefly  reported,  contained
this  carefully  prepared  statement :  "  Mr.  President,
I  approach  "a  very  delicate  subject.  I  regret  the
occasion  that  renders  it  necessary  for  me  to  speak
of  it,  because  it  may  give  offence  where  none  is  in-
tended. But  my  purpose  is  fixed.  Mr.  President,
I  have  yet  to  learn  that  one  man  can  make  a  slave
of  another.  If  one  man  cannot  do  so,  no  number
of  individuals  can  have  any  better  right  to  do  it.
And  I  hold  that  all  laws  or  compacts  imposing  any
such  condition  upon  any  human  being  are  abso-
lutely void,  because  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature,
which  is  the  law  of  God,  by  which  he  makes  his
ways  known  to  man,  and  is  paramount  to  all  human
control."  He  was  equally  opposed  to  the  compro-
mise offered  by  Mr.  Clay  on  principle,  and  because
it  contained  the  seeds  of  future  troubles.  Upon
the  close  of  this  senatorial  term  he  put  upon  record,
in  the  senate,  a  resolution  which  he  fondly  hoped
might  provide  a  way  for  the  final  extinction  of
slavery.  It  was  to  the  effect  that,  whenever  that
part  of  the  public  debt  for  which  the  public  lands

were  pledged  should
have  been  paid,  the
proceeds  of  all  fu-
ture sales  should  be
held  as  a  fund  to  be
used  to  aid  the  eman-
cipation of  such
slaves,  and  the  re-
moval of  them  and
of  free  persons  of
color,  as  by  the  laws
of  the  states  might
be  allowed  to  any
territory  beyond  the
limits  of  the  United
States.  His  purpose
to  retire  to  private
life  was  thwarted  by
an  urgent  invitation
from  John  Quincy
Adams,  in  1825,  to
accept  the  mission  to
Great  Britain.  Mr.
King  reluctantly  acquiesced  and  sailed  for  Eng-
land, where  he  was  cordially  received,  but  after  a
few  months  he  was  obliged,  through  failing  health,
to  return  home.— His  wife,  Mary,  b.  in  New  York,


^na^t-j  SCiSi*-  Q


17  Oct.,  1769;  d.  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  5  June,  1819,
was  the  only  daughter  of  John  Alsop,  a  merchant,
and  a  member  of  the  Continental  congress  from
New  York,  and  married  Mr.  King  in  New  York  on
30  March,  1786,  he  being  at  that  time  a  delegate
from  Massachusetts  to  the  congress  then  sitting  in
that  city.  Mrs.  King  was  a  lady  of  remarkable
beauty,  gentle  and  gracious  manners,  and  well  cul-
tivated mind,  and  adorned  the  high  station,  both
in  England  and  at  home,  that  her  husband's  offi-
cial positions  and  their  own  social  relations  entitled
them  to  occupy.  The  latter  years  of  her  life,  ex-
cept while  in  Washington,  were  passed  in  Jamai-
ca, L.  I. — Rufus's  brother,  William,  statesman,
b.  in  Scarborough,  Me.,  9  Feb.,  1768 ;  d.  in  Bath,
Me.,  17  June,  1852,  was  endowed  with  exceptional
mental  gifts,  but  lacked  early  educational  advan-
tages for  their  development".  After  residing  at
Topsham,  Sagadahoc  co.,  Me.,  for  several  years,  he
removed  to  Bath  in  the  same  state,  where  he  was  a
merchant  for  half  a  century.  At  an  earlv  period  of
his  career  he  became  a  member  of  the  Massachu-
setts legislature,  and  took  an  active  part  in  draft-
ing and  enacting  the  religious  freedom  bill,  and
securing  to  original  settlers  upon  wild  lands  the
benefit  of  their  improvements.  He  was  an  ardent
advocate  of  the  separation  of  Maine  and  Massachu-
setts, and  presided  over  the  convention  that  met  to
frame  a  constitution  for  the  new  state.  He  was
subsequently  elected  the  first  governor  of  Maine,
and  at  the  conclusion  of  his  term  of  office  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  commissioner  for  the  adjustment  of
Spanish  claims.  He  also  held  other  offices  of  im-
portance under  the  general  and  state  governments,
including  that  of  collector  of  the  port  of  Bath.
He  was  a  generous  and  intelligent  patron  of  insti-
tutions of  learning. — His  half-brother,  Cyrus,  law-
yer, b.  in  Scarborough,  Me.,  16  Sept.,  1772;  d.  in
Saco,  Me.,  25  April,  1817,  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1794.  He  accompanied  his  brother  to  Eng-
land, where  he  acted  as  his  private  secretary.  On
his  return  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  practised  twenty  years  at  Saco,  Me.  He  was
elected  a  representative  to  the  13th  congress  as  a
Federalist,  and  re-elected  to  the  14th,  serving  from
24  May,  1813,  till  3  March,  1817.  His  speeches  in
opposition  to  bills  that  provided  for  increased  taxa-
tion and  for  filling  the  ranks  of  the  army  in  1814
were  characterized,  says  a  contemporary,  by  "  splen-
dor of  language  and  a  profusion  of  imagery." —
Rufus's  eldest  son.  John  Alsop,  statesman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  3  Jan..  1788;  d.  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,
7  July,  1867,  was,  with  his  brother  Charles,  placed
at  school  at  Harrow  during  his  father's  residence
in  England.  Thence  he  went  to  Paris,  and  then
returned  to  New  York,  where  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  In  1812,  when  war  with  Great  Britain
was  declared,  he  gave  his  services  to  the  coun-
try, and  was  later  a  lieutenant  of  cavalry  sta-
tioned in  New  York.  Soon  after  the  war  he  re-
moved to  Jamaica,  N.  Y..  near  his  father's  home,
and  was  for  several  years  practically  engaged  in
farming.  He  was  elected  in  1819  and  in  several
subsequent  years  to  the  assembly  of  the  state,  and,
with  his  brother  Charles,  opposed  many  of  the
schemes  of  De  Witt  Clinton.  He  was,  however,
friendlv  to  the  canal,  and  was  chosen  to  the  state
senate  'after  the  adoption  of  the  new  constitution.
From  this  he  resigned  in  order  that  he  might,  as
secretary  of  legation,  accompany  his  father  on  his
mission  to  Great  Britain.  The  failure  of  the  lat-
ter's  health  obliged  him  to  return,  and  his  son  re-
mained as  charge  d'affaires  until  the  arrival  of  the
new  minister.  Returning  home  to  his  residence  at
Jamaica,  he  was  again,  in  1838,  sent  to  the  assem-


544


KING


KING


c_^2^_  ^  -c/Uy>


bly,  and  in  1849  he  took  his  seat  as  a  representative
in  congress,  having  been  elected  as  a  Whig.  He
strenuously  resisted  the  compromise  measures,  espe-
cially the  fugitive-slave  law,  and  advocated  the  ad-
mission of  California
as  a  free  state.  He
was  an  active  member
of  several  Whig  nomi-
nating conventions,
presided  over  that  at
Syracuse,  N.Y.,  in  1855,
where  the  Republican
party  was  formed,  and
in  1856,  in  the  conven-
tion at  Philadelphia,
warmly  advocated  the
nomination  of  Gen.
Fremont.  He  was
elected  governor  of
New  York  in  1856,  en-
tered on  the  duties  of
the  office,  1  Jan.,  1857,
and  specially  interest-
ed himself  in  internal  improvements  and  popular
education.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  de-
clined a  renomination  on  account  of  increasing
age,  and  retired  to  private  life,  from  which  he
only  emerged,  at  the  call  of  Gov.  Morgan,  to  be-
come a  member  of  the  Peace  convention  of  1861.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and  was  active  in  its  diocesan  conventions.
— Rufus's  second  son,  Charles,  educator,  b.  in
New  York  city,  16  March,  1789;  d.  in  Frascati,
Italy,  in  October,  1867,  was  educated  at  Harrow,
England,  and  in  Paris.  The  war  of  1812  with
England  found  him  actively  engaged  in  business,
and,  although  he  held  the  opinion  that  it  was  in-
judicious, he  gave  the  government  his  support,  both
in  the  legislature  of  New  York,  to  which  he  was
elected  in  1813.  and  as  a  volunteer  in  1814.  In
consequence  of  the  failure  of  the  house  with  which
he  was  connected,  he  engaged  with  Johnston  Ver-
plank  in  the  publication  of  the  "  New  York  Ameri-
can," a  conservative  newspaper.  Mr.  King  was  its
sole  editor  from  1827  till  1845,  when  he  became
one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Courier  and  Enquirer,"
holding  that  post  until  1849.  In  that  year  he  was
chosen  president  of  Columbia  college,  and  gave
himself  heartily  to  the  duties  of  his  new  office,  ad-
vancing the  interests  of  the  college  in  every  way
bv  his  scholarship,  energy,  and  wise  management.
He  was  an  active  supporter  of  the  National  gov-
ernment during  the  civil  war.  In  1863  Mr.  King
resigned  the  presidency  of  the  college,  and  in  the
next  year  began  a  tour  in  Europe,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death. — Rufus's  third  son,  James
Gore,  banker,  b.  in  New  York  city,  8  May,  1791 ;
d.  in  Weehawken,  N.  J.,  3  Oct.,  1853,  was  placed  at
school  near  London  at  the  age  of  seven  years,  and
afterward  was  sent  to  Paris  to  learn  the  French
language.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1810,
and  began  the  study  of  law,  but  was  never  admit-
ted to  the  bar.  He  served  during  the  war  of  1812
as  an  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  in  1815  es-
tablished the  house  of  James  G.  King  and  Co.  In
1818  he  removed  to  Liverpool,  England,  and  en-
tered into  business  there  with  his  brother-in-law,
William  Gracie.  In  1824  he  declined  John  Jacob
Astor's  offer  to  make  him  the  head  of  the  Ameri-
can fur  company,  and  became  a  member  of  the
firm  of  Prime,  Ward,  Sands,  King  and  Co.,  in  New
York  city,  afterward  James  G.  King  and  Sons.  In
the  early  history  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  rail-
road company,  Mr.  King  took  the  office  of  presi-
dent without  compensation. He  was  largely  in-


strumental in  gaining  for  the  road  the  confidence  of
the  community,  and  in  giving  it  an  impulse  toward
its  completion.  Resigning  this  post  during  1  lie
crisis  of  1837,  he  went  abroad,  proved  to  the  gov-
ernors of  the  Bank  of  England  the  wisdom  of  help-
ing American  merchants,  and  induced  them  to
send  to  this  country,  to  assist  the  banks,  £1,000,000
in  gold — a  large  sum  in  those  days — which  they
did  through  his  house.  The  result  was  that  con-
fidence was  restored,  the  banks  resumed  specie
payments,  and  the  crisis  was  passed.  Mr.  King
had  been  a  member  of  the  Chamber  of  commerce
in  New  York  in  1817,  and  from  1841  till  1848
served  as  first  vice-president  and  president.  In
1848  he  was  elected  a  member  of  congress  from
Weehawken,  N.  J.,  where  he  had  lived  for  many
years,  and  served  from  1849  till  1851.  Among
other  measures,  he  brought  in  a  bill  for  the  collec-
tion of  the  revenue,  and  appropriating  the  sums
needed  for  the  costs  of  collection,  which  was  main-
ly carried  by  his  clear  and  forcible  presentation
of  the  matter,  and  which  still  remains  the  law.
At  the  end  of  the  session  Mr.  King  retired  to
private  life,  having  gradually  withdrawn  from
the  active  business  of  his  house,  and  passed  his
time  at  his  country  home. — Rufus's  fourth  son,
Edward,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  13  March,
1795 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  6  Feb.,  1836,  studied
at  Columbia  and  at  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,  law-
school,  but  emigrated  to  Ohio  in  1815,  where  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  next  year.  He  set-
tled in  Chillicothe,  then  the  capital  of  the  state,
but  in  1831  removed  to  Cincinnati.  He  was  sev-
eral times  elected  to  each  branch  of  the  Ohio  legisla-
ture, and  for  two  sessions  was  speaker  of  the  house.
He  attained  success  at  the  bar,  and  was  instrumen-
tal in  forming  the  Cincinnati  law-school  in  1833. —
Rufus's  youngest  son,  Frederic  Gore,  physician,
b.  in  England  in  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24
April,  1829,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1821.
Going  to  New  York,  he  studied  medicine  under
Dr.  Wright  Post,  and  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  Columbia  in  1824.  Having  been  called  pro-
fessionally to  Italy,  he  afterward  visited  France,
where  he  enjoyed  many  opportunities  of  perfect-
ing himself  in  his  favorite  study,  anatomy.  He
also  added  to  his  medical  library  a  valuable  collec-
tion of  French  authors.  Returning  to  New  York
in  the  autumn  of  1825,  he  resumed  the  practice  of
his  profession.  During  a  severe  epidemic  of  fever
in  that  season,  he  attended  his  brother's  family  at
Jamaica,  L.  I.,  and  contracted  the  disease  that
terminated  his  career.  Dr.  King  was  one  of  the
first  to  give  popular  lectures  on  professional  sub-
jects, having  delivered  courses  on  phrenology  and
the  structure  of  the  vocal  organs.  He  also  lectured
on  anatomy  before  the  artists  of  the  National
academy  of  design.  After  spending  a  year  in  the
New  York  hospital,  he  was  appointed  demonstrator
of  anatomy  to  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons in  the  same  city.  His  early  death  cut  short
what  would  doubtless  have  proved  a  brilliant  career.
— Charles's  son,  If  n  his,  journalist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  26  Jan.,  1814 ;  d.  there,  13  Oct.,  1876,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1833,
and  appointed  to  the  engineer  corps.  He  resigned
from  the  army,  30  Sept.,  1836,  and  became  assistant
engineer  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  railroad.  From
1839  till  1843  he  was  adjutant-general  of  the  state
of  New  York.  He  was  then  associate  editor  of  the
"Albany  Evening  Journal,"  and  of  the  Albany
"Advertiser"  from  1841  till  1845,  when  he  re-
moved to  Wisconsin,  and  was  editor  of  the  Mil-
waukee "  Sentinel "  until  1861.  He  also  served  as
a  member  of  the  convention  that  formed  the  con-


KING


KING


545


stitntion  of  Wisconsin,  regent  of  the  state  uni-
versity, and  a  member  of  the  board  of  visitors  to
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849.  lie  was  U.  S.
minister  to  Rome  from  22  March  till  5  Aug.,  1861,
but  resigned,  as  he  had  offered  his  services  in  de-
fence of  the  Union.  He  was  made  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  17  May,  1861,  and  commanded  a
division  at  Fredericksburg,  Groveton,  Manassas,
Yorktown,  and  Fairfax,  remaining  in  the  army  un-
til 1863,  when  he  was  reappointed  minister  to
Rome,  where  he  resided  until  1867.  During  the
next  two  years  he  acted  as  deputy  comptroller  of
customs  for  the  port  of  New  York,  but  for  some
time  before  his  death  he  had  retired  from  public
life  on  account  of  failing  health. — Charles,  soldier,
son  of  Gen.  Rufus,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  12  Oct.,
1844,  was  educated  at  Columbia  and  at  the  IT.  S.
military  academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  June,

1866,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.  He  was
transferred  to  the  5th  cavalrv,  1  Jan.,  1871.  and
from  4  Sept..  1869,  till  24  Oct.  1871,  was  assistant
instructor  of  tactics  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy.
He  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  William  H.
Emory  from  November,  1871,  till  January.  1874,
and  as  acting  judge-advocate.  Department  of  the
Gulf,  for  about  the  same  period.  He  was  princi-
pally engaged  on  frontier  duty  from  1874  till  1877,
and  was  severely  wounded  at  Sunset  Pass,  Arizona,
1  Nov.,  1874.  He  was  regimental  adjutant  from  5
Oct.,  1876,  till  28  Jan.,  1878.  and  was  promoted
captain,  1  May,  1879.  On  the  14th  of  the  following
month  he  was  compelled  to  retire  from  active  ser-
vice on  account  of  his  wounds,  and  in  1880  he  ac-
cepted the  chair  of  military  science  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Wisconsin.  Capt.  King  is  the  author  of
"The  Colonel's  Daughter"  (Philadelphia,  1882);
"Famous  and  Decisive  Battles"  (1884);  '"Marion's
Faith"  (1885);  and  "The  Deserter"  (1887).

KING, Rufus H., banker,  b. in Ridgefield,
Conn., in 1784; d. in Albany, N. Y., 9 July,

1867.  He  was  the  son  of  Joshua  King,  an  officer
of  the  Revolutionary  army,  to  whom  Andre  first
revealed  his  identity.  The  son  removed  to  Albany
when  a  j'oung  man  and  engaged  in  business.  He
became  afterward  the  director  and  president  of  the
state  bank  in  that  city,  and  remained  connected
with  it  for  nearly  forty  years.  He  was  noted  for
his  liberalitv. — His  brother,  Joshua  Ingersoll,
b.  in  Ridgefield,  Conn.,  in  1801 ;  d.  there,  30  July.
1887,  was  at  one  time  in  business  with  his  brother
Rufus  in  Albany,  but  for  nearly  half  a  century
before  his  death  resided  in  the  family  homestead
at  Ridgefield.  He  was  distinguished  for  his
courteous  manners,  was  a  stanch  Republican,  and
represented  his  district  as  senator  in  the  Connecti-
cut legislature  of  1849.

KING,  Samuel,  artist,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  24
Jan.,  1749;  d.  there,  1  Jan.,  1820.  He  derived  de-
scent from  Daniel  King,  of  Lynn,  Mass.,  who  was
a  settler  there  as  early  as  1647,  and  a  large  land-
owner. Samuel  was  an  artist  of  skill  in  his  day,
and  many  specimens  of  his  work  are  extant,  in-
cluding a  portrait  of  himself,  which  is  now  in  pos-
session of  a  descendant.  Washington  Allston  was
a  lad  at  school  in  Newport  for  some  ten  years,  and,
during  that  time  became  acquainted  with  Mr.
King,  who,  recognizing  his  talent,  instructed  him
in  the  rudiments  of  art.  The  aid  and  encourage-
men  that  Allston  thus  received  were  probably
largely  instrumental  in  deciding  his  career,  and
when  in  1809  he  returned  from  Europe,  an  accom-
plished artist,  he  did  not  forget  to  acknowledge
the  friendly  assistance  he  had  received  from  Mr.
King.  Malbone,  the  portrait-painter,  of  Newport,
and  Miss  Anne  Hall,  an  accomplished  artist,  were
vol.  in. —  35


also  pupils  of  Mr.  King. — His  son,  Samuel,  be-
came a  successful  East  India  merchant,  and  was
senior  partner  of  the  firm  of  King  and  Olyphant
as  early  as  1803. — The  second  Samuel's  grand-
son, Clarence,  geologist,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  6
Jan.,  1842,  was  graduated  at  the  Sheffield  scien-
tific school  of  Yale  in  1862,  and  during  the  fol-
lowing year  crossed  the  continent  on  horseback
from  the  Missouri  river  to  California,  where  he
joined  the  geological  survey  of  that  state.  His
connection  with  this  work  continued  until  1866,
chiefly  in  the  high  Sierra,  and  he  carefully  studied
the  gold  belt.  His  palaeontological  discoveries
furnished  the  evidence  on  which  rests  the  determi-
nation of  the  age  of  the  gold-bearing  rocks.  On
his  return  to  the  east,  he  originated  an  elaborate
plan  for  a  complete  geological  section  of  the  west-
ern Cordillera  system  at  the  widest  expansion  on
the  fortieth  parallel.  The  Union  and  the  Central
Pacific  railroads  were  projected  to  lie  generally  in
the  vicinity  of  that  parallel,  and  the  opening  up  of
this  territory  to  settlement  was  the  economic  rea-
son urged  for  the  initiation  of  the  new  expedition.
The  plans  received  the  sanction  of  the  chief  of  en-
gineers and  of  the  secretary  of  war,  and  in  March,
1867,  after  the  necessary  legislation  was  secured,
Mr.  King  was  given  charge  of  the  expedition.  Ac-
companied by  a  large  staff  of  his  own  selection,
wholly  civilian,  he  took  the  field  in  1867.  and  until
1872  prosecuted  the  work  in  accordance  with  the
original  plans  and  instructions.  The  publication
of  his  reports  was  begun  in  1870  and  completed  in
1878.  They  are  issued  as  "  Professional  Papers  of
the  Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  Army,"  in  ^excn
quarto  volumes  and  two  atlases,  of  which  vol.
i.,  on  "  Systematic  Geology  "  (Washington,  1878),
was  written  by  Mr.  King.  His  exposure  of  the
fraudulent  diamond-field  in  1872  was  characteris-
tic. Large  quantities  of  precious  stone,  subse-
quently shown  to  have  been  purchased  in  London,
were  carefully  "salted"  in  the  west,  and  the  story
of  a  discovery  of  new  diamond-fields  of  unparal-
leled richness  was  circulated  throughout  the  United
States.  Mr.  King  hastened  to  the  locality,  which
was  within  the  jurisdiction  of  his  survey,  and
promptly  exposed  the  unnatural  character  of  the
alleged  deposits.  In  1878  the  national  surveys
then  in  the  field,  organized  under  different  depart-
ments of  the  government,  were  at  his  suggestion
consolidated  into  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  and
the  directorship  was  given  to  Mr.  King,  who  ac-
cepted the  office  with  the  understanding  that  he
should  remain  at  the  head  of  the  bureau  only
long  enough  to  appoint  its  staff,  to  organize  its
work,  and  to  guide  its  forces  into  full  activity.
This  consolidation,  effected  very  largely  through
Mr.  King's  personal  efforts  in  obtaining  the  req-
uisite acts  of  congress  in  the  face  of  strong  and
bitter  opposition,  was  one  of  the  most  important
acts  of  his  career.  He  resigned  the  office  in  1881,
and  has  since  devoted  himself  to  the  pursuit  of
special  geological  investigations.  Mr.  King  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies  in  the  United  States
and  in  Europe,  and  in  1876  was  elected  to  the  Na-
tional academy  of  sciences.  He  has  contributed  to
current  literature,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Moun-
taineering in  the  Sierra  Nevada"  (Boston,  1871).

KING,  Samuel  Archer,  aeronaut,  b.  near
Philadelphia.  Pa..  9  April.  1828.  When  a  boy  he
was  fond  of  climbing  to  the  greatest  heights  possi-
ble, to  satisfy  his  passion  for  viewing  extended
landscapes.  Soon  after  attaining  his  majority  he
constructed  a  balloon.  His  first  ascension  was
made  on  25  Sept.,  1851,  from  Philadelphia ;  but,  in
consequence  of  a  scant  supply  of  gas,  it  proved


546


KING


KING


only  a  partial  success,  and  he  received  rough  treat-
ment in  the  tree-tops  and  in  being  dragged  up  the
Schuylkill  and  over  the  dam.  He  again  tried  the
experiment,  and  made  a  successful  voyage  across
Philadelphia,  far  into  New  Jersey.  He  then  made
numerous  expeditions  from  various  places  in  Penn-
sylvania and  New  Jersey.  In  1855  he  made  sev-
eral ascensions  from  Wilmington,  Del.,  and  on  16
June,  1856,  ascended  from  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  but
in  descending  was  dashed  to  the  earth  and  ren-
dered insensible.  During  1856-7  he  made  ascen-
sions from  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  other  places  in
New  England,  and  on  15  Aug.  he  went  up  from  New
Haven,  Conn.,  in  his  balloon  "  Queen  of  the  Air,"
which  subsequently  became  famous  from  his  ascen-
sions made  from  Boston.  At  an  ascension  on  1
Sept.,  1858,  he  experimented  with  the  use  of  a
drag-rope  as  a  guide.  In  starting,  he  allowed
seventy-five  pounds  of  rope  to  trail  along  the
ground.  As  the  balloon  gradually  became  heated
by  the  sun,  its  buoyant  power  was  increased  with-
out discharging  ballast,  and  by  the  time  five  miles
had  been  traversed  the  rope  was  lifted  from  the
ground,  and  it  continued  to  be  lifted  until  a  height
of  two  miles  had  been  reached.  After  a  passage
of  nearly  thirty  miles  the  drag-rope  was  detached,
and  the  aeronaut  then  continued  a  similar  distance
farther.  In  June,  1859,  he  made  an  ascension
from  Charlestown,  Mass.,  landing  in  Belmont,  and
on  4  July  following  he  made  an  ascension  from
Boston.  On  another  occasion  he  ascended  from
Boston  Common  with  a  party,  and  alighted  in
Melrose,  where  a  long  rope  was  procured  and  he
treated  some  of  the  ladies  to  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the
village  by  moonlight.  While  the  balloon,  with
five  young  ladies,  was  in  the  air,  it  escaped,  but
after  a  few  miles  the  descent  was  safely  made.
On  4  July,  1868,  he  made  an  ascent  from  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  with  five  persons.  The  start  was  excellent,
but  the  balloon  was  carried  out  over  Lake  Erie,
where,  in  efforts  to  navigate  it,  by  means  of  an
undercurrent,  to  reach  the  land,  the  car  twice
struck  the  surface  of  the  water.  Mr.  King  reached
the  land,  and  then  began  a  voyage  that  finally
ended  on  the  top  of  the  Alleghany  mountains
late  at  night.  As  the  balloon  struck,  the  anchor
was  thrown  out,  but  it  rebounded,  passing  over  a
tall  pine-tree,  the  top  branches  of  which  caught
the  anchor.  The  rope  being  comparatively  short,
the  party  were  not  able  to  reach  the  ground.  The
night  was  dark,  and  the  nature  of  the  surface  be-
neath them  was  unknown,  so  they  concluded  to
remain  all  night  in  the  tree.  When  daylight  came,
the  anchor-rope  was  cut  loose  and  the  balloon
landed  with  perfect  safety.  On  19  Oct.,  1869,  Mr.
King  ascended  from  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  with  his
monster  balloon  the  "  Hyperion,"  in  the  presence
of  nearly  50,000  persons,  carrying  a  party  of  seven.
The  weather  was  unfavorable,  the  wind  boisterous,
threatening  clouds  flew  across  the  sky,  flurries  of
snow  were  frequent,  and  the  cold  was  searching.
In  four  and  a  half  minutes,  although  gas  had  been
discharged  from  the  valve,  they  entered  a  snow-
cloud.  The  balloon  moved  at  the  rate  of  forty
miles  an  hour,  the  cold  was  intense,  night  came
on,  and  the  party  were  in  the  midst  of  a  driving
snow-storm.  The  weight  of  snow  that  collect-
ed on  the  top  of  the  balloon  drove  it  to  the
ground,  and  a  forced  landing  in  an  open  field  was
made  in  the  squall ;  but  the  anchor  did  not  hold,
and  the  balloon  bounded  over  a  piece  of  woods,
alighting  on  the  other  side.  Here  the  anchor  held
for  a  while,  the  gas  escaping  from  the  valve,  but,
unfortunately,  two  of  the  party  got  out  of  the
basket, and the  balloon, thus  lightened,  broke


loose  and  bounded  upon  a  side-hill  and  at  last  ran
against  a  tree,  a  huge  rent  being  made  in  the  ma-
chine, so  that  the  gas  escaped  almost  instantly.
The  party  had  landed  near  Cazenovia.  During
a  subsequent  series  of  ascensions  in  the  southern
states  Mr.  King  had  many  strange  experiences;
the  people,  unfamiliar  with  such  sights,  were  at  a
loss  to  account  for  his  strange  descent  from  the
clouds.  In  February,  1870,  he  ascended  from
Augusta,  Ga.,  and  after  a  journey  of  130  miles
descended,  although  not  until  his  balloon  had  be-
come injured  and  he  had  been  precipitated  to
the  ground  from  a  height  of  nearly  60  feet.  In
July,  1872,  he  ascended  from  Boston  common,  and
was  carried  out  to  sea,  but,  after  descending  until
the  drag-rope  trailed  through  the  water,  a  yacht
was  met  with  and  the  rope  tied  to  its  mast.  The
balloon  soon  towed  the  vessel  in  to  the  shore  and
landed.  Mr.  King  has  always  claimed  that  the
study  of  meteorology  should  be  pursued  with  a  bal-
loon. For  this  purpose,  during  the  autumn  of
1872,  he  made  several  ascensions  with  officers  of  the
IT.  S.  signal  service,  and  the  results  of  their  experi-
ence have  been  published  in  the  "  Journal "  of  the
signal  service.  At  the  time  of  the  attempted  trip
of  the  "  New  York  Daily  G  raphic  "  balloon  the  serv-
ices of  Mr.  King  were  called  in,  and  it  was  through
his  efforts  that  the  launching  was  made.  (See  Don-
aldson, Washington  H.)  An  important  excursion
was  made  on  4  July,  1874,  in  his  "  Buffalo  "  from
the  city  of  that  name.  The  start  was  made  in  the
afternoon,  the  balloon  was  carried  southward  dur-
ing the  night,  and,  following  the  course  of  the  Sus-
quehanna river  until  the  next  morning,  the  party
found  themselves  over  Havre  de  Grace,  Md.,  and  as
the  sun  rose  a  large  part  of  Pennsylvania,  Mary-
land, Virginia,  Delaware,  and  New  Jersey  was  seen.
Later  a  descent  was  made  in  New  Jersey.  In  Sep-
tember of  the  same  year  an  ascension  was  made
from  Cleveland  at  11  A.  m.  At  first  the  balloon
moved  westward,  but,  rising  higher,  it  floated  out
over  Lake  Erie  for  eight  hours,  until  Buffalo  was
nearly  reached ;  then  descending  to  the  lower  cur-
rent, it  drifted  back  past  Cleveland  toward  the
Canada  shore,  reaching  Point  au  Pele  near  7  pm.
He  descended  just  in  time  to  avoid  being  carried
out  over  Lake  Huron ;  but,  the  current  changing,  he
again  mounted  and  the  balloon  was  carried  across
the  lake,  up  the  St.  Clair  river,  finally  landing  in
Michigan  near  Port  Huron,  after  having  traversed
a  distance  of  nearly  500  miles.  On  a  trip  made
in  July,  1875,  with  the  "  Buffalo,"  he  carried  a
photographer  with  him,  who  took  numerous  views
of  cloud  effects,  and  the  journey  proved  of  special
interest,  as  they  passed  through  a  series  of  thunder-
storms, which  they  watched  from  beginning  to
end.  During  the  centennial  year  Mr.  King  made
several  excursions  of  various  length  from  Phila-
delphia, and  in  April,  1877,  he  made  several  short
trips  from  Nashville,  Tenn.,  with  the  observers
from  the  U.  S.  signal  service  bureau.  In  August,
1887,  he  made  an  ascent  at  Fairmont  park,  Phila-
delphia, in  his  balloon,  the  "  Great  Northwest,"  ac-
companied by  Prof.  Henry  Hazen,  of  the  U.  S.
signal  service,  and,  after  four  hours  drifting  in  the
vicinity  of  the  city,  descended  opposite  Manayunk.
Mr.  King  has  made  ascents  from  nearly  all  the
cities  of  the  eastern  states,  having  in  all  made
nearly  300  voyages  through  the  air,  traversing  the
entire  country  east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  much
that  is  west  of  that  river.

KING,  Thomas  Butler,  statesman,  b.  in  Hamp-
den, Hampshire  co.,  Mass.,  27  Aug.,  1804;  d.  near
Waresborough,  Ga.,  10  May,  1864.  His  ancestor,
John,  came  from  Suffolk  county,  England,  to  this


KING


KING


547


country  about  1718.  Thomas  was  educated  at
Westfield  academy,  Mass.,  studied  law,  and  re-
moved to  Georgia  in  1823,  settling  in  Glynn
county,  where  he  became  the  owner  of  extensive
cotton  plantations.  He  entered  public  life  about
ls:;-2  as  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  held  the
office  for  four  years.  In  1838,  when  the  nullifica-
tion question  arose,  Mr.  King  attached  himself  to
the  state-rights  party,  and  was  elected  to  the
Georgia  senate  on  that  ticket.  In  1840  he  was  a
member  of  the  young  men's  convention  of  Balti-
more, and  about  that  time  became  a  president  of
several  railway  and  canal  companies.  Mr.  King
was  a  member  of  congress  from  Georgia  in  1839-'43
and  1845-'9,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  and
took  an  active  interest  in  naval  affairs  and  in  the
promotion  of  ocean  steam  navigation.  He  was  de-
feated in  1842  and  1848,  and,  when  Gen.  Taylor
became  president,  was  appointed  collector  of  the
port  of  San  Francisco,  holding  the  office  from
1849  till  1851.  On  his  return  to  Georgia,  he  was
again  elected  state  senator  in  1859,  and  in  1861,
when  Georgia  seceded,  he  was  sent  by  the  state
as  commissioner  to  Europe,  remaining  there  for
two  years. — His  son,  Henry  Lord  Page,  b.  on
St.  Simon's  island,  Ga.,  25  April,  1831 ;  d.  in  Fred-
ericksburg, Va.,  13  Dec,  18(52,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1852,  and  at  the  Harvard  law-school  in
1855.  He  was  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
LaFayette  McLaws,  was  in  the  seven  days'  fight
before  Richmond,  at  Antietam,  Harper's  Ferry,  and
Fredericksburg,  where  he  was  killed.

KING,  Thomas  Starr,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  17  Dec,  1824;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal..  4  March,  1863.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Univer-
salist  clergyman,  and  his  early  life  was  spent  in
various  towns  where  his  father  preached.  In  1835
the  family  settled  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  where,
after  the  death  of  his
father,  he  became  a  clerk
in  a  dry-goods  store.  In
1840  he  was  appointed
assistant  teacher  in  the
Bunker  Hill  grammar-
school,  and  his  time  out-
side of  his  regular  duties
was  spent  in  study.  Two
years  later  he  became
principal  of  the  West
grammar-school  of  Med-
ford,  Mass.,  where  he
studied  for  the  minis-
try under  Hosea  Ballou.
Subsequently  he  was
clerk  in  the  navy-yard
at  Charlestown,  and  in
September.  1845,  he  de-
livered his  first  sermon
in  Woburn.  He  then
preached  for  a  Universalist  society  in  Boston,  and
in  July,  1846,  he  was  called  to  his  father's  for-
mer church  in  Charlestown.  In  1848  he  accepted
a  call  from  the  Hollis  street  Unitarian  church,
where  he  continued  for  eleven  years.  During  this
term  of  ministry  he  grew  steadily  in  power  and
reputation.  He  was  not  considered  as  profoundly
learned  ;  he  was  not  a  great  writer;  nor  could  his
unrivalled  popularity  be  ascribed  to  his  fascinating,
social,  or  intellectual  gifts.  "  It  was,"  says  Dr.
Henry  W.  Bellows,  "the  hidden,  interior  man  of
the  heart,  the  invisible  character  behind  all  the
rich  possessions,  intellectual  and  social,  of  this
gifted  man,  that  gave  him  his  real  power  and  skill
to  control  the  wills,  and  to  move  the  hearts,  and  to
win  the  unbounded  confidence  and  affection  of  his


tS(Jt>^i^^


fellow-beings."  Mr.  King  also  at  this  time  acquired
great  popularity  as  a  lecturer  in  the  northern
states.  His  first  lecture  was  on  "  Goethe,"  and  it
was  followed  by  one  on  "Substance  and  Snow,"
which  almost  equalled  in  popularity  that  of  Wen-
dell Phillips  on  "  The  Lost  Arts."  The  subjects
which  he  afterward  selected,  such  as  "  Socrates,"
"Sight  and  Insight."  and  "The  Laws  of  Dis-
order," obtained  almost  as  great  a  reputation.
His  name  soon  became  associated  with  the  White
mountains,  for  it  was  there  that  he  spent  most  of
his  summers,  drawing  in  those  inspirations,  descrip-
tive of  natural  scenery,  which  abound  in  his  dis-
courses, and  he  was  familiar  with  every  ravine  and
peak  of  that  region.  In  1853  he  began  to  print  ac-
counts of  his  explorations  in  the  "  Boston  Tran-
script," and,  having  visited  it  for  ten  years  in  winter
as  well  as  summer,  he  embodied  the  results  of  his
experience  in  a  volume  entitled  "The  White  Hills,
their  Legends.  Landscape,  and  Poetrv"  (Boston.
1859;  new  ed..  1887).  In  1860  he  left  Boston,  and
accepted  a  call  to  San  Francisco,  Cal.  As  in  the
east,  he  was  soon  asked  to  lecture  in  California  and
Oregon.  Letters  of  his  experience  found  their  way
to  the  Boston  papers,  and,  as  the  White  mountains
became  known  largely  through  his  efforts,  so  too
he  was  one  of  the  first  to  call  public  attention  to
the  beauties  of  the  Yosemite  valley.  In  the  presi-
dential canvass  of  1860.  when  the  suggestion  of  a
Pacific  republic  was  made,  "taking  the  constitu-
tion and  Washington  for  his  text,  he  went  forth
appealing  to  the  people."  He  spoke  on  "  Webster
and  the  Constitution."  "Lexington  and  the  New
Struggle,"  and  "  Washington  and  the  Union,"
and  his  magnificent  eloquence  swept  everything
before  it.  Mr.  King  urged  the  paramount  duty
of  actively  supporting  the  Union  ;  "for,''  he  con-
tended, "whatever  of  theory,  of  party,  of  per-
sonal ambition,  or  of  prejudice,  in  this  great  hour,
may  have  to  pass  away,  it  seems  to  be  the  will  of
the  American  people  that  the  grand  inheritance  of
the  fathers  of  the  republic  shall  not  pass  away.*'
To  him  credit  is  given  for  having  preserved  Cali-
fornia to  the  Union,  and  later,  when  the  civil  war
had  begun,  he  was  active  in  his  labors  with  the
sanitary  commission.  Meanwhile  he  was  occupied
with  the  building  of  a  new  church,  and  in  Septem-
ber, 1862,  the  corner-stone  was  laid.  On  Christmas,
1863.  the  church  was  finished,  and  it  was  dedicated
on  10  Jan.,  1864.  Before  March  came,  he  was
stricken  with  diphtheria,  and  after  a  few  days'  ill-
ness died.  His  remains  were  buried  in  the  church
that  he  had  built,  and  remained  there  until  1887,
when,  on  the  sale  of  the  church  property,  the
sarcophagus  was  transferred  to  the  Masonic  ceme-
tery. A  movement  for  the  purpose  of  erecting  a
monument  in  Golden  Gate  park,  to  cost  $50,000,
has  taken  shape  in  San  Francisco  during  the
present  year  (1887),  and  the  collection  of  funds
is  now  in  progress  throughout  California.  Mr.
King  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Harvard
in  1850.  Several  volumes  of  Ins  sermons  appeared
posthumously,  including  "  Patriotism  and  Other
Papers  "  (Boston.  1865) :  "  Christianity  and  Human-
ity." with  a  memoir  by  Edwin  P.  Whipple  (1877);
and  "Substance  and  Snow"  (1877).  See  also  "A
Tribute  to  Thomas  Starr  King,"  by  Richard
Frothingham  (1865).

KING,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland;  d.
near  Mobile.  Ala.,  1  Jan.,  1826.  He  was  appointed
a  lieutenant  of  infantry.  3  May.  1808;  captain.  2
Julv,  1812 ;  and  assistant  inspector-general,  10  July,
1812  He  commanded  the  expedition  from  Black
Rock  to  Canada  in  November.  1812,  in  which  he
was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner. He  was  pro-


548


KING


KINGSBURY


raoted  major,  3  March,  1813,  and  commanded  his
regiment  in  the  capture  of  York  (now  Toronto),  27
April,  1813.  He  became  assistant  adjutant-general,
28  April,  1813,  was  wounded  at  the  capture  of
Fort  George,  27  May,  1813,  and  commanded  U.  S.
troops  in  repelling  the  attack  on  Black  Rock,  11
July,  1813.  He  was  appointed  adjutant-general,
with  the  rank  of  colonel,  18  July,  1813 ;  colonel,
21  Feb.,  1814 ;  and  was  military  and  civil  governor
of  Pensacola  in  May,  1818.

KING,  William  Rufus,  vice-president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Sampson  county,  N.  C,  6
April,  1786 ;  d.  near  Cahawba,  Dallas  co.,  Ala.,  18
April,  1853.  His  father,  William  King,  served
as  a  member  of  the  North  Carolina  convention
that  was  called  to  adopt  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  was  also  for  many  terms  a  dele-
gate to  the  general  assembly.  The  son  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1803,
studied  law  with  William  Duffy,  of  Fayetteville,
and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1806.  The  same
year  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  state  legisla-
ture, and  was  appointed  by  that  body  solicitor  for
the  Wilmington  district.  He  served  for  two  years
in  that  capacity,  and  on  resigning  was  again  re-
turned to  the  legislature  for  the  years  1808-'9.  The
following  year  Mr.  King  was  elected  to  a  seat
in  congress  as  a  War-Democrat,  and,  though  the
youngest  member  of  that  body,  became  conspicuous
for  his  zealous  support  of  President  Madison.  He
remained  a  member  of  congress  until  1816,  when
he  accepted  the  appointment  of  secretary  of  lega-
tion to  Naples  in  association  with  William  Pinck-
ney,  afterward  accompanying  Mr.  Pinckney  to
Russia  in  the  same  capacity.  On  his  return  from
Europe  in  1818,  Mr.  King  removed  to  Dallas  coun-
ty, Ala.,  and  served  as  a  delegate  to  the  conven-
tion that  organized  a  state  government.  On  the
adoption  of  the  state  constitution,  he  was  elected
U.  S.  senator,  and  served  until  1844,  when  Presi-
dent Tyler  appointed  him  minister  to  France.
The  proposed  annexation  of  Texas  was  at  that
time  exciting  the  opposition  of  England,  and  it
was  believed  that  France  might  be  persuaded  to
join  in  the  protest.  Mr.  King,  who  earnestly  fa-
vored the  undertaking,  insisted  on  receiving  from
Louis  Philippe  a  frank  avowal  of  his  policy.  The
reply  was  satisfactory,  and  annexation  took  place
without  opposition  from  any  of  the  European
powers.  In  1846  Mr.  King  was  recalled  at  his  own
request,  and  in  1848  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  senator
in  place  of  Arthur  P.  Bagby,  who  had  been  made
minister  to  Russia.  In  1849  he  was  elected  for
the  full  term  of  six  years,  and  in  1850  he  served
as  president  of  the  senate.  In  1852  Mr.  King  was
elected  vice-president  of  the  United  States  on  the
ticket  with  Franklin  Pierce,  but  failing  health
forced  him  to  visit.  Cuba  in  1853,  where  the  oath
of  office  was  administered  by  special  act  of  con-
gress. He  returned  to  this  country,  but  with
health  so  completely  shattered  that  he  died  the
day  after  reaching  home.  President  Pierce  paid  a
tribute  to  Mr.  King's  memory  in  his  annual  mes-
sage, and  the  usual  resolutions  were  passed  in  both
houses  of  congress.  Mr.  King  was  about  six  feet
high,  and  remarkably  erect  in  figure.  He  was  a
fine  talker  and  a  most  interesting  companion.
— His  elder  brother,  Thomas  D.,  soldier,  b.  in
Duplin  county,  N.  C,  22  Sept.,  1779 ;  d.  in  Tusca-
loosa, Ala.,  24  Feb.,  1854,  was  educated  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina,  and  was  frequently
elected  to  the  legislature,  in  which  he  served  in
both  houses.  He  became  major  in  the  43d  U.  S.
infantry  on  4  Aug.,  1813,  and  remained  in  the
service  until  peace  was  declared  in  1815.


KING,  William  Sterling,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  Oct.,  1818  ;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  29
June,  1882.  His  father,  Elisha  W.  King,  a  lawyer
of  New  York  city,  was  for  several  years  a  member
of  the  state  assembly.  William  was  educated  at
Yale  and  in  Union  college,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1837.  He  then  studied  law,  and  practised  his
profession  in  New  York  city  from  1839  till  1843.
About  that  time  he  removed  to  North  Providence,
R.  I.,  and  in  1852  settled  at  Roxbury,  Mass.,  where
he  remained  until  the  close  of  his  life.  In  1855  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legisla-
ture. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  com-
missioned captain  in  the  35th  Massachusetts  regi-
ment, and  commanded  it  at  South  Mountain  and
Antietam,  where  he  received  wounds,  from  the
effects  of  which  he  never  entirely  recovered.  He
was  soon  promoted  to  be  major  and  then  colonel,
and  in  1862-'3  became  chief  of  staff  of  the  2d  divis-
ion, 9th  army  corps,  provost-marshal  of  Kentucky,
and  military  commander  of  the  district  of  Lexing-
ton, Ky.  In  1864  he  received  a  commission  as
colonel  of  the  4th  Massachusetts  artillery,  and  in
1865  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  by
brevet.  After  he  was  mustered  out  of  service  Gov.
Andrew  appointed  him  chief  of  Massachusetts  state
police,  and  later  he  filled  successively  the  offices  of
assessor  of  U.  S.  internal  revenue,  and  registrar  of
probate  and  insolvency.  In  1875-'6  he  was  again
a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  and
chairman  of  the  military  committee.

KINGDON,  Hollingsworth  Tully,  Canadian
Anglican  bishop,  b.  in  England  in  1837.  He  was
graduated  in  1858,  ordained  a  priest  in  the  Church
of  England  in  1860,  and  became  senior  assistant
curate  at  St.  Andrew's,  Well  street,  London,  in
1869.  In  1878  he  was  appointed  vicar  of  Great
Easter,  Essex,  and  in  1880  became  coadjutor  bish-
op of  Fredericton,  New  Brunswick.  In  1881  the
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him.

KINGSBOROUGH,  Edward  King,  Viscount,
author,  b.  in  Cork,  Ireland,  16  Nov.,  1795 :  d.  in
Dublin,  27  Feb.,  1837.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of
George,  third  Earl  of  Kingston,  was  educated  at
Oxford, represented  Cork  in  parliament  in  1820-6,
and  subsequently  devoted  himself  to  his  great
work,  "  The  Antiquities  of  Mexico,  comprising  Fac-
similes of  Ancient  Mexican  Paintings  and  Hiero-
glyphics, together  with  the  Monuments  of  New
Spain  by  M.  Dupaix,  with  their  respective  Scales
of  Measurement,  and  accompanying  Descriptions,
the  Whole  illustrated  with  many  Valuable  inedited
MSS."  (9  vols.,  London,  1831-'48).  The  first  seven
volumes  are  estimated  to  have  cost  upward  of
$300,000.  The  eighth  and  ninth  were  published
after  his  death,  which  resulted  from  a  fever  con-
tracted in  a  debtor's  prison,  where  he  had  been
temporarily  confined  for  a  resistance  to  an  at-
tempted imposition.  The  work  is  chiefly  valuable
for  its  generally  faithful  reproduction  in  fac-simile
of  such  Mexican  hieroglyphical  or  painted  records
and  rituals  as  were  known  to  exist  in  the  private
collections  and  libraries  of  Europe,  but  their  care-
less arrangement  renders  them  unintelligible  except
to  advanced  students  in  American  archasology.
Most  of  his  original  speculations  are  loose  and
crude,  and  mainly  directed  to  the  hypothesis  of
the  Jewish  origin  of  the  American  Indians,  or  of
the  semi-civilized  nations  of  Mexico  and  Central
America.  The  ninth  volume,  containing  the  narra-
tive of  Don  Alva  Ixtlilxochitl,  closes  abruptly
without  finishing  the  imperfect  relation.

KINGSBURY,  Charles  P.,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  25  Dec,
1879. He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military


KINGSBURY


KINGSLEY


549


academy  in  1840,  and,  entering  the  army  as  2d  lieu-
tenant of  ordnance,  served  as  assistant  and  in  com-
mand of  various  arsenals  until  he  was  sent  with  the
armv  of  occupation  to  Texas.  Subsequently  during
the  Mexican  war  he  was  Gen.  Wool's  chief  ordnance
officer,  and  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Taylor  at
Buena  Vista.  In  April,  1861,  he  was  superintend-
ent of  the  U.  S.  armory  at  Harper's  Ferry,  when
it  was  burned  to  prevent  it  from  falling  into  the
hands  of  the  Confederate  troops.  He  was  chief  of
ordnance,  ranking  as  colonel,  in  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  in  1861-'2,  served  through  the  Virginia
peninsular  campaign,  and  was  engaged  in  the  seven
days'  battles  before  Richmond.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  and
in  July  of  that  year  was  placed  in  charge  of  the
U.  S.  arsenal  at  Water  town,  Mass.  In  December,
1870,  he  was  retired  on  his  application,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Treatise  on  Artillery  and  Infantry  "  (New  York,
1849),  and  also  contributed  to  various  periodicals.

KINGSBURY,  Cyrus,  missionary,  b.  in  Al-
stead,  N.  H.,  22  Nov.,  1786 ;  d.  at  a  mission  station
in  the  Choctaw  nation,  Indian  territory,  27  June,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1812,  and  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1815.  He  was
ordained  as  a  missionary  at  Ipswich,  Mass.,  29
Sept.,  1815,  engaged  in  mission  work  in  Virginia
and  Tennessee  from  January  till  July,  1816,  and
in  September  of  that  year  made  his  first  visit  to
the  Cherokees.  In  October  following  he  attended
a  general  council  of  the  Cherokees  and  Creeks,  and,
after  purchasing  a  plantation,  began  missionary
work  at  Brainard,  13  Jan.,  1817.  On  27  June,
1818,  after  travelling  400  miles  through  the  wil-
derness, he  established  the  first  mission  station
among  the  Choctaws  at  Elliot.  The  Choctaws
having  sold  their  lands  to  the  U.  S.  government  in
1830,  and  removed  to  the  country  west  of  the
present  state  of  Arkansas,  Mr.  Kingsbury,  in  the
summer  and  autumn  of  1834.  made  a  tour  among
the  Osages,  Creeks,  and  Cherokees,  and  in  Decem-
ber went  to  the  new  country  of  the  Choctaws,
settling  in  February,  1836.  with  his  family  at  Pine
Ridge,  near  Fort  Towson,  where  he  had  established
the  headquarters  of  the  mission.  He  labored  there
until  the  discontinuance  of  the  mission  by  the
American  board  in  1859,  and  afterward  in  the  same
field  in  connection  with  the  Presbyterian  and
Southern  Presbyterian  boards  till  his  death.

KINGSBURY,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  in  1755 ;  d.  in  Franklin,  Mo.,  1  July,  1837.
He  entered  the  Continental  army  as  a  private  in
1775,  served  in  Wayne's  Indian  campaign,  and  was
appointed  lieutenant  of  infantry,  29  Sept.,  1789.
He  rose  by  regular  promotion  to  the  rank  of  in-
spector-general, and,  for  gallant  services  on  the
Ohio  river  in  1791,  was  highly  complimented  by
Gen.  Josiah  Harmar.  He  was  for  many  years  on
duty  at  Detroit  and  Mackinaw,  and  afterward  at
Bellefontaine,  Fort  Adams,  and  New  Orleans.  He
retired  from  the  army  in  1815,  and  took  up  his
residence  in  Missouri.  —  His  son,  Julius  Jesse
Bronson,  b.  in  Connecticut  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  26  June,  1856,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1823,  and  served  in  the
Mexican  war,  attaining  the  rank  of  major. — An-
other son,  Thomas  H.  C,  b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
23  Dec,  1807;  killed  at  Antietam,  17  Sept.,  1862,
was  colonel  of  the  11th  Connecticut  regiment  at
the  time  of  his  death.

KINGSLEY,  Calvin,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Anns-
ville,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Bevrout,
Syria,  6  April,  1870.  In  1826  his  father's  family
removed  to  Ellington,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  where


for  the  first  time  he  met  with  the  Methodists,  and
at  eighteen  years  of  age  he  became  a  member  of
that  church.  After  teaching  for  several  years  he
was  graduated  at  Alleghany  college.  Pa.,  "in  1841,
and  was  at  once  employed  in  its  faculty,  and  also  ad-
mitted on  trial  to  the  Erie  conference  of  the  Method-
ist Episcopal  church.  The  next  year  he  was  chosen
professor  of  mathematics  and  civil  engineering,
and  during  the  years  1843-'4  he  acted  as  financial
agent  for  the  college.  He  was  elected  a  delegate
to  the  general  conference  in  1852,  and  afterward
to  each  quadrennial  session  of  that  body,  till  in
1864  he  was  elected  bishop.  In  1856  he  was  chosen
editor  of  the  "Western  Christian  Advocate"  at
Cincinnati,  where  he  remained  eight  years.  At  the
general  conference  of  1860  he  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  slavery,  and  took  an  active  part  in
defining  the  anti-slavery  position  of  the  church.
His  labors  in  the  episcopacy  called  him  to  travel
extensively,  not  only  over  every  part  of  this  coun-
try, but  also  in  foreign  lands.  In  1865-'6  he  held
the  conferences  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  in  1867
he  visited  the  missions  in  Europe.  In  1869  he
again  visited  California  and  Oregon,  then  passed
to  China,  and  thence  to  India,  intending  to  return
by  way  of  Europe,  but  died  before  his  purpose
could  be  carried  out.  His  published  works  are  a
review  of  "  Bush  on  the  Resurrection  "  (Cincinnati,
1847);  and  "Round  the  World"  (1870),  the  latter
a  posthumous  work.

KINGSLEY,  James  Luce,  educator,  b.  in  Wind-
ham, Conn.,  28  Aug.,  1778;  d.  in  New  Haven,  31
Aug.,  1852.  He  was  educated  at  Williams  and
Yale, where  he  was  graduated  in  1 799.  He  afterward
taught  for  two  years,  first  in  Wethersfield  and  then
in  Windham,  and  in  1801  became  a  tutor  in  Yale.
In  1805  he  was  appointed  to  the  newly  established
professorship  of  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin  in  that
institution.  He  was  relieved  of  a  part  of  his  duties
in  1831.  when  a  separate  professorship  of  Greek
was  established,  and  of  another  part  in  1835,  when
a  professorship  of  sacred  literature  was  founded,
but  he  continued  to  instruct  in  Latin  until  he  re-
signed in  1851.  As  a  writer  of  English,  President
Timothy  Dwight  called  him  the  "American  Addi-
son ";  and  President  Woolsey  said  of  him,  "  I  doubt
if  any  American  scholar  has  ever  surpassed  him  in
Latin  style."  He  published  a  discourse  on  the
200th  anniversarv  of  the  founding  of  New  Haven,
25  April,  1838 ;  editions  of  Tacitus  (Philadelphia),
and  Cicero,  "  De  Oratore  "  (New  York) :  and  was
the  author  of  a  history  of  Yale  college  in  the
"American  Quarterly  Register  "  (1835) ;  a  life  of
Ezra  Stiles,  president  of  Yale  college,  in  Sparks's
"  American  Biographv."

KINGSLEY,  William  Charles,  contractor,  b.
in  Franklin  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1833 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
21  Feb.,  1885.  Hi's  early  years  were  passed  on  a
farm,  and  after  teaching  for  a  time  he  superin-
tended railroad  work  in  Illinois  and  Wisconsin,
and  in  1856  went  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was
a  contractor  to  construct  city  water-works.  He
became  convinced  as  early  as  1865  of  the  feasibility
of  a  bridge  that  should  connect  Brooklyn  with
New  York,  and  labored  to  interest  wealthy  men  in
his  project.  The  New  YTork  bridge  company  was
organized  in  1867,  with  a  nominal  capital  of
$5,000,000.  Mr.  Kingsley  became  a  shareholder,
was  made  superintendent  of  the  work,  was  paid
fifteen  per  cent,  on  the  cost,  and  in  1875  the  bridge
was  placed  in  charge  of  a  board  of  trustees,  of
whom  he  was  one  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.
In  1882  he  succeeded  Henry  C.  Murphy  as  presi-
dent of  the  board,  and  saw  "the  bridge  completed
and  formally  opened,  24  May,  1883.


550


KINLOCH


KINNERSLEY


KINLOCH,  Francis,  patriot,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  7  March,  1755 ;  d.  there,  8  Feb.,  1826.  His
father,  Francis,  was  a  member  of  his  majesty's
council  for  South  Carolina  from  1717  till  1757,  and
at  one  time  its  president,  and  his  grandfather,
James,  came  from  England  about  1700.  The  son
was  first  educated  in  Charleston,  but  was  sent  to
London  in  17(58,  after  his  father's  death,  and  placed
at  Eton.  In  1774.  after  travelling  through  France,
Italy,  and  Switzerland,  he  remained  in  Geneva  with
his  friend,  John  von  Muller,  the  Swiss  historian.
At  first  he  sympathized  with  the  Tories,  but  at  the
beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  returned  to
Charleston,  received  a  captain's  commission,  and
was  on  Gen.  Isaac  Huger  s  staff  at  the  attack  on
Savannah  in  1779,  receiving  a  bullet  wound.  He
then  served  on  Gen.  William  Moultrie's  staff  until
1780,  when  he  was  sent  to  the  Continental  congress
in  Philadelphia  for  one  year.  While  trying  to  es-
cape from  his  house  during  "  Simcoe's  raid,"  he
was  captured,  but  released  on  parole  and  returned
home.  After  the  war  he  was  engaged,  with  his
brother  Cleland,  in  settling  their  desolated  estates
near  Georgetown.  For  many  years  he  served  in
the  state  house  of  representatives,  and  was  a  justice
of  the  peace  and  of  the  quorum.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  convention  of  1787,  and  voted  there  in
favor  of  ratifying  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislative  coun-
cil in  1789,  and  in  1790  one  of  the  convention  that
formed  the  constitution  for  South  Carolina.  In
1803  he  went  with  his  family  to  the  south  of
France  and  Geneva,  but  about  1806  he  returned
to  Charleston.  He  was  the  author  of  "Letters
from  Geneva  "  (2  vols.,  Boston),  and  a  "  Eulogy  on
George  Washington,  Esq."  (Georgetown,  1800;  re-
printed privately,  New  York,  1847). — His  brother,
Cleland,  planter,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1759  ;
d.  at  Acton,  S.  C,  23  Sept.,  1823,  was  educated  at
Eton  and  in  Holland.  Pie  remained  in  Scotland
during  the  Revolution,  and  on  his  return  to  Caro-
lina in  1783  was  amerced,  but  his  property  re-
stored. He  served  frequently  in  the  state  legisla-
ture, was  a  delegate  to  the  conventions  of  1787  and
1790,  also  holding  other  offices.  He  was  among
the  most  successful  rice-planters  in  the  state,  and
one  of  the  first  to  adopt  the  tide-water  cultivation
and  the  new  pounding  and  threshing  machinery,
and  to  encourage  inventions  and  improvement  .

KINLOCH,  Robert  Alexander,  physician,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C.  20  Feb.,  1826.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Charleston  college  in  1845,  and  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1848,  and  subsequently  spent  nearly  two  years  in
study  abroad.  He  has  since  practised  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  where  he  became  the  first  surgeon  of  the
Roper  hospital.  He  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Confed-
erate army,  serving  as  medical  director  in  the  De-
partment of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,
as  medical  inspector  of  hospitals,  and  as  a  member
of  the  army  examining  boards  in  Richmond  and
Charleston.  He  has  been  president  of  the  State
medical  association  and  vice-president  of  the
American  medical  association,  and  since  1867  pro-
fessor of  surgery  in  the  Medical  college  of  South
Carolina.  In  1876  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Inter-
national medical  congress.  He  has  invented  sev-
eral surgical  instruments  and  appliances,  chiefly
urethrotome  stone  pessaries.  He  was  the  first  in
the  United  States  to  reset  the  knee-joint  for  chronic
disease.  He  is  the  first  surgeon  that  ever  per-
formed laparotomy  for  gun-shot  wound  of  the  ab-
domen, without  protrusion  of  viscera.  He  has  con-
tributed to  medical  periodicals,  and  at  one  time
edited  the  "  Charleston  Medical  Journal."


KINNE,  Aaron,  clergvman,  b.  in  Lisbon,  Conn.,
in  1745;  d.  in  Talmadge,*Ohio,  9  July,  1824.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1765,  ordained  in  Octo-
ber, 1770,  and  had  charge  of  a  Congregational
church  in  Groton,  Conn.  He  published  "  The  Son-
ship  of  Christ "  ;  "A  Display  of  Scripture  Prophe-
cies "  (1813) ;  "  Explanation  of  the  Types,  Prophe-
cies, Revelation,  etc."  (1814) ;  and  "  An  Essay  on
the  New  Heaven  and  Earth  "  (1821).

KINNERSLEY,  Ebenezer,  electrician,  b.  in
Gloucester,  England,  30  Nov.,  1711;  d.  in  Lower
Dublin,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  July,  1778.  He  was  a
son  of  Rev.  William  Kinnersley,  an  assistant  pas-
tor of  the  Lower  Dublin  Baptist  church,  and  cam
to  this  country  with  his  parents  in  1714.  His
early  life  was  passed  at  Dublin,  and  then  he  went
to  Philadelphia,  where  he  gave  evidence  of  his  ge-
nius as  a  scholar  and  mechanician.  It  is  supposed
that  he  taught  a  school  there  and  associated  with
Benjamin  Franklin,  who  soon  learned  to  appreci-
ate young  Kinnersley,  whom  he  designates  as  "  an
ingenious  neighbor.  When  Franklin  saw  Dr.
Spence,  a  Scotchman  in  Boston,  experiment  with
a  glass  tube  and  silk,  and  observed  the  effects  that
were  produced,  he  communicated  the  fact  to  his
associates  in  Philadelphia,  and  soon  a  hundred
tubes  were  in  use.  Among  those  who  devoted  spe-
cial attention  to  the  subject  were  Franklin,  Kin-
nersley, Philip  Syng,  and  Thomas  Hopkinson.
Mr.  Kinnersley,  being  out  of  business,  devoted  all
his  time  to  the  subject,  and  in  a  couple  of  years
the  discoveries  that  were  made  were  such  as  to  as-
tound the  learned  of  Europe,  to  whom  they  were
communicated  by  Franklin  in  his  letters  to  the
well-known  Peter  Collinson,  of  London,  by  whom
they  were  published.  It  was  thus  that "  The  Phila-
delphia experiments  "  became  known  and  the  names
of  Franklin  and  Kinnersley  were  prominently  asso-
ciated with  them  and  the  discoveries  that  were
made.  The  electric  fire,  as  it  was  then  termed,
was  a  subject  that  engrossed  scientific  scholars  in
England  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  but  the
Philadelphia  philosophers  appeared  to  surpass  all
in  their  discoveries.  In  1748  Kinnersley  demon-
strated that  the  electric  fluid  actually  passed
through  water,  and  proved  it  by  a  trough  ten  feet
long  full  of  water.  He  also  invented  the  "  magi-
cal picture  "  referred  to  by  the  Abbe  Nollet,  and
produced  the  ringing  of  chimes  of  bells.  In  1751
he  began  delivering  lectures  on  "  The  Newly  Dis-
covered Electrical  Fire  " — the  first  of  the  kind  in
America  or  Europe.  His  advertisement  in  the
"Pennsylvania  Gazette"  of  11  April,  1751,  is  as
follows  :  "  Notice  is  hereby  given  to  the  Curious,
that  Wednesday  next,  Mr.  Kinnersley  proposes  to
begin  a  course  of  experiments  on  the  newly  dis-
covered Electrical  Fire,  containing  not  only  the
most  curious  of  those  that  have  been  made  and
published  in  Europe,  but  a  considerable  number  of
new  ones  lately  made  in  this  city,  to  be 'accompa-
nied with  methodical  Lectures  on  the  nature  and
properties  of  that  wonderful  element."  These  lec-
tures proved  a  complete  success,  and  were  attend-
ed by  persons  of  all  classes.  In  September,  1751,
he  went  to  Boston  with  a  letter  from  Franklin  to
Gov.  James  Bowdoin,  and  delivered  his  lectures  in
Faneuil  hall.  The  governor  said  they  "were
pleasing  to  all  sorts  of  people  and  were  very  curi-
ous." While  at  Boston  he  continued  his  experi-
ments and  discovered  the  difference  between  the
electricity  that  was  produced  by  the  glass  and  sul-
phur globes,  which  he  at  once  communicated  to
Franklin  at'  Philadelphia.  Until  then  the  theory
of  Du  Fay  as  to  the  vitreous  and  resinous  elec-
tricity was  generally  adopted,  but  now  Kinnersley


KINNEY


KINNEY


551


showed  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  positive  and  nega-
tive theory  was  correct.  Prom  Boston  he  went  to
Newport,  R.  I.,  and  in  March,  1752,  repeated  his
lectures  there  and  suggested  how  houses  and  barns
might  be  protected  from  lightning.  This  was
three  months  before  the  time  that  Franklin  drew
the  electricity  from  the  clouds.  He  then  visited
New  York  and  lectured  on  the  subject.  In  1753
Mr.  Kinnersley  was  elected  chief  master  in  the  Col-
lege of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1755  he  was  appoint-
ed professor  of  English  and  oratory,  holding  the
office  until  1772,  when,  owing  to  failing  health,  he
resigned.  In  1757  Dr.  Franklin  went  to  London
as  agent  for  Pennsylvania.  Mr.  Kinnersley  con-
tinued his  experiments,  invented  an  electrical  ther-
mometer, and  proved  that  heat  could  be  produced
by  electricity,  which  was  not  known  before.  In
1764  he  published  a  syllabus  of  his  lectures  on
electricity,  a  copy  of  which  is  in  the  Philadelphia
library.  This  pamphlet  gave  in  detail  most  of  the
experiments  that  he  performed,  among  others  an
orrery  propelled  by  electricity ;  and  he  suggested
that  perhaps  the  solar  system  might  be  sustained
in  the  same  way.  In  this  country  he  was  better
known  than  Franklin,  and  even  in  Europe  his
name  was  very  frequently  mentioned,  as  may  be
seen  in  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley's  "  History  of  Electrici-
ty," and  in  a  volume  published  by  the  Abbe  Bec-
caria,  of  the  University  of  Turin.  Both  have  paid
Prof.  Kinnersley  high  honor.  He  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Lower  Dublin  Baptist  church  while
young,  and  in  1743  was  ordained  as  a  minister,
but  he  never  acted  as  a  pastor.  The  American
philosophical  society  chose  him  as  a  member,  and
the  degree  of  M.  A.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the
College  of  Philadelphia.  There  is  a  window  in  his
memory  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.

KINNEY,  Coates,  poet,  b.  near  Penn  Van.
Yates  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Nov..  1826.  He  was  partly
educated  at  Antioch  college.  Yellow  Springs.  Ohio,
studied  law  with  Thomas  Corwin,  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  Cincinnati.  After  practising
about  three  years  he  engaged  in  journalism,  edit-
ing the  daily  Cincinnati  "  Times  "  and  the  "  Ohio
State  Journal."  He  was  a  paymaster  in  the  U.  S.
army  from  June,  1861,  till  November,  1865,  and
was  mustered  out  with  the  commission  of  brevet
lieu  tenant  -colonel  of  volunteers.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  convention  that  nominated  Gen.  Grant
for  the  presidency  in  1868,  and  its  Ohio  secretary.
In  1882-'3  he  was  senator  from  the  5th  district  in
the  Ohio  legislature,  and  delivered  a  speech  against
"The  Official  Railroad  Pass."  He  has  published
"Ke-u-ka  and  Other  Poems"  (Cincinnati,  1855),
and  has  written  several  minor  lyrics,  of  which
"The  Rain  on  the  Roof,"  which  has  been  set  to
music,  is  the  most  popular.

KINNEY,  John  Fitch,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Oswego  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  April,  1816.  After  receiving
an  academic  education,  he  studied  law  and  settled
in  Marysville,  Ohio,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1837.  In  1839  he  removed  to  Mount  Ver-
non, Ohio,  practising  law  there  till  1844,  and  then
removed  to  Lee  county,  Iowa.  He  became  secre-
tary of  the  legislative  council  for  Iowa  territory,
and  also  district  attorney,  and  on  the  admission  of
Iowa  as  a  state  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court,  holding  this  office  two  years,  after
which  he  was  elected  to  the  same  office  by  the
legislature  for  a  term  of  six  years.  In  1853  he
was  appointed  by  President  Pierce  chief  justice  of
the  supreme  court  of  Utah,  to  which  office  he
was  again  appointed  in  1860.  He  was  elected  a
delegate  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served
from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,  1865.


KINNEY,  Jonathan  Kendrick,  lawyer,  b.  in
Royalton,  Windsor  co.,  Vt.,  26  Oct.,  1843.  He  is
a  great-grandson  of  the  Rev.  Jonathan  Kinney,
and  was  educated  in  the  common  schools  of  his
native  town,  and  at  the  Royalton  academy.  He
served  in  the  volunteer  army'in  the  civil  war,  and
at  its  close  engaged  in  business  in  the  west,  and
later  entered  the  Harvard  law-school,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1875.  He  has  since  practised  his
profession,  reported  cases,  and  contributed  to  legal

Eeriodicals.  He  has  published  "A  Digest  of  the
>ecisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States"  (Boston,  1887),  and  edited  the  "Law  of
Railways,"  by  Isaac  F.  Redfield  (1887).

KINNEY,"  William  Burnet,  journalist,  b.  in
Speedwell,  Morris  co.,  N.  J.,  4  Sept.,  1799;  d.  in
New  York  city,  21  Oct.,  1880.  His  grandfather,
Sir  Thomas  Kinney,  came  to  this  country  before
the  Revolution  to  explore  the  mineral  resources
of  New  Jersey.  Will-
iam Burnet  received  a
good  education,  and
subsequently  studied
law  under  Joseph  C.
Homblower.  In  1820
he  began  the  life  of  an
editor  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
which,  with  one  or  two
interruptions,  he  con-
tinued to  lead  until  his
appointment,  in  1851,
as  U.  S.  minister  to
Sardinia.  Prior  to  this
event  he  had  been  con-
spicuous in  various
public  capacities,  and
among  them  as  a  dele-
gate, in  1844.  to  the  Baltimore  Whig  convention,
where  he  was  largely  instrumental  in  securing
the  nomination  of  his  friend,  Theodore  Freling-
huysen,  for  the  vice-presidency,  with  Henry  Clay.
While  minister  at  Turin  he  discussed  with  Count
Cavour  and  other  eminent  men  of  the  kingdom  of
Sardinia  the  movement  for  the  unification  of  Italy.
He  rendered  also,  at  the  same  time,  important
services  to  Great  Britain,  for  which  he  received  an
acknowledgment  in  a  special  despatch  from  Lord
Palmerston.  When  the  U.  S.  government  offered
to  transport  Kossuth  to  the  United  States  in  a
national  ship,  detached  from  the  Mediterranean
squadron,  Mr.  Kinney  made  himself  acquainted
with  the  aims  and  purposes  of  the  Hungarian
exile,  an!  gave  prompt  instructions  to  the  com-
mander, and  information  to  his  own  government,
of  the  objects  of  the  fugitive.  Daniel  Webster,
who  was  at  that  time  secretary  of  state,  thwarted
Kossuth's  philanthropic  but  impracticable  efforts
to  enlist  the  United  States  in  a  foreign  complica-
tion. On  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office  he
removed  from  Turin  to  Florence,  where  he  devoted
much  of  his  time  to  making  additions  to  the  new
information,  which  his  post  had  enabled  him  to
acquire,  relative  to  the  Medici  family,  with  a  view
to  producing  a  historical  work,  which  promised  to
be  of  great  importance,  but  he  did  not  live  to  ac-
complish it— His  wife,  Elizabeth  Clementine,
poet.  b.  in  New  York  city,  18  Dec,  1810;  d.  in
Summit.  N.  J..  19  Nov.,  1889.  She  was  the  daugh-
ter of  David  L.  Dodge,  and  her  first  husband  was
Edmund  B.  Stedman.  a  merchant  of  Hartford,
Conn.  She  contributed  to  periodical  literature,
and  published  "  Felicita,  a  Metrical  Romance"
(New  York.  1855);  "Poems"  (1867);  and  "Bianca
Capello."  a  tragedy  founded  on  Italian  history,  and
written  during  her  residence  abroad  (1873).


552


KINNISON


KIP


KINNISON,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Old  Kingston,
near  Portsmouth,  Me.,  17  Nov.,  1736;  d.  in  Chi-
cago, 111.,  24  Feb.,  1851.  He  owned  a  farm  in
Lebanon,  and  was  one  of  seventeen  who  formed  a
political  club  and  held  secret  meetings  in  a  tavern.
They  went  to  Boston  and  took  part  in  the  destruc-
tion of  the  tea  in  the  harbor.  Kinnison  was  in
active  service  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  and
afterward  settled  in  Danville,  Vt„  where  he  en-
gaged in  farming  eight  years.  He  then  removed
to  Wells,  Me.,  and  resided  there  until  the  war  of
1812,  through  which  he  served,  being  wounded  at
Williamsburg.  In  1845  he  went  to  Chicago,  re-
duced to  extreme  poverty,  with  a  pensidn  of  $96  a
year,  and  until  1848  earned  money  by  manual  labor.
At  a  public  anti-slavery  meeting  in  the  summer  of
1848  he  addressed  the  audience  with  marked  effect.
He  was  the  last  survivor  of  the  Boston  "  tea-party."

KINSELLA,  Thomas,  journalist,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1832;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  11  Feb.,  1884.  He
came  to  this  country  when  a  boy, learned  the

Srinter's  trade,  and  in  1861  became  editor  of  the
irooklyn,  N.  Y.,  "  Eagle."  He  supported  An-
drew Johnson,  and  favored  the  nominations  of
Horace  Greeley  in  1872,  Samuel  J.  Tilden  in  1876,
and  Gen.  Hancock  in  1880.  In  1866  he  was  made
postmaster  of  Brooklyn,  and  he  afterward  held
other  local  offices.  He  was  a  member  of  congress
in  1871-'3,  and  he  was  also  one  of  the  original
Brooklyn  bridge  trustees,  and  president  of  the
Faust  society  and  the  St.  Patrick's  club.

KINSEY,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1693;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  11  May,  1750.
He  was  the  son  of  a  Quaker  preacher,  and  the
grandson  of  John  Kinsey,  one  of  the  commission-
ers of  the  proprietors  of  West  Jersey,  who  came
from  London  in  1677.  The  son  was  educated  in
the  law,  and  practised  in  the  courts  of  New  Jersey
and  Pennsylvania.  In  1725  he  appeared  as  coun-
sel in  a  cause  before  the  court  of  chancery  in  Phila-
delphia, and  on  his  arising  to  address  the  court
with  head  covered,  after  the  manner  of  the  Quak-
ers, Sir  William  Keith,  the  governor  and  president
of  the  court,  ordered  Kinsey  to  take  off  his  hat,
which  he  refused  to  do,  whereupon  Keith  directed
an  officer  to  remove  it.  This  act  on  Keith's  part
gave  great  offence  to  the  Quakers.  They  claimed
that  under  the  law  they  had  the  right  to  remain  in
court  with  heads  covered,  and  to  this  effect  ad-
dressed a  petition  to  the  governor,  in  consequence
of  which  Keith  rescinded  his  ruling  and  ordered
that  a  decree  to  this  end  be  entered  on  the  minutes
of  the  court.  Up  to  1730  Kinsey  resided  in  New
Jersey,  where  he  served  in  the  assembly,  and  for
several  years  was  speaker  of  that  body ;  but  after
this  date  he  lived  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  the  same
year  was  chosen  to  the  assembly  of  Pennsylvania,
to  which  body  he  was  continuously  re-elected  till
his  death,  and  after  1739  was  its  speaker.  He  was
attorney-general  of  the  province  from  1738  till
1741,  and  in  1743  was  appointed  chief  justice,
which  post  he  held  until  his  death.  In  1737  he
was  one  of  the  two  commissioners  that  were  sent
to  Maryland  to  negotiate  for  a  settlement  of  the
boundary  dispute,  and  in  1745  was  one  of  the  com-
missioners who,  in  conjunction  with  commissioners
from  New  York,  Massachusetts,  and  Connecticut,
negotiated  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  a  treaty  with  the  Six
Nations.  He  published  "  Laws  of  New  Jersey  "
(1733). — His  son,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  22  March,  1731 ;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  4  Jan.,
1803,  became  eminent  as  a  lawyer  and  practised  in
the  courts  of  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey.  In
1772  he  was  chosen  to  the  assembly  of  New  Jersey,
and  was  the  leader  of  the  opposition  to  Gov.  Will-


iam Franklin.  In  1774  he  was  elected  to  the  Con-
tinental congress,  but  resigned  the  office  in  No-
vember. He  was  chief  justice  of  New  Jersey  from
1789  till  his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1790.

KINZIE,  John,  founder  of  Chicago,  b.  in  Que-
bec, Canada,  in  1763:  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  6  Jan.,
1828.  He  was  of  Scotch  parentage,  and  the  son  of
John  McKenzie,  but  dropped  the  prefix  to  the  fam-
ily name,  and  his  descendants  spell  it  as  it  is  gives
above.  His  father  died  when  the  boy  was  quite
young,  and  his  mother  married  William  Forsythe,
a  merchant,  who  settled  in  New  York  city.  At
the  age  of  ten  John  ran  away  from  home,  and  fol-
lowed the  trade  of  a  jeweler  in  Quebec  for  three
years,  but  afterward  became  an  Indian  trader  in
the  west.  In  1804  he  established  a  trading-post
on  the  site  of  the  present  city  of  Chicago,  where
he  was  the  first  white  settler,  and  he  subsequently
founded  others  on  Rock,  Illinois,  and  Kankakee
rivers.  He  was  twice  married.  His  daughter,
Maria,  became  the  wife  of  Gen.  David  Hunter. —
His  daughter-in-law,  Mrs.  John  H.  Kinzie,  wrote
"  Wau-bun,  or  the  Early  Day  in  the  Northwest,"
being  the  early  history  of  Chicago  (New  York,  1856).

KIP,  William  Ingraham,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
New  York  city,  3  Oct.,  1811.  He  is  descended
from  Ruloff  de  Kype,  a  native  of  Brittany,  and  a
warm  partisan  of  the  Guises  in  the  French  civil
wars  between  Protestants  and  Papists  in  the  16th
century.  On  the
defeat  of  his  party
he  fled  to  the  Low
Countries,  and,
joining  the  army
of  the  Due  d'An-
jou,  fell  in  battle
near  Jarnac.  His
son,  Ruloff,  became
a  Protestant  and
settled  in  Am-
sterdam, and  his
grandson,  Henry
(b.  in  1576),  was  an
active  member  of
the  Company  of
foreign  countries
that  was  organized
in  1588  to  explore
a  northeast  passage  to  the  Indies.  In  1635  he  came
to  America  with  his  family,  but  soon  returned  to
Holland.  His  sons  remained,  bought  large  tracts
of  land,  and  were  active  in  public  affairs.  One  of
them,  Henry,  was  a  member  of  the  first  popular
assembly  in  New  Netherlands,  and  another,  Isaac,
owned  the  property  that  is  now  the  City  hall  park,
New  York  city.  William  Ingraham  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1831,  studied  law,  and  afterward  divini-
ty. He  was  graduated  at  the  General  theological
seminary,  and  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  in  1835.  He  was  first  called  to  St.
Peter's,  Morristown,  N.  J.,  and  then  served  as
assistant  at  Grace  church,  New  York  city.  In
1838  he  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's,  Albany,
which  office  he  retained  until  he  was  chosen  mis-
sionary bishop  of  California  in  1853.  He  was
elected  bishop  in  1857.  Bishop  Kip  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1847,  and
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1872.  He  has  been
a  contributor  to  the  "  Church "  review  and  the
"  Churchman,"  and  has  published  "  The  Lenten
Fast"  (New  York,  1843);  "The  Double  Witness  of
the  Church  "  (1844) ;  "  The  Christmas  Holidays  in
Rome"  (1845;  London,  1846);  "Early  Jesuit  Mis-
sions in  America  "  (New  York,  1846) ;  "  Early  Con-


{0*yi  .Jhy.ts/t^^JzlJi^


KIRBY


KIRK


553


flicts  of  Christianity"  (New  York  and  London,
1850);  "The  Catacombs  of  Rome"  (New  York,
1854);  "Unnoticed  Things  of  Scripture"  (1868);
"  The  Olden  Time  in  New  York  "  (1872) ;  and  "  The
Church  of  the  Apostles"  (1877).  He  has  also
edited  "The  Confessions  of  a  Romish  Convert"
(New  York,  1850).  Many  of  his  works  have  gone
through  several  editions. — His  brother,  Leonard,
author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  13  Sept.,  1826,  was
graduated  at  Trinity  in  1846,  and  studied  law.  In
1849  he  went  to  California  by  way  of  Cape  Horn.
But  he  soon  returned  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  he
has  since  followed  his  profession.  In  1885  he  was
made  president  of  the  Albany  institute.  Mr.  Kip
has  contributed  tales  and  sketches  to  the  maga-
zines, and  has  published  "California  Sketches"
(New  York,  1850);  "Volcano  Diggings"  (1851);
"  jEnone,  a  Roman  Tale  "  (1866) ;  "  The  Dead  Mar-
quise "  (1873) ;  "  Hannibal's  War,  and  other  Christ-
mas Stories"  (Albany,  1878):  "Under  the  Bells"
(New  York,  1879) ;  and  "  Nestlenook  "  (1880).

KIRBY,  Ephraim,  jurist,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  23  Feb.,  1757 ;  d.  in  Fort  Stoddard.  Miss.,
2  Oct.,  1804.  He  spent  his  boyhood  on  his  father's
farm,  but  joined  the  Revolutionary  army  before
the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  and  served  through  the
war,  participating  in  nineteen  actions  and  receiv-
ing thirteen  wounds.  At  Germantown  he  was  left
for  dead  on  the  field.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he
earned  by  manual  labor  the  means  of  obtaining  a
classical  education,  was  for  a  short  time  a  student
at  Yale,  and  in  1787  received  from  that  college  the
honorary  degree  of  M.  A.  He  studied  law.  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  published  "  Reports  of
the  Decisions  of  the  Superior  Court  and  Court  of
Errors"  (Litchfield,  1789),  which  was  the  first
volume  of  reports  issued  in  the  state,  and  probably
the  first  in  the  United  States.  He  was  several
times  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  governor,  was
in  the  legislature  in  1791-1804,  and  in  1801  was
appointed  by  President  Jefferson  supervisor  of
U.  S.  revenue  for  Connecticut.  On  the  acquisition
of  Louisiana  he  was  made  a  judge  of  the  newly
organized  territory  of  Orleans,  but  died  on  his
way  to  enter  on  the  duties  of  the  office.  He  ac-
quired a  large  property  by  his  profession,  but
lost  it  through  the  dishonesty  of  an  agent  that  he
had  employed  to  purchase  land  in  Virginia. — His
son,  Reynold  Marvin,  soldier,  b.  in  Litchfield.
Conn..  1*0  March,  1790 ;  d.  in  Fort  Sullivan.  Me.,  7
Oct.,  1842,  entered  the  army,  9  July,  1813.  and  re-
ceived the  brevets  of  1st  lieutenant  and  captain  for
gallantry  in  the  siege  of  Fort  Erie.  He  became
captain  of  artillery  in  1824.  and  brevet-major  in  the
same  vear. — Another  son,  Edmund,  soldier,  b.  in
Litchfield  8  April,  1794 ;  d.  in  Brown ville,  N.  Y.,
20  Aug.,  1849,  entered  the  army.  6  July,  1812,
served  through  the  war  with  England,  and  in  1819
was  aide  to  Gen.  Jacob  Brown,  whose  daughter  he
married.  He  became  captain  in  May,  1824.  and
paymaster,  5  Aug..  1824,  relinquishing  his  rank  in
the  regular  line,  and  afterward  served  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  at  Monterey,  and  on  that
of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  in  the  valley  of  Mexico,
receiving  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  gal-
lantry at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  that  of
colonel  for  Molino  del  Rev. — Edmund's  son,  Ed-
mund, soldier,  b.  in  Brownville,  N.  Y.,  in  1840;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.  28  May,  1863,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1861,  and
assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.  He  was  made  1st
lieutenant  on  14  May,  1861,  and,  succeeding  to  the
command  of  his  battery  on  the  capture  of  Capt.
James  B.  Ricketts  at  Bull  Run.  he  retained  it  till
his  death. He was  engaged  with this battery


through  the  peninsula  and  Maryland  campaigns,
on  the  march  to  Falmouth,  Va.,  and  at  Fredericks-
burg and  Chancellorsville,  in  which  last  engage-
ment he  was  mortally  wounded.  For  his  gal-
lantry in  this  battle  he  was  given  on  his  death-bed
the  commission  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
to  date  from  23  May,  1863.

KIRBY,  J.  Hudson,  actor,  b.  on  shipboard  near
Sandy  Hook,  N.  J.,  3  April,  1819 ;  d.  in  London,
England,  in  1848.  He  first  appeared  in  subordi-
nate parts  in  1837,  at  the  Chestnut  street  theatre
in  Philadelphia.  Later  he  was  seen  at  the  Rich-
mond Hill  theatre  in  New  York  as  Young  Norval
in  Home's  tragedy  of  "  Douglas,"  and  other  leading
juvenile  characters.  For  a  brief  time  thereafter  he
managed  the  Franklin  theatre  in  New  York  city.
In  1842  he  played  in  Albany  and  other  places  as
Claude  Melnotte  in  "  The  Lady  of  Lyons,"  and
King  Lear  and  other  Shakespearian  parts.  Dur-
ing several  years  Kirby  was  engaged  as  leading
performer  at  the  Chatham  street  National  theatre.
Here  he  met  with  remarkable  popularity  in  the
dramas  "  Six  Degrees  of  Crime,"  "  The  Surgeon  of
Paris,"  "The  Carpenter  of  Rouen,"  and  others,
that  ran  nightly  for  several  seasons.  In  1845
Kirby  went  to  England,  where  he  performed  in
tragic  and  dramatic  parts  in  London  at  the  Olym-
pic, Surry,  and  other  theatres,  extending  his  pro-
fessional visits  to  the  other  large  cities  of  Great
Britain.  As  an  actor  he  was  favored  with  great
natural  endowments,  and  in  the  representation  of
some  romantic  characters  was  unequalled.  But
the  subtleties  of  the  higher  drama  were  beyond
his  grasp,  and  he  appeared  in  them  without  mak-
ing any  lasting  impressions.

KIRBY,  William,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Kingston-upon-Hull.  England.  13  Oct.,  1817.  He
came  to  Canada  in  1832,  studied  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  resided  for  a  time  in  Montreal,  and  removed
to  Niagara,  Out.,  in  1839.  He  edited  and  published
the  "Niagara  Mail"  from  1841  till  1861.  and  has
been  collector  of  customs  at  Niagara.  He  is  the
author,  among  other  works,  of  the  "  U.  E.,  a  Tale
of  Upper  Canada,"  a  poem  (Niagara,  1869) ;  "  Chien
D'Or,"  a  Canadian  historical  romance  (Montreal,
1877):  "Beaumanoir"  and  "Joseph  in  Egypt,"
dramas :  and  manv  poems.

KIRCHHOFF,  Charles  William  Henry,  min-
ing engineer,  b.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  28  March,
1853.  He  received  his  scientific  education  in  Eu-
rope, and  was  graduated  at  the  Royal  school  of
mines  in  Clausthal  in  1874.  After  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  settled  in  New  York,  and  was
connected  with  various  technical  journals,  becoming
in  1883  managing  editor  of  the  "  Engineering  and
Mining  Journal."  This  place  he  held  until  1886,
when  he  was  made  assistant  editor  of  the  "Iron
Age,"  and  he  became  its  editor  in  1887.  Mr.
Kirchhoff,  in  addition  to  his  editorial  work,  has
contributed  frequent  papers  of  scientific  value  to
the  "Transactions  of  the  American  Institute  of
Mining  Engineers."  of  which  society  he  is  a  mem-
ber. He  has  since  1882  prepared  annually  for  the
"Mineral  Resources  of  the  United  States"  chap-
ters on  certain  of  the  heavier  metals.

KIRK,  Edward  Norris.  clergvman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  14  Aug..  1802 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27
March,  1874.  He  was  of  Scotch  ancestry,  and
was  educated  at  Princeton,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1820.  After  studying  law  for  eighteen
months  in  New  York  city,  he  entered  Princeton
theological  seminary  and  remained  there  four
years,  after  which  he  was  appointed  agent  of  the
Board  of  foreign  missions,  and  travelled  through
the  south  in  its  behalf. In  1827  he  was  ordained


554


KIRK


KIRKE


assistant  pastor  of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  in
Albany,  and  in  1828  became  pastor  of  the  4th  Pres-
byterian church,  which  had  been  gathered  by  his
labors  in  the  revivals  under  Charles  G.  Finney.
Mr.  Kirk  coincided  with  Mr.  Finney's  views,  and
in  connection  with  Dr.  Beinaii,  of  Troy,  established
a  school  of  theology  to  train  young  men  for  service
in  the  ministry  as  evangelists.  In  1837  he  resigned
his  pastorate,  owing  to  impaired  health,  and  went
to  Europe,  preaching  in  London  and  Paris,  where
he  aided  in  establishing  the  first  American  Protest-
ant religious  service.  On  his  return  he  preached
as  an  evangelist,  but  in  June,  1842,  he  accepted
the  call  of  the  newly  organized  Mount  Vernon
Congregational  church,  Boston,  and  remained  there
till  1871,  when  he  resigned,  owing  to  the  infirmi-
ties of  age.  In  1856  he  visited  France  for  the  pur-
pose of  erecting  a  chapel  for  American  Protestants
in  Paris,  the  result  of  his  labors  there  nearly  twen-
ty years  before.  He  was  president  of  the  Ameri-
can missionary  association  and  secretary  of  the
Evangelical  alliance.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Amherst  in  1855.  He  was
the  author  of  a  "  Memorial  of  the  Rev.  John  Ches-
ter, D.  D."  (Albany,  1829) ;  "  Lectures  on  Christ's
Parables  "  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Sermons  "  (2  vols.,
1840;  Boston,  1860);  "Canon  of  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures "  (abridged,  1862) ;  and  translations  of  Gaus-
sen's  "  Inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  "  (New  York,
1842);  and  Jean  Frederic  Astie's  "Lectures  on
Louis  XIV.  and  the  Writers  of  his  Age  "  (Boston,
1855).  His  "  Lectures  on  Revivals  "  were  edited
by  Rev.  Daniel  0.  Mears  (Boston,  1874).

KIRK,  Edward  N.,  soldier,  b.  in  Jefferson  coun-
ty, Ohio,  29  Feb.,  1828 ;  d.  29  July,  1863.  He  set-
tled in  Sterling,  111.,  and  assisted  in  raising  and
organizing  the  34th  Illinois  regiment,  of  which  he
was  chosen  colonel.  He  commanded  a  brigade  at
Shiloh,  and  at  the  siege  of  Corinth,  on  29  Nov.,
1862,  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, and  commanded  a  brigade  in  Johnson's  di-
vision of  McCook's  corps  at  the  battle  of  Stone
River  in  January,  1863,  where  he  was  wounded.

KIRK,  John  Foster,  author,  b.  in  Frederic-
ton,  New  Brunswick,  22  March,  1824.  His  parents
removed  shortly  afterward  to  Halifax,  and  he  was
educated  by  a  private  tutor.  In  1842  he  left  Hali-
fax for  Quebec,  and  after  several  months  came  to
the  United  States  and  settled  in  Boston.  From
1847  till  1859  he  was  secretary  and  assistant  to
William  II.  Prescott,  and  aided  in  preparing  all
that  historian's  later  works.  In  1850  he  accompa-
nied Mr.  Prescott  to  Europe.  Mr.  Kirk  contribut-
ed through  all  these  years  and  up  to  1870  to  the
"  North  American  Review,"  the  "  Atlantic  Month-
ly," and  other  periodicals.  In  that  year  he  re-
moved to  Philadelphia,  where  he  edited  "Lippin-
cott's  Magazine  "  from  1870  till  1886.  In  the  lat-
ter year  he  was  appointed  lecturer  on  European
history  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He
has  published  "History  of  Charles  the  Bold"
(3  vols.,  Philadelphia  and  London,  1863-'8),  and
edited  the  complete  works  of  William  H.  Prescott
(1870-'4).— His  second  wife,  Ellen  Warner  Olney,
author,  b.  in  Southington,  Conn.,  6  Nov.,  1842,  is  a
daughter  of  Jesse  Olney,  the  geographer.  She  is
the  author  of  "Love  in  Idleness"  (Philadelphia,
1876);  "Through  Winding  Ways"  (1879);  "A
Lesson  in  Love "  (1881) ;  "  A  Midsummer  Mad-
ness "  (1884) ;  "  The  Story  of  Margaret  Kent,"  un-
der the  pen-name  of  "  Henry  Hayes  "  (1886) ;  and
"Sons  and  Daughters"  (1887).

KIRKBBIDE,  Thomas  Story,  physician,  b.
in  Morrisville,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  31  July,  1809 :  d.  in
Philadelphia,  16  Dec,  1883. His  ancestor,  Joseph,


came  to  this  country  with  William  Penn.  Thomas
was  educated  in  the  schools  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1832.  He  was  appointed  in  that  year  resi-
dent physician  of  the  Friends'  asylum  for  the  in-
sane at  Frankfort,  Pa.,  and  in  1833-5  held  the
same  office  in  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,  .Phila-
delphia, having  charge  of  its  west  wing,  which
was  the  first  hospital  department  in  the  country
for  the  treatment  of  the  insane.  He  then  engaged
in  general  practice  till  1840,  when  he  was  elected
superintendent  of  the  newly  established  Pennsyl-
vania hospital  for  the  insane,  where  he  remained
till  his  death.  He  was  the  first  in  this  country  to
place  the  sexes  in  entirely  separate  institutions,
and  in  1859  completed  a  new  building  for  his  male
patients  at  a  cost  of  $355,000,  which  he  had  raised
in  Philadelphia  and  vicinity.  Dr.  Kirkbride  was
a  careful  student  of  his  specialty,  and  remarkably
successful  in  his  treatment  of  the  insane.  He  was
one  of  the  founders,  and  for  eight  years  the  presi-
dent, of  the  Association  of  medical  superintend-
ents of  American  institutions  for  the  insane,  a
member  of  various  other  medical  societies  in  this
country  and  abroad,  and  connected  with  other
charitable  institutions  in  Philadelphia.  In  his
annual  reports,  which  are  of  great  value,  he  treated
at  length  of  the  construction,  heating,  and  venti-
lation of  hospitals  for  the  insane,  and  all  topics
connected  with  their  management.  Besides  these
he  published  "  Rules  and  Regulations  for  the
Pennsylvania  Hospital  for  the  Insane  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1850) ;  "  The  Construction,  Organization,  and
General  Management  of  Hospitals  for  the  Insane "
(1854)  :  "  Appeal  for  the  Insane  "  (1854)  ;  and
numerous  articles  and  reviews  in  the  "  American
Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences  "  and  the  "  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Insanity."

KIBKE,  Sir  David,  adventurer,  b.  in  Dieppe,
France,  in  1596 ;  d.  in  Ferryland,  Newfoundland,
about  1655.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Gervase
Kirke,  a  Scottish  merchant,  and  entered  business  as
a  wine-merchant  in  Bordeaux  and  Cognac.  Dur-
ing the  Huguenot  troubles  he  retired  to  England,
and,  accompanied  by  his  two  brothers,  commanded
an  expedition  of  three  vessels  under  royal  letters
of  marque  in  1627  to  break  up  the  French  settle-
ment in  Canada  and  Nova  Scotia.  The  expedition
was  sent  by  his  father,  who  had  become  interested
in  Sir  William  Alexander's  American  projects.
After  reaching  Tadousac,  Kirke  sent  parties  to
burn  the  houses  and  kill  the  cattle  at  Cape  Tour-
mente,  seized  the  French  forts,  and  ordered  Cham-
plain  to  surrender  Quebec.  The  latter  concealed
his  weakness  by  a  defiant  answer,  and  the  assail-
ants withdrew.'  Kirke  engaged  the  French  squad-
ron under  De  Roquemont,  near  Gaspe,  18  July,

1628,  and  defeated  him,  capturing  all  the  arms,
ammunition,  and  stores  that  were  intended  for
Quebec.  The  garrison  of  that  place  was  now  re-
duced to  extreme  suffering,  and  when  Kirke  reap-
peared before  the  town  with  his  squadron  in  July,

1629,  it  capitulated.— Kirke's  brother,  Louis,  was
appointed  governor,  and  was  the  first  military
commandant  of  Quebec  in  the  employ  of  the  Eng-
lish government.  He  displayed  much  courtesy
and  humanity  to  the  suffering  people  during  the
short  time  he  held  command.  England  relin-
quished these  conquests  in  1632;  but  Kirke  was
knighted  by  Charles  I.  in  1633,  and  with  others  ob-
tained a  grant  of  Newfoundland.  He  was  its
governor  for  nearly  twenty  years  until  dispossessed
by  Cromwell.  In  1653  he  returned,  having  recov-
ered part  of  his  property  by  bribing  Claypole.


KIRKHAM


KIRKLAND


555


KIRKHAM,  Ralph  Wilson,  soldier,  b.  in
Springfield,  Mass..  20  Feb.,  1821.  His  great-grand-
father. Henry  Kirkham,  served  in  the  French  and
Indian  wars  of  1755-'63,  and  his  grandfather  pai--
ticipated  in  the  American  Revolution,  and  was
severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Trenton,  26
Dec,  1776.  Ralph  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1842.  After  serving  on  gar-
rison and  frontier  duty,  he  participated  in  the
Mexican  war,  where  he  was  brevetted  1st  lieuten-
ant for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  Contre-
ras  and  Churubusco,  27  Aug.,  1847,  and  wounded
in  the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rev,  8  Sept.,  1847.  He
was  brevetted  captain  for  gallant  and  meritorious
conduct  in  the  storming  of  Chapultepec,  13  Sept.,
1847,  assisted  in  the  capture  of  Mexico,  13-14
Sept.,  1847,  and  honorably  mentioned  in  Gen.
Scott's  despatches.  While  in  Mexico  he  was  one
of  a  party  of  six  American  officers  and  an  English-
man who  ascended  to  the  summit  of  Popocatapetl,
the  original  number  that  set  out  upon  the  expe-
dition being  about  one  hundred.  This  mountain
had  never  been  ascended  since  the  time  of  Cortez,
a.  D.  1519.  From  6  Nov.,  1848,  till  1  Oct.,  1849,  he
was  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  with  head-
quarters at  St.  Louis.  Mo.  He  was  quartermaster
of  the  6th  infantry,  1  Oct.,  1849,  till  16  Nov..  1854.
when  he  was  ordered  to  the  Pacific  coast.  He
built  adobe  barracks  at  Fort  Tejon  and  a  military
post  at  Walla  Walla,  constructed  a  military  road
from  the  latter  place  to  Fort  Colville,  Washing-
ton territory,  participated  in  frontier  Indian  wars,
and  was  ordered  to  San  Francisco,  where  he
served  as  quartermaster  until  his  resignation  in
1870.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  chief
quartermaster  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific
in  1861,  and  subsequently  of  the  Department  of
California,  and  was  acting  chief  of  commissariat  in
1866.  On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  lieu-
tenant-colonel, colonel,  and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.
army,  for  faithful  and  meritorious  services  in  the

Quartermaster's  department  during  the  civil  war.
n  1870-'l  he  visited  the  far  east  with  William  II.
Seward.  He  now  (1887)  resides  in  Oakland,  Cal.,
where  he  has  one  of  the  best  libraries  on  the  Pa-
cific coast,  especially  upon  military  subjects.

KIRKLAND,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  1  Dec,  1741 ;  d.  in  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  28
Feb.,  1808.  He  was  the  son  of  Rev.  Daniel  Kirt-
land,  but  restored  the  old  spelling  of  the  family
name.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1765,
receiving  his  degree,  although  he  had  left  college
eight  months  before,  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the
Six  Nations.  After  remaining  with  the  tribes  a
year  and  a  half,  and  learning  the  Mohawk  and
Seneca  languages,  he  returned  to  Connecticut,  was
ordained  to  the  Congregational  ministry,  and  com-
missioned Indian  missionary  by  the  board  of  cor-
respondence of  the  Missionary  society.  He  then
went  to  Oneida,  and  continued  to  labor  among  the
tribes,  with  occasional  interruptions,  for  more  than
forty  years.  During  the  Revolution  he  was  active
in  endeavoring  to  preserve  the  neutrality  of  the
Six  Nations,  made  several  long  journeys  among
the  tribes,  and  attended  numerous  councils.  After
the  battle  of  Lexington  the  provincial  congress  of
Massachusetts  formally  requested  his  influence  to
secure  the  friendship  of  the  Six  Nations,  and  he
succeeded  in  attaching  the  Oneidas  to  the  patriot
cause,  although  the  other  tribes,  through  the  influ-
ence of  Sir  William  Johnson  and  the  Mohawk
sachem  Joseph  Brant,  had  joined  the  British.
Washington  said  of  this  mission  in  a  letter  ad
dressed  to  congress  in  1775:  "T
mate  my  sense  of  the  importan


inti-


station,  and  of  the  great  advantages  which  have  and
may  result  to  the  united  colonies  from  his  situation
being  made  respectable.  All  accounts  agree  that
much  of  the  favorable  disposition  shown  by  the  In-
dians may  be  ascribed  to  his  labor  and  influence."
He  became  brigade  chaplain  to  Gen.  John  Sullivan
in  1779,  and  accompanied  him  on  the  Susquehanna
expedition.  During  the  remainder  of  the  war  he
was  chaplain  to  the  Continental  forces  at  Fort
Schuyler  and  at  Stockbridge,  Mass.  When  peace
was  declared  he  resumed  his  work  among  the  In-
dians, and  in  1785  he  received  a  liberal  grant  of
land  from  congress  in  consideration  of  his  services
among  the  tribes.  In  1788  the  Indians  and  the
state  of  New  York  added  to  this  gift  a  large  and
valuable  tract,  on  which  he  settled  and  founded
the  present  town  of  Kirkland.  In  1791  he  made
a  statement  of  the  numbers  and  situation  of  the
Six  United  Nations,  and  in  the  winter  of  that  year
conducted  a  delegation  of  forty  warriors  to  con-
gress in  Philadelphia  in  order  to  consult  as  to  the
best  method  of  introducing  civilization  among  the
tribes.  In  1793  Mr.  Kirkland  established  the
Hamilton  Oneida  college  (now  Hamilton  college),
an  institution  for  the  education  of  American  and
Indian  youth.  See  a  memoir  of  Kirkland  by  his
grandson,  Rev.  Samuel  K.  Lothrop,  in  Sparks's
"American  Biography." — His  son,  John  Thorn-
ton, clergyman,  b.  in  Herkimer,  N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,
1770;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  April,  1840,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1789,  and  began  the
study  of  theology  at  Stockbridge,  Mass..  under  the
Rev.  Stephen  West,  but  on  changing  his  religious
views  returned  to  Cambridge,  and  while  preparing
to  enter  the  ministry  of  the  Unitarian  church  was
tutor  in  metaphysics  at  Harvard.  In  1794  he  was
ordained  and  installed  pastor  of  the  New  South
church,  Boston,  continuing  in  that  charge  till  1810,
when  he  was  elected  president  of  Harvard.  Under
his  administration  of  seventeen  years,  the  course
of  study  was  greatly  enlarged,  the  law-school  es-
tablished, the  medical  school  reorganized,  four
different  professorships  in  the  academical  depart-
ment were  endowed  and  filled,  three  new  buildings
erected,  and  large  additions  were  made  to  the  li-
brary. Princeton
gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in
1802,  and  Brown
that  of  LL.  D.  in
1810.  Dr.  Kirk-
land had  great
natural  dignity  of
person  and  charac-
ter, and  possessed
in  an  eminent  de-
gree a  knowledge
of  men.  His  con-
versation was  a
succession  of  aph-
orisms and  max-
ims. Hewasaverse
to  literary  effort.  .,  .  ,  -^

and  published  but  ^ \  &Z-.  /xe^y^^c^^J
few  works. These

include  "  Eulogy  on  Washington  "  (1799) ;  "  Biog-
raphy of  Fisher  Ames"  (Boston.  1809):  "Dis-
course on  the  Death  of  Hon.  George  Cabot "  (1823) ;
and  numerous  contributions  to  the  periodicals  of
the  dav. — Their  cousin,  William,  author,  b.  near
LTtica,"N.  Y.,  in  1800;  d.  near  Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  19
Oct.,  1846,  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in
1818,  was  tutor  there  in  1820,  and  in  1825-7  occu-
pied the  chair  of  the  Latin  language  and  literature.
He  resigned  his  professorship  in  1828,  and  estab-


556


KIRKLAND


KIRKPATRICK


lished  a  seminary  at  Geneva,  N.  Y.  After  spending
several  years  abroad,  he  removed  with  his  family
to  Michigan,  but  returned  to  New  York  in  1842,
and  with  Rev.  Henry  W.  Bellows  founded  "  The
Christian  Inquirer."  a  weekly  Unitarian  journal.
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  editor  of  the
"  New  York  Evening  Mirror."  Besides  many  other
contributions  to  periodical  literature,  he  is  the
author  of  a  series  of  "  Letters  from  Abroad,"
which  were  never  collected  in  book-form. — His
wife,  Caroline  Matilda  Stansbury,  author,  b.
in  New  York  city,  12  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  there,  6  April,
1864,  was  the  daughter  of  a  publisher  of  New
York  city.  After  his  death  she  removed  to  Clin-
ton, N.  Y.,  where  she  married  Mr.  Kirkland  in
1827.  Her  first  publications  were  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Mrs.  Mary  Clavers."  Returning  to  New
York  in  1842,  she  established  a  girls'  boarding-
school,  and  at  the  same  time  contributed  to  the
annuals  and  magazines.  She  became  the  editor  of
the  "  Union  Magazine,"  which  in  1848  was  re-
moved to  Philadelphia  and  published  as  "  Sartain's
Magazine."  Mrs.  Kirkland's  death  was  caused  by
overwork  in  her  efforts  to  make  the  great  New  York
sanitary  fair  a  success.  Her  works  include  "A  New
Home;  Who'll  Follow?"  (New  York,  1839):  "For-
est Life  "  (1842) ;  "  Western  Clearings  "  (1846) ;  an
"  Essay  on  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Spenser,"  pre-
fixed to  an  edition  of  the  first  book  of  the  "  Fairy
Queen  "  (1846) ;  "  Holidays  Abroad  "  (1849) ;  "  The
Evening  Book,  or  Sketches  of  Western  Life "
(1852) ;  "  A  Book  for  the  Home  Circle "  (1853) ;
"The  Helping  Hand"  (1853);  "Autumn  Hours
and  Fireside  Readings  "  (1854) ;  "  Garden  Walks
with  the  Poets  "  (1854) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Washing-
ton "  (1857) ;  "  School-Girl's  Garland  "  (1864) ;  and
"  The  Destiny  of  Our  Country  "  (1864). — Their  son,
Joseph,  author,  b.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  7  Jan.,  1830,
received  a  common  -  school  education,  and  since
1856  has  resided  in  Illinois.  He  was  successively
private,  lieutenant,  and  captain  in  the  12th  Illinois
volunteer  infantry  in  1861-'2,  and  major  in  1863,
and  served  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  After
the  war  he  engaged  in  coal  -  mining  in  central
Illinois  and  Indiana,  where  he  made  the  social
studies  that  have  given  their  bent  to  his  writings.
Mr.  Kirkland  is  a  lawyer  by  profession,  and  is  also
engaged  in  literary  work.  He  has  published
"Zury,  the  Meanest  Man  in  Spring  County,"  a
story  of  western  life  (Boston,  1887). — His  sister,
Elizabeth  Stansbury,  is  principal  of  a  young
ladies'  school  in  Chicago,  and  has  published  "  Six
Little  Cooks "  (Chicago,  1875) ;  "  Dora's  House-
keeping" (1877);  "A  Short  History  of  France"
(1878) ;  and  "  Speech  and  Manners  "  (1885).

KIRKLAND,  Thomas,  Canadian  educator,  b.
near  Tanderagee,  Armagh.  Ireland,  12  Aug.,  1835.
He  came  to  Canada  in  1854,  and  thereafter  was
successively  principal  of  Oshawa  and  Whitby
schools,  and  mathematical  master  in  Barrie  gram-
mar-school. In  18?l-'84  Mr.  Kirkland  was  science
master  in  Toronto  normal  school,  and  then  he  be-
came principal.  For  ten  years  he  was  professor
of  chemistry  and  physics,  and  lecturer  on  botany
in  Trinity  medical  school,  Toronto.  His  publica-
tions include  a  work  on  "  Statics,"  and  he  is  joint
author  of  "  Kirkland  and  Scott's  Arithmetics."

KIRKMAN,  Marshall  Monroe,  author,  b.  in
Illinois,  10  July,  1842.  Since  1856  he  has  been
connected  with  the  Chicago  and  Northwestern  rail-
road, as  accounting  officer,  local  treasurer,  and
comptroller.  He  has  published  "  Railway  Expen-
ditures "  (2  vols.,  Chicago,  1877) ;  "  Railway  Rev-
enue, Accounts  and  Forms "  (New  York,  1877) ;
"Hand-Book  of  Railway  Expenditures" (1877);


"  Train  and  Station  Service  "  (Chicago,  1879) ;  "  The
Baggage,  Parcel,  and  Mail  Traffic-'  (1879);  "The
Track  Accounts  of  Railroads"  (1882);  "Relation
of  Railroads  to  the  People"  (1885);  "Railway
Legislation"  (1886):  "The  Freight  Traffic  Way-
Bill "  (1886) ;  "  Division  of  Railway  Expenses  and
Earnings"  (1886);  "How  to  Collect  Railway  Rev-
enue Without  Loss"  (1886);  "Maintenance  of
Railways  "  (1886) ;  "  Paymaster's  Manual "  (1886) ;
and  "The  Handling  of  Railway  Supplies"  (1887).

KIRKPATRICK,  Andrew,  jurist,  b.  in  Mine
Brook,  N.  J.,  17  Feb.,  1756 ;  d.  in  New  Brunswick.
N.  J.,  7  Jan.,  1831.  His  father,  David,  emigrated
from  Scotland  to  the  United  States  and  settled  at
Mine  Brook,  in  1726.
Andrew  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton
in  1775,  was  subse-
quently classical  in-
structor in  the  Rut-
gers college  gram-
mar-school, and  at
the  same  time  stud-
ied law.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in
1785,  and,  settling
in  Morristown,  soon
established  a  large
practice.  In  1797  he
was  a  member  of  the
New  Jersey  legisla-
ture, but  he  resigned
at  the  end  of  the
first  session  to  become  judge  of  the  state  supreme
court.  Six  years  later  he  became  chief  justice  of
the  state,  and  he  was  twice  re-elected,  holding  the
office  for  twenty-one  years.  In  1792  he  married
Jane,  eldest  daughter  of  Col.  John  Bayard,  of  Bo-
hemia Manor.  Judge  Kirkpatrick  "  was  the  beau-
ideal,"  says  Aaron  Ogden  Dayton,  "  of  a  minister
of  justice.  His  enunciation  was  slow  and  distinct;
his  voice  full  and  musical ;  his  opinions,  when  not
previously  prepared,  were  delivered  with  fluency
and  clearness  ;  when  written,  the  language  in  which
they  were  clothed  was  marked  by  great  purity  and
precision.  His  opinions  exhibited  a  depth  of  re-
search which  entitled  him  to  rank  among  the  first
American  jurists."  His  decisions  are  in  Penning-
ton's, Southard's,  and  the  first  three  volumes  of
Halstead's  "  Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  New
Jersey." — His  wife,  Jane  Bayard,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  12  July,  1772 ;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  16  Feb.,  1851,  was  noted  for  her  accomplish-
ments, benevolence,  and  beautiful  Christian  char-
acter. She  is  the  author  of  "  The  Light  of  Other
Days,"  edited  by  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Jane  E.  Cogs-
well (New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  1856).  See  "  Memorials
of  Andrew  Kirkpatrick  and  of  his  Wife,  Jane  Bay-
ard," by  James  Grant  Wilson  (printed  privately,
New  York,  1870). — Their  second  son,  Littleton,  b.
in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  19  Oct.,  1797  ;  d.  at  Sara-
toga Springs,  N.  Y.,  15  Aug.,  1859,  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1815,  became  a  prominent  member
of  the  New  Jersey  bar,  and  was  a  member  of  con-
gress from  the  New  Brunswick  district  in  1843-'5,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  Two  of  their
grandsons,  Andrew  K.  Cogswell  and  Andrew  Kirk-
patrick, became  members  of  the  New  Jersey  bench.

KIRKPATRICK,  George  Airey,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Kingston,  Ont.,  13  Sept.,  1841.
He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  in
1861,  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Upper  Canada  in
1865,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Dominion
parliament  in  1870, 1872, 1874, 1878,  and  1882.  He
was  chosen  speaker  of  the  Canadian  parliament  on


KIRKPATRICK


KIRKWOOD


557


8  Feb.,  1883.  Mr.  Kirkpatrick  has  been  a  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  militia,  was  on  active  duty  dur-
ing the  Fenian  raid,  has  been  president  of  the
Dominion  rifle  association,  and  commanded  the
Canadian  rifle-team  at  Wimbledon  in  1876.

KIRKPATRICK,  John  Lycan,  clergyman,  b.
in  Mecklenburg  county,  N.  C,  20  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in
Lexington,  Va.,  24  June,  1885.  He  was  graduated
at  Hampden  Sidney  college  in  1832,  and  after
teaching  two  years  entered  Union  theological
seminary,  New  York  city.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1837,  and  installed  pastor  of  the  2d
Presbyterian  church  of  Lynchburg,  Va.  In  1841
he  accepted  a  call  from  Gainesville,  Ala.,  and  in
1853  from  Charleston,  S.  C.  During  this  pastorate
he  was  for  four  years  editor  of  the  "  Southern  Pres-
byterian." In  1861  he  became  president  of  David-
son college,  N.  C,  and  in  1866  he  was  elected  to
the  chair  of  moral  philosophy  in  Washington
college,  Lexington,  Va.,  under  the  presidency  of
Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee.  Dr.  Kirkpatrick  was  the
moderator  of  the  general  assembly  of  1862.  He
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees of  Union  theological  seminary.

KIRKWOOD,  James  Pngh,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Edinburgh,  Scotland.  27  March,  1807:  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  22  April.  1877.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Scotland,  and  in  1821  was  apprenticed  as
a  civil  engineer,  continuing  as  such  and  as  an
assistant  until  1832,  when  he  established  himself
independently  in  Glasgow.  During  the  same  year
he  came  to  the  United  States  and  served  as  assist-
ant and  resident  engineer  on  various  railroads.  In
1839  he  was  engaged  in  the  preliminary  works  of
Flynn's  Knoll  lighthouse,  New  York  harbor,  un-
der the  orders  of  the  U.  S.  engineers.  For  several
years  he  was  U.  S.  constructing  engineer  for  the
docks,  hospital,  and  workshops  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,
and  afterward  was  general  superintendent  of  the
Erie  railroad.  During  1850-"5  he  was  chief  en-
gineer on  the  Missouri  Pacific  i-ailroad,  and  sub-
sequently, while  still  continuing  his  relation  with
that  road,  as  consulting  engineer,  he  took  charge  of
the  work  of  lowering  and  moving  horizontally  the
great  water-main  on  Eighth  avenue,  New  York  city,
into  a  rock-cut.  He  received  the  appointment  in
1856  of  chief  engineer  of  the  Nassau  water-works
in  Brooklyn,  and  remained  as  such  until  1860.
Thenceforth  his  services  were  sought  chiefly  as  a
consulting  engineer.  The  subject  of  municipal
water-works  was  his  specialty,  and  he  made  im-
portant reports  on  it  to  many  cities,  including
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.  He  was  advisory  engineer  of  the  Lynn.,
Mass.,  water-works  at  the  time  of  his  death.  For
the  last  twenty-five  years  of  his  life  he  was  an  in-
valid, but  he  persisted  in  his  work,  and  was  re-
garded as  the  first  engineer  in  his  specialty  in  the
United  States.  He  was  president  of  the  American
society  of  civil  engineers  in  1867-'8.

KIRKWOOD,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  near  Newark,
Del.,  in  1730 ;  d.  in  Ohio,  4  Nov.,  1791.  After  re-
ceiving a  classical  education  at  Newark  academy,
he  engaged  in  farming,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  entered  the  army  as  lieutenant,  and
participated  in  the  battles  of  Long  Island,  Trenton,
and  Princeton.  Early  in  1777  he  was  commissioned
captain,  and  engaged  in  all  the  important  battles
of  the  three  following  campaigns.  In  1780  he  ac-
companied his  regiment  under  Gen.  Horatio  Gates
to  the  south,  where  it  suffered  severely  at  the
battle  of  Camden.  The  remnant  that  survived  the
engagement  was  attached,  under  Kirkwood  and
Col.  Jacquet,  to  Gen.  Henry  Lee's  light  infantry.
Capt.  Kirkwood  commanded  it  at  Cowpens,  Guil-


ford, Eutaw.  and  the  other  battles  of  this  cam-
paign, and  was  brevetted  major.  He  afterward
emigrated  to  Ohio,  settling  nearly  opposite  Wheel-
ing, and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Miami.

KIRKWOOD,  Robert,  clergvman,  b.  in  Paisley,
Scotland,  25  May,  1793  ;  d.  in  'Yonkers,  N.  Y„  26
Aug.,  1866.  He  was  educated  in  Glasgow  college,
studied  theology  there,  was  licensed  in  1828,  and,
in  response  to  a  call  for  pastors,  went  to  the  United
States  and  became  pastor  of  the  Dutch  Reformed
church  at  Cortlandville,  N.  Y.  He  officiated  suc-
cessively there,  at  Auburn,  and  at  Sandbeach,  N.  Y.,
until  1839,  when  he  served  seven  years  as  domestic
missionary  in  Illinois.  For  the  next  twelve  years
he  was  an  agent  of  the  Bible  and  tract  society.  He
connected  himself  with  the  Presbyterian  church  in
1857,  settled  at  Yonkers,  and  devoted  his  time  to
literary  labors.  Besides  contributions  to  the  re-
ligious press,  he  published  "  Lectures  on  the  Mil-
lennium "  (New  York.  1855) ;  "  Universalism  Ex-
plained "  (1856) ;  "  A  Plea  for  the  Bible  "  (1860) ;
and  "  Illustrations  of  the  Offices  of  Christ "  (1862).

KIRKWOOD,  Samuel  Jordan,  senator,  b.  in
Harford  county,  Md.,  20  Dec,  1813.  His  only
schooling  was  received  at  an  academy  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  and  ended  when  he  was  about  fourteen
years  old.  He  removed  to  Ohio  in  1835,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843.  From
1845  till  1849  he  was  prosecuting  attorney  of  Rich-
land county,  and  in  1850-'l  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention.  He  removed  to
Iowa  in  1855.  engaged  in  milling  and  farming,  and
in  1856  served  in  the  state  senate.  He  was  elected
governor  of  Iowa  in  1859,  and  re-elected  in  1861.
He  placed  in  the  field  nearly  or  quite  fifty  regi-
ments of  infantry  and  cavalry,  all  but  the  first  being
enlisted  for  three  years,  and  throughout  the  war
there  was  no  draft  in  Iowa,  as  her  quota  was
always  filled  by  volun-
teers. He  was  offered
in  1862  the  appoint-
ment of  U.  S.  minis-
ter to  Denmark,  and,
in  the  hope  of  his  ac-
ceptance, Mr.  Lincoln
held  the  appointment
open  until  the  expi-
ration of  Mr.  Kirk-
wood's  term  as  gov-
ernor, but  he  then
made  his  refusal  final.
In  1866  he  was  elected
U.  S.  senator  as  a  Re-
publican, to  fill  the  un-
expired term  of  James
Harlan.  In  1875  he
was  for  a  third  time  governor  of  the  state,  and  the
next  year  was  re-elected  LT.  S.  senator,  serving  till
1881, "when  he  resigned  to  enter  the  cabinet  of
President  Garfield  as  secretary  of  the  interior.
Since  1882  he  has  held  no  public  office. — His  cousin,
Daniel,  mathematician,  b.  in  Bradenbaugh,  Md.,
27  Sept.,  1814,  was  educated  in  York  county
academy,  Pa.,  and  subsequently  devoted  his  life  to
educational  pursuits,  becoming  principal  of  Lancas-
ter, Pa.,  high-school  in  1843,  and  of  Pottsville
academy  in  1848.  In  1851  he  was  made  professor
of  mathematics  in  Delaware  college,  and  in  1854
elected  president  of  that  institution,  holding  these
offices  until  1856.  He  then  received  the  appoint-
ment of  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  Indiana
university.  Bloomington,  and  ten  vears  later  was
called  to"  fill  a  similar  chair  in  Washington  and
Jefferson  college.  Pa.  In  1867  he  was  recalled  to
Indiana,  and  has  since  remained  in  that  university.


558


KIRTLAND


KITCHING


He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Washington
college,  Pa.,  in  1850,  and  that  of  LL.  1).  from  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1852.  Prof.  Kirk-
wood  is  a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,
and  in  1851  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society.  His  contributions  to  scien-
tific literature  have  been  large,  and  include  papers
that  have  been  published  in  the  proceedings  of
societies  of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  in  "  The
Monthly  Notices  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  So-
ciety," "  The  American  Journal  of  Science,"  "  The
Sidereal  Messenger,"  and  other  journals.  Among
these  have  been  "  Analogy  between  the  Periods  of
Rotation  of  the  Primary  Planets  "  (1849) ;  "  Theory
of  Jupiter's  Influence  in  the  Formation  of  Gaps  in
the  Zone  of  Minor  Planets  "  (1866) ;  and  "  Physical
Explanation  of  the  Intervals  in  Saturn's  Rings  "
(1867).  He  has  also  published  in  book-form  "  Me-
teoric Astronomy  "  (Philadelphia,  1867) ;  "  Comets
and  Meteors"  (1873);  and  "'The  Asteroids  or
Minor  Planets  between  Mars  and  Jupiter "  (1887).
KIRTLAND,  Jared  Potter,  physician,  b.  in
Wallingford,  Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1793  :  d.  in  Cleveland,
Ohio,  10  Dec,  1877.  He  received  his  early  educa-
tion at  the  academies  of  Wallingford  and  Cheshire,
Conn.,  and  became  an  expert  in  the  cultivation  of
fruits  and  flowers,  and  a  close  student  of  botany.
At  this  time  he  made  his  first  attempt  in  the  pro-
duction of  new  varieties  of  fruit,  and  he  also
managed  a  large  plantation  of  white  mulberry-
trees  for  the  rearing  of  silk- worms.  In  1811  his
grandfather  died,  leaving  him  a  medical  library,
and  sufficient  money  to  permit  him  to  attend
medical  lectures  at  Edinburgh ;  but  in  1813,  on  ac-
count of  the  war  with  England,  he  entered  the  medi-
cal department  of  Yale  instead,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1815.  He  then  settled  in  Wallingford,
where  he  practised  for  about  two  years,  devoting
his  unoccupied  time  to  the  cultivation  of  natural
science.  In  1818  he  removed  to  Durham,  Conn.,
and  five  years  later  to  Poland,  Ohio.  He  was  elect-
ed to  the  legislature  in  1828,  and  served  three
terms,  after  which  he  was  again  occupied  with  his
practice.  In  1837-'42  he  filled  the  chair  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  Ohio  medical
college,  Cincinnati,  and  he  also  served  as  assistant
on  the  geological  survey  of  Ohio,  being  appointed
in  1837,  when  it  was  organized  under  William  W.
Mather,  and  during  the  first  summer  collected
specimens  in  all  departments  of  natural  history,
from  which  a  report  on  the  "  Zoology  of  Ohio  "  was
published  in  the  second  annual  report  of  the  sur-
vey. In  1841,  having  previously  removed  to  a
place  near  Cleveland,  he  began  a  series  of  lectures
on  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine,  and  physi-
cal diagnosis,  in  Willoughby  medical  school,  and
was  then,  till  1864,  professor  of  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine  in  Cleveland  medical  college,
of  which  he  was  one  of  the  founders.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  examining  surgeon  for  recruits  at
Columbus  and  Cleveland,  and  devoted  his  pay  to
the  bounty  fund  and  to  the  Soldiers'  aid  society  of
northern  Ohio.  His  many  investigations  were
published  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  "
and  in  the  "Journal  of  the  Boston  Society  of
Natural  History."  These  include  researches  in  all
departments  of  natural  history ;  but  perhaps  the
most  conspicuous  was  his  discovery  of  the  sexual
difference  in  the  naiades,  in  which  he  showed  that
the  male  and  female  could  be  distinguished  by  the
forms  of  the  shells  as  well  as  by  their  internal
anatomy.  The  truth  of  this  discovery  was  ques-
tioned by  eminent  naturalists,  but  in  1851  it  was
confirmed  by  Louis  Agassiz.  In  1861  he  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams,  and  he  was


one  of  the  founders  of  the  Cleveland  academy  of
science  in  1845,  becoming  its  first  and  only  presi-
dent. This  society  in  1865  became  the  Kirtland
society  of  natural  history,  and  his  collections  of
specimens  were  given  to  this  organization.  Dr.
Kirtland  was  also  a  member  of  other  scientific
associations,  had  held  the  office  of  president  of  the
Ohio  medical  society,  and  was  one  of  the  early
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He
was  a  man  of  great  learning  and  peculiar  personal
magnetism.  His  influence  in  improving  agricul-
ture and  horticulture,  and  in  diffusing  a  love  of
natural  history,  was  felt  throughout  all  the  north-
western  stcitcs

KISLINGBURY,  Frederick  Foster,  soldier,
b.  in  Ilsley,  near  Windsor  Castle,  England,  25  Dec,
1847;  d.  at  Cape  Sabine,  Greenland,  1  June,  1884.
When  a  mere  boy  he  came  to  this  country  with  his
parents  and  settled  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.  He  re-
ceived a  common-school  education,  and  began  a
mercantile  career,  which  was  cut  short  by  his  en-
listment in  a  cavalry  regiment  during  the  civil
war.  He  served  two  years,  and  after  the  war  was
stationed  at  Detroit  as  chief  clerk  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  lakes.  A  few  years  later  he  was  placed
in  command  of  a  band  of  scouts  engaged  in  fight-
ing the  Indians,  and  later  he  became  2d  lieutenant
in  the  11th  infantry,  serving  on  the  plains.  When,
in  1881,  the  U.  S.  government  decided  to  send  an
expedition  to  the  far  north  (see  Greely,  Adolphus
W.),  Lieut.  Kislingbmw  was  among  the  first  to
volunteer,  was  made  the  second  officer  in  the
expedition,  and  participated  in  the  scientific
work  of  the  next  two  years.  In  May,  1884,  the
supplies  became  exhausted.  There  had  been  one
death  early  in  the  year,  and  others  now  fol-
lowed in  rapid  succession,  and  when  the  relief-
vessels  reached  the  cape,  22  June,  1884,  only  seven
of  the  party  were  found  alive.  One  of  the  last  to
die  was  Lieut.  Kislingbury.  His  remains  were
taken  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  buried  in  Mt.  Hope
cemetery.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Knights  of
Pythias,  and  a  lodge  of  that  order  has  been  formed
in  Rochester  as  a  monument  to  his  memory.  Gen.
"Greely  has  joined  other  members  of  the  party  in
testifying  to  his  courage,  ability,  and  enterprise.

K1SSAM,  Richard  Sharp'e,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city  in  1763 ;  d.  there  in  October,  1822.
He  received  his  education  at  Hempstead,  L.  1.,
and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University
of  Edinburgh  in  1789.  his  inaugural  discourse
being  published  under  the  title  of  "  De  Rheu-
matismo."  He  began  practice  in  New  York  in
1791,  and  for  thirty  years  was  at  the  head  of  his
profession.  He  was  particularly  noted  as  a  lithoto-
mist,  only  three  out  of  his  sixty-five  operations
proving  fatal.  In  1792  he  declined  the  chair  of
botany  in  Columbia  college,  and  for  thirty  years
he  was  surgeon  to  the  New  York  hospital.

KITCHELL,  Aaron,  senator,  b.  in  Hanover,
N.  J.,  10  July,  1744;  d.  there,  25  June,  1820.  He
was  a  blacksmith  by  trade,  and  was  actively  en-
gaged in  the  pre-Revolutionary  movements.  He
was  in  congress  as  an  anti-Federalist  from  1791  till
1797,  and  again  from  1799  till  1801.  In  1804  he
wras  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  New  Jersey,  and
served  till  1809,  when  he  resigned.  In  1817  he  was
a  presidential  elector  on  the  Monroe  ticket.

KITCHIN(i,  John  Benjamin,  merchant,  b.  in
Horsforth,  England,  20  April,  1813;  d.  in  New
York  city,  19  July,  1887.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1824,  entered  the  business-house  of  Tom-
linson  and  Booth,  and  afterward  established  him-
self independently.  He  rendered  the  telegraph
important  pecuniary  aid  in  its  early  history,  and


KITTREDGE


KLtBER


559


was  among  those  who  .were  interested  in  the  suc-
cess of  the  Atlantic  cable.  Mr.  Kitehing  spent  a
large  amount  of  money  in  the  ship  "Ericsson,"
which  was  intended  to  demonstrate  the  superiority
of  the  method  of  propulsion  by  air-engines ;  but  on
the  trial-trip  an  accident  occurred,  causing  the  sink-
ing of  the  vessel.  In  1840  he  removed  to  Brooklyn
and  was  associated  in  the  founding  of  several
banks  and  in  the  establishment  of  the  Polytechnic
and  Packer  institutes.  Later  he  was  one  of  the
promoters  of  the  Manhattan  market  and  the  Gar-
field national  bank  in  New  York  city.  In  1873  he
was  instrumental  in  founding  St.  John's  school
in  New  York  city,  which  was  conducted  by  his
son-in-law,  the  Rev.  Theodore  Irving,  and  since  the
death  of  the  latter  by  Mrs.  Irving,  Mr.  Kitching's
daughter. — His  son,  John  Howard,  soldier,  b.  in
New  York  city,  16  July,  1840 ;  d.  in  Dobb's  Ferry,
N.  Y.,  11  Jan.,  1865,  was  educated  in  private  schools
in  Brooklyn  and  New  York,  and  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Lincoln
cavalry.  Soon  afterward  he  received  a  captain's
commission  in  the  2d  New  York  artillery,  and
participated  in  all  the  battles  of  the  peninsular
campaign.  In  the  autumn  of  1862  he  was  made
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  135th  New  York  volun-
teers, which  was  afterward  changed  to  the  6th
artillery,  and  in  April,  1863,  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  his  regiment.  Subsequently  he  was
almost  constantly  in  command  of  a  brigade,  and
on  1  Aug.,  1864.  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  During  1863-'4  he  was
stationed  with  the  artillery  reserve  at  Harper's
Perry,  Brandv  Station,  and  elsewhere  in  that
vicinity.  In  May,  1804,  he  joined  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  and  participated  in  the  overland  cam-
paign until  July,  1864,  when  the  6th  corps  was
detached  from  the  army  and  sent  to  Washington,
where  Col.  Kitehing  continued  to  act  as  a  brigade-
commander  in  charge  of  the  defences  of  the  capital.
Later  he  had  command  of  a  provisional  division  in
the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  in  the  battle  of
Cedar  Creek  received  wounds  from  the  effects  of
which  he  died  some  months  afterward.  See  "  More
than  Conqueror  :  or  Memorials  of  Col.  J.  Howard
Kitehing  "  (New  York,  1873).

KITTREDGE,  Jonathan,  temperance  advo-
cate, b.  in  Canterbury,  N.  II..  17  July.  1793:  d.  in
Concord,  N.  H.,  8  April.  1864.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1813,  read  law  in  New  York  city.
practised  there  seven  years,  and  subsequently  set-
tling in  Canaan,  N.  H.,  represented  that  town  in
the  legislature. From  1855  till  1859  he  was  chief

i'ustice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  in  the
atter  year  he  removed  to  Concord,  where  he  re-
sided until  his  death.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1858.  Judge  Kittredge  was
an  ardent  temperance  advocate,  and  delivered,  at
Lyme,  in  January.  1827,  the  first  temperance  lec-
ture ever  given  in  New  Hampshire.  This  lecture
was  published  (Lyme,  N.  H.,  1827),  and  was  long  a
popular  tract  on  the  subject.

KITTREDGE,  Thomas,  surgeon,  b.  in  An-
dover,  Mass.,  in  July,  1746;  d.  there  in  October,
1818.  He  studied  medicine  at  Newburyport,  set-
tling at  Andover  in  1768.  He  was  appointed  sur-
geon in  Col.  James  Frye's  regiment  in  1775,  and
was  at  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill.  Dr.  Kittredge
was  an  early  member  of  the  Massachusetts  medical
society,  and  served  in  the  legislature  several  terms
and  in  the  council  in  1810— '11.

KJOEPING,  Olans  (kyuh-ping),  Swedish  ex-
plorer, b.  in  Dalecarlia  in  i741 ;  d.  in  Soroe,  Den-
mark, in  1809.  He  entered  the  Danish  service  as
military  surgeon,  and  was  stationed  for  several


years  in  the  West  Indies,  also  visiting  Louisiana,
Guiana,  and  New  Spain.  In  1796  he  became  rec-
tor of  the  academy  of  Soroe.  His  works  concern-
ing America,  include  "  Beschreibung  von  Guiana  "
(Soroe,  1797) ;  "  Neueste  Gemalde  von  Louisiana
und  Mississippi "  (2  vols.,  1792) ;  "  Prodromus  none,
sistens  enumerationera  plantarum  cellularium  quas
in  insulas,  Santo  Domingo,  Cuba,  Sancti  Thorn*  et
Sancti  Bartholomei  a  Kjoeping  collectas  describit "
(Copenhagen,  1799) ;  and  "  Anmarkningar  om  Plan-
ter af  Cuba  "  (3  vols..  1807).

KLEEBERG,  Minna,  poet,  b.  in  Elsmhorn,
Holstein,  Germany,  21  July,  1841 ;  d.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  31  Dec,  1878."  She  was  the  daugh-
ter of  a  physician  named  Cohen,  and  was  carefully
trained  by  her  father,  early  showing  poetical  taste.
In  1862  she  married  Rev.  Dr.  L.  Kleeberg,  with
whom  she  came  to  this  country  in  1866.  Her
poems  soon  attracted  attention,  and  her  efforts  to
repel  anti-Semitic  accusations  gained  general  praise.
Most  of  her  poems  were  published  in  Dr.  L.  Stein's
"  Freitag-Abend,"  at  Frankfort-on-the-Main.  and
thev  were  collected  in  book-form  just  before  her
death  (Louisville.  Ky.,  1877).

KLEIN,  Gustav  Frederic  (kline).  German  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Mannheim  in  1708;  d.  in  Talca,
Chili,  in  November,  1771.  He  became  a  Jesuit,
and  in  1733  was  sent  to  the  missions  of  Uruguay.
He  was  afterward  rector  of  the  College  of  Santia-
go, dean  of  the  cathedral  of  Quito,  and,  after  the
expulsion  of  the  order  in  1767,  settled  in  Talca,
where  he  bought  a  large  estate.  Klein  devoted
most  of  his  time  to  historical  researches,  and  pub-
lished "Descripcion  general  de  la  America  Es-
pafiola  "  (Buenos  Ayres.  1737) :  "  Resumen  de  la
historia  de  Chile"  (Santiago.  1744):  "Geographia
generalis.  seu  descriptio  globi  terrarumque  "  (1749);
"  Documentos  ineditos  para  la  historia  de  Peru  "
(3  vols.,  Quito.  1752):  and  "  Memories  sobre  las
colonias  de  Espaha  situadas  en  la  costa  occidental
de  America  "(5  vols.,  1754).  He  left  also  several
manuscripts,  which  were  forwarded  to  Rome  after
his  death,  and  published  in  the  "  Bibliotheca  nova
Scriptorum  Societatis  Jesu."  including  "Cronica
del  reyno  de  Chile  "(5  vols.,  Rome,  1789);  "  Me-
morias  dos  estabelecimentos  portuguezes  na  costa
do  Brazil  "  (6  vols..  1790);  and  "  Additamentos  a's
ditas  memorias,  emque  se  referem  algumas  par-
ticularedades  acerca  dos  estabelecimentos  portu-
guezes do  Brazil  "  (6  vols,  1792).

KL1NGS0HR,  John  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.
near  Dresden,  Saxony.  13  June,  1746;  d.  in  Beth-
lehem. Pa„  5  Nov.,  1798.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Leipsic,  where  he  studied  both
theology  and  law.  After  serving  the  Moravian
church  in  Germany  in  various  capacities,  and  being
ordained  successively  to  the  grades  of  deacon  and
presbyter,  he  accepted  an  appointment  as  pastor  of
the  church  at  Bethlehem.  Pa.,  where  he  arrived  in
1783,  and  labored  for  fifteen  years,  until  his  death,
with  great  acceptance  and  success.  He  was  a
learned  theologian  and  distinguished  preacher.

KLUBER,  Melchior,  German  explorer,  b.  in
Dessau  in  1713  ;  d.  in  Gotha  in  1764.  He  entered
the  ministry  and  became  chaplain  of  the  Prince  of
Lippe-Detmold  in  1752.  He  had  read  the  plead-
ings of  Las  Casas  in  behalf  of  the  Indians,  and  in-
duced the  prince  to  send  him  to  South  America  to
ascertain  the  real  condition  of  the  Indians  two  cen-
turies after  the  conquest.  Sailing  from  Bremen  in
November,  1756,  he  landed  in  the  following  Janu-
ary in  Santo  Domingo,  but  met  there  with  difficul-
ties and  was  for  some  time  unable  to  proceed  on
his  mission.  At  last  he  won  the  friendship  of  the
lieutenant  of  the  king  in  Les  Cayes,  who  gave  him


560


KNAPP


KNAPP


French  passports  that  opened  him  access  to  the
Spanish  dominions.  Prom  1757  till  1759  Kliiber
visited  the  West  Indies,  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  Jamaica,
Saint  Christopher,  Saint  Thomas,  and  Saint  Croix,

foing  afterward  to  Cayenne,  and  crossed  Brazil  to
luenos  Ayres  in  1759-'61,  returning  home  in  July,
1761.  He  published  "  Abhandlung  von  einigen  in
Cuba  gefundenen  Beinen"  (Gotha,  1702);  "  Reisen
im  Innern  von  Cuba,  Santo  Domingo,  Sanct  Thom-
as, und  Guiana"  (2  vols.,  Dessau,  1702);  "Reisen
in  Sued  Brazil "  (Gotha,  1764) ;  and  "  Hundert  Tage
auf  Reisen  in  Sanct  Christophe"  (1764).

KNAPP,  Francis,  scholar,  b.  in  England  in
1672  ;  d.  after  1715.  His  father,  George,  a  captain
in  the  British  navy,  commanded  a  ninety-gun  ship
on  the  American  coast  in  the  early  part  of  the  18th
century.  The  son  came  to  the  United  States  to
take  possession  of  some  lands  that  he  had  inherited
from  his  grandfather  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  where
he  passed  his  life  in  scholarly  pursuits.  He  was  a
musical  composer,  and  the  author  of  "  A  Poetical
Epistle  to  Mr.  B.,"  reprinted  in  J.  Nichols's  "  Select
Collection  of  Poems  (Boston,  1780),  and  of  a  poeti-
cal "  Address  to  Mr.  Alexander  Pope,  on  his  Wind-
sor Forest,"  dated  17  June,  1715,  which  appears  in
the  first  and  subsequent  editions  of  Pope's  works.
Samuel  L.  Knapp,  in  his  "  American  Biography,"
claims  that  this  address  was  an  American  produc-
tion ;  but  a  note  by  William  Roscoe,  in  his  edition
to  Pope,  says  it  was  written  in  Killala,  Ireland.

KNAPP,  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in  Otsego  coun-
ty, N.  Y.,  7  Dec,  1799 ;  d.  in  Rockford,  HI.,  2
March,  1874.  He  was  educated  at  Madison  uni-
versity, was  ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  in
1825,  and  settled  in  Springfield,  N.  Y„  where  he
began  to  preach,  and  at  the  same  time  engaged  in
farming  and  business,  and  became  so  successful
that  he  was  accused  of  want  of  zeal  in  his  profes-
sion. In  1830  he  removed  to  Watertown,  N.  Y.,
and  in  1832  gave  up  secular  employment  and  be-
gan to  labor  as  an  evangelist  on  his  own  responsi-
bility, preaching  first  in  barns  and  school-houses.
In  his  revival  work  he  visited  New  York,  New
England,  and  the  western  states,  including  Cali-
fornia, preached  about  16,000  sermons,  led  200
young  men  to  become  clergymen,  and  baptized
4,000  persons.  Vast  numbers  attended  his  meet-
ings, and  such  excitement  prevailed  that  mobs
often  threatened  him  and  his  hearers,  and  the  pro-
tection of  the  police  was  called  for  to  prevent  seri-
ous disturbances.  His  preaching  was  characterized
by  fiery  metaphors  and  denunciation  of  sin,  his
energy  increasing  with  his  excitement,  so  that,
to  quote  his  own  words,  "  he  was  able  to  shake  ser-
mons from  his  sleeves."  He  left  his  property  to
his  church.  He  published  a  few  sermons,  and
wrote  an  autobiography  which  was  never  printed.
KNAPP,  Jacob  Hermann,  b.  in  Dauborn,
Prussia,  17  March,  1832.  His  father,  John,  was  a
member  of  the  Prussian  house  of  representatives
and  the  German  reichstag.  The  son  was  educated
in  Germany,  France,  and  England,  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  Giessen,  Germany,  in  1854,  and  in  1860-8
was  professor  and  lecturer  on  ophthalmology  in  the
University  of  Heidelberg.  At  the  latter  date  he  re-
signed, and,  removing  to  the  United  States,  settled
in  New  York  city.  He  founded  the  New  York  oph-
thalmic and  aural  institute  in  1869,  and  since
that  date  has  been  its  surgeon.  He  was  also  sur-
geon to  the  New  York  charity  hospital  in  1872,  the
same  year  was  consulting  oculist  to  the  department
of  public  charities,  and  in  1876  became  lecturer  on
eye  and  ear  diseases  in  the  New  York  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons.  He  founded  in  1869,
with  Prof.  Moos,  of  Heidelberg,  "  The  Archives  of


Ophthalmology  and  Otology,"  an  international  sci-
entific monthly  (Wiesbaden  and  New  York).  In
1874  he  was  president  of  the  New  York  pathologic
cal  society.  His  publications  include  "  Curvature
of  the.  Cornea  of  the  Human  Eye "  (Heidelberg,
1859);  "Intraocular  Tumors"  (Carlsruhe,  1868;
New  York,  1869) ;  "  Cocaine  and  its  Use  in  Oph-
thalmic and  General  Surgery"  (New  York,  1885);
"  Investigations  on  Fermentation,  Putrefaction,  and
Suppuration  "  (1886) ;  "Cataract  Extraction  with-
out Iridectomy  "  (1887) ;  and  reports  on  "  A  Series
of  One  Thousand  Successive  Cases  of  Cataract  Ex-
traction without  Iridectomy  "  (1887).

KNAPP,  31  a t  li  his.  German  explorer,  b.  in  Wer-
den  in  1752;  d.  in  Fulda,  Hesse-Cassel,  in  1814.
He  was  educated  in  Munich,  appointed  in  1776
professor  of  natural  history  in  the  College  of  Erlan-
gen,  and  was  called  to  fill  the  same  chair  at  the
University  of  Munich  in  1782.  In  the  following
year  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  scientific  ex-
pedition that  was  sent  to  South  America  by  the
Duke  of  Bavaria.  He  made  a  thorough  survey  of
the  Andes,  visited  Brazil  in  its  most  remote  parts,
resided  in  Venezuela  in  1787-'9,  studying  the
ethnography  of  that  country,  and  afterward  visit-
ed the  Guianas,  Peru,  Chili,  the  Andes,  Patagonia,
and  the  Argentine  Republic.  He  returned  in
1792,  and,  resigning  his  professorship,  devoted  his
time  to  the  publication  of  the  materials  he  had
collected  during  his  ten  years'  travels  through
South  America.  He  afterward  removed  to  Fulda,
where  he  resided  till  his  death.  Among  his  works
are  "  Origines  gentis  Americanorum "  (Munich,
1795) ;  "  De  usu  et  ratione  experimentorum  in
perficienda  historia  naturalis "  (Dresden,  1796) ;
"  Versuch  iiber  die  Zeitrechnung  der  Vorwelt "
(Leipsic,  1796);  "Reisen  im  Sudwesten  von  Bra-
zilien  "  (2  vols.,  1797) ;  "  Geschichte  der  Entdeckung
Amerikas  "  (3  vols.,  1798) ;  "  Reisen  nach  Amerika"
(3  vols.,  1801) ;  "  Guianische  Skizzen  "  (Dresden,
1804);  "Reise  durch  Peru  und  Chile"  (2  vols.,
Leipsic,  1805) ;  and  "  Die  Chemie  und  ihre  Anwen-
dung  auf  das  praktische  Leben  "  (Dresden,  1808).

KNAPP,  Samuel  Lorenzo,  author,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  19  Jan.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Hopkinton,
Mass.,  8  July,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1804,  studied  law  with  Chief -Justice  The-
ophilus  Parsons,  and  attained  to  eminence  in  his
profession.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  command-
ed a  regiment  of  militia  on  the  coast  defences.  He
became  editor  of  the  "  Boston  Gazette "  in  1824,
also  conducting  the  "  Boston  Monthly  Magazine,"
and  in  1826  he  established  the  "  National  Repub-
lican," on  the  failure  of  which,  two  years  after-
ward, he  removed  to  New  York  city,  and  returned
to  the  practice  of  his  profession.  His  works,  which
are  chiefly  biographical,  include  "  Travels  in  North
America  by  Ali  Bey  "  (Boston,  1818) ;  "  Biograph-
ical Sketches  of  Eminent  Lawyers,  Statesmen,  and
Men  of  Letters"  (1821);  "Memoirs  of  Gen.  La-
fayette" (1824);  "The  Genius  of  Freemasonry"
(Providence,  1828);  "Discourse  on  the  Life  and
Character  of  De  Witt  Clinton  "  (1828) :  "  Lectures
on  American  Literature"  (New  York,  1829);
"  Sketches  of  Public  Characters  by  Ignatius  Loy-
ola Robertson,  LL.  D."  (1830) ;  "  American  Biogra-
phv "  (1833) ;  a  revised  edition  of  John  Hinton's
"  History  of  the  United  States  "  (1834) ;  "  Life  of
Thomas  Eady  "  (1834) ;  "  Advice  in  the  Pursuit  of
Literature  "  (1835) ;  "  Memoir  of  the  Life  of  Daniel
Webster"  (1835);  "Life  of  Aaron  Burr"  (1835);
"  Life  of  Andrew  Jackson  "  (1835) ;  "  The  Bachelor,
and  Other  Tales"  (1836);  and  "Female  Biogra-
phy" (Philadelphia,  1843).  He  edited  "The  Li-
brary of  American  History  "  (New  York,  1837).


KNEASS


KNICKERBOCKER


561


KNEASS,  Strickland,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  July,  1821 ;  d.  there,  14  Jan.,
1884.  His  father,  William  Kneass,  was  for  many
years  engraver  of  the  U.  S.  mint.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,
Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1839.  From  that  time  until  1855,
when  he  was  chosen  chief  engineer  and  surveyor
of  the  consolidated  city  of  Philadelphia,  he  was
employed  in  his  profession  in  various  important
works.  He  served  with  ability  in  the  office  of
chief  engineer  of  Philadelphia  until  1872,  when  he
resigned  to  accept  the  post  of  assistant  to  the  presi-
dent of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad.  He  afterward
became  president  of  the  Pennsylvania  and  Dela-
ware and  other  railroads.

KNEELAND,  Abner,  editor,  b.  in  Gardner,
Mass.,  6  April,  1774;  d.  near  Farmington,  Iowa,  27
Aug.,  1844.  He  was  first  a  Baptist  clergyman,  then
became  a  Universalist,  and  finally  a  Pantheist.  He
edited  a  Universalist  magazine  in  Philadelphia  in
1821-3,  conducted  and  edited  the  " Olive  Branch
and  Christian  Enquirer  "  in  New  York  city  in  1828,
and  founded  in  1832  "  The  Investigator,"  an  organ
of  free-thought,  in  Boston.  In  1836  he  was  tried  in
Boston  for  blasphemy,  before  the  supreme  court  of
Massachusetts.  See  "Review  of  the  Prosecution
against  Kneeland  for  Blasphemv,  bv  a  Cosmopo-
lite "  (Boston,  1836).  Kneeland  published  "  A  Co-
lumbian Miscellany"  (Keene,  N.  H.,  1804);  "The
Deist"  (New  York,  1822);  a  " Translation  of  the
New  Testament  from  the  Greek"  (Philadelphia,
1822);  "  Lectures  on  Universal  Benevolence  "  (1824) :
"  Lectures  on  the  Doctrine  of  Universal  Salvation  "
(1824) ;  and  "  Review  of  the  Evidences  of  Chris-
tianity "  (New  York,  1829).

KNEELAND,  Samuel,  printer,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  in  1696 ;  d.  there,  14  Dec,  1769.  He  was
apprenticed  to  Benjamin  Green,  and  for  many
years  was  printer  to  the  government  and  council,
printing  also  the  laws  and  journals  of  the  house  of
representatives.  Besides  many  religious  books  and
pamphlets,  he  published  "The  Gazette"  from  1727
till  1741,  and  "The  New  England  Weeklv  Jour-
nal "from  1741  till  1752.

KNEELAND,  Samuel,  naturalist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1840,  and  at  the  medical  department  in
1843,  taking  the  Boylston  prize  for  his  thesis  on
"  Contagiousness  of  Puerperal  Fever,"  and  again,
in  1844,  for  his  essay  on  "  Hydrotherapy."  Subse-
quently he  spent  two  years  in  professional  studies
in  Paris,  and  then  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  Boston,  meanwhile  serving  as  demonstrator
of  anatomy  in  Harvard  medical  school  during
1845-'7,  and  as  physician  to  the  Boston  dispensary.
He  then  passed  some  time  in  Brazil,  and  also  visit-
ed the  Lake  Superior  copper  region.  During  the
civil  war  he  entered  the  army  as  acting  assistant
surgeon  from  Massachusetts,  was  assigned  to  duty
with  Gen.  Burnside,  and  accompanied  the  expedi-
tion to  New  Berne  in  March,  1862,  after  the  capture
of  that  place  being  assigned  to  duty  at  the  Craven
street  hospital  in  New  Berne,  and  at  the  hospital  in
Beaufort,  N.  C.  In  October,  1862,  he  was  com-
missioned surgeon  of  the  45th  Massachusetts  regi-
ment, and  served  in  that  capacity  in  New  Berne
till  the  regiment  was  discharged  in  July,  1863.
He  then  entered  the  corps  of  surgeons  of  volun-
teers, and  was  placed  in  charge,  successively,  of
the  University  hospital  in  New  Orleans,  and  of
the  Marine  hospital  in  Mobile.  In  1866  he  was
mustered  out  of  the  service  with  the  brevet  rank
of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  then  returned  to  Boston,
and  became  associated  in  the  work  of  the  Massa-
chusetts institute  of  technology,  holding  the  office
vol.  in. — 36


of  instructor  in  1867-9  and  professor  of  zoology
and  physiology  in  1869-78,  also  acting  as  secretary
of  the  corporation  in  1866-'78,  and  of  secretary  of
the  faculty  in  1871-8.  Dr.  Kneeland  then"  re-
turned to  literary  work  and  lecturing,  which  he
has  since  followed  in  Boston  and  to  the  Philip-
pine islands.  He  has  travelled  extensively  in
search  of  information  concerning  earthquakes  and
volcanic  phenomena,  having  made  visits  to  the
Hawaiian  islands  and  to  Iceland  in  1874,  at  the
time  of  its  millennial  celebration,  for  this  purpose.
He  is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  societies,
and  has  held  the  office  of  secretary  to  the  Ameri-
can academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  to  the  Bos-
ton society  of  natural  history.  Dr.  Kneeland  has
contributed  largely  to  current  medical  literature,
and  was  the  author  of  many  articles,  mostly  on
zoological  and  medical  subjects,  in  the  "  American
Cyclopaedia."  He  edited  the  "  Annual  of  Scientific
Discovery "  (1866-'9) ;  a  translation  of  Andry's
"  Diseases  of  the  Heart "  (Boston,  1847) ;  and  Smith's
"  History  of  the  Human  Species  "  (1852).  His  own
works  include  "  Science  and  Mechanism "  (New
York,  1854) ;  "  The  Wonders  of  the  Yosemite  Yal-
ley  and  of  California"  (Boston,  1871);  and  "An
American  in  Iceland  "  (1876).

KNICKERBOCKER,  Johannes,  soldier,  b.  in
Schaghticoke,  N.  Y..  in  1749 ;  d.  there  about
1827.  He  was  descended  from  Herman  Jansen
Knickerbocker,  of  Friesland,  Holland,  one  of  the
earliest  settlers  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  in-
herited the  Knickerbocker  estate  at  Schaghticoke
from  his  uncle  Her-
man. This  was  a
grant  from  the  city
of  Albany,  to  whom
it  had  been  con-
veyed by  the  Duke
of  York,  and  was
subsequently  di-
vided between  his
sons.  The  home-
stead (see  next  page)
is  still  standing
on  the  site  of  the
old  fort  built  by
the  Duke  of  York
as  a  defence  against
the  French  and
Canadian  Indians,
being  the  extreme
northern  outpost  of

the  colony  at  that  time.  The  tree  of  peace,  planted
by  Gov.  Dongan  in  the  presence  of  the  friendly
Indians,  is  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  man-
sion. Col.  Knickerbocker  served  hi  the  army  of
the  Revolution,  and  was  at  the  surrender  of  Bur-
goyne  at  Saratoga.  He  subsequently  represented
the  county  of  Rensselaer  in  the  legislature.— His
son,  Herman,  lawver.  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  27  July,
1782;  d.  in  Williamsburg.  N.  Y,  30  Jan.,  1855,  re-
ceived a  classical  education,  studied  law,  and  be-
gan practice  in  Albany.  Inheriting  a  large  proper-
tv,  he  removed  to  Schaghticoke,  N.  Y.,  where  he
dispensed  such  generous  hospitality  that  he  became
known  as  the  "  Prince  of  Schaghticoke."  He  was
elected  to  the  11th  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and
served  from  22  May,  1809,  till  3  March,  1811.  In
1816  he  was  chosen  to  the  state  assembly,  and  also
filled  the  office  of  county  jud<;e.  He  is  alluded  to
by  Washington  Irving,  in  "  Knickerbocker's  His-
torv  of  New  York,"  as  "  My  cousin,  the  congress-
man " ;  and  when  Mr.  Irving  visited  Washington
he  introduced  him  to  President  Madison  as  "  My
cousin,  Diedrich  Knickerbocker,  the  great  historian


«£^Wf  (/%ucyu^aiy^*-


562


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


of  New  York."  He  became  involved  pecuniarily  in
the  latter  years  of  his  life.  Very  many  anecdotes
are  related  of  "  Prince  Knickerbocker,"  who  was
particularly  fond  of  practical  jokes,  some  of  which
were  extremely  ludicrous  in  their  consequences.
One  of  the  conditions  of  proprietorship  by  which
the  Knickerbocker  estate  was  held  was  that  the
mavor  and  council  of  Albany  should  be  entertained
at  least  once  in  each  year  at  the  family  mansion.
"  Prince  Knickerbocker,"  having  erected  a  spacious


residence  for  himself  some  distance  from  the  home-
stead, decided  to  become  the  entertainer  of  the
mayor  and  council  of  Troy,  as  an  offset  to  the  fes-
tivities of  the  paternal  home.  On  the  arrival  of
these  dignitaries,  with  appetites  sharpened  by  a  long
drive,  they  found  apparently  no  preparations  to  re-
ceive them,  but,  on  the  contrary,  were  allowed  to
overhear  a  dispute  between  the  "prince"  and  his
butler  as  to  how  they  should  make  two  chickens
suffice  for  so  many  mouths.  A  sudden  relief  came
to  the  guests  when  the  dining-room  doors  were
opened  on  a  sumptuous  repast. — Herman's  son,
David  Buel,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Schaghticoke,
N.  Y.,  24  Feb.,  1833,  spells  the  family  name  with  an
"  a  "  in  the  third  syllable.  He  was  graduated  at
Trinity  in  1853  and  at  the  General  theological  sem-
inary in  1856.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  made  dea-
con, and  he  was  ordained  priest,  12  July,  1857.  He
spent  his  entire  clerical  life,  previous  to  his  eleva-
tion to  the  episcopate,  in  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  first
as  a  missionary  and  afterward  as  rector  of  Gethsem-
ane  parish.  Having  been  elected  the  third  bishop
of  Indiana,  he  was  consecrated  at  St.  Mark's,  Phila-
delphia, 14  Oct.,  1883.  In  1873  Bishop  Knicker-
backer  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Trinity.
During  his  long  residence  in  Minnesota  he  founded
six  parishes  besides  St.  Barnabas  hospital  (1871)  and
the  Sheltering  arms  orphanage  (1882)  of  Minne-
apolis. In  1877  he  was  chosen  missionary  bishop
of  New  Mexico,  but  declined.  In  the  autumn  of
1864-'6  he  visited  the  Chippewa  Indian  country
as  one  of  a  board  of  visitors  that  had  been  ap-
pointed for  that  purpose  by  the  secretary  of  the
interior.  He  has  published  several  occasional  ser-
mons and  addresses,  and  is  editor  of \the  "  Church
Worker  "  in  Indianapolis.

KNIGHT,  Daniel  Ridgeway,  artist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  about  1845.  Early  in  his  career  he
went  to  Paris  and  became  a  student  at  the  Acade-
mie  des  beaux  arts.  He  was  a  pupil  also  of  Gleyre
in  1872,  and  of  Meissonier  in  1876.  His  studio
is  now  (1887)  in  Poissy,  and  his  professional  life
has  been  passed  almost  entirely  in  France.  He
draws  suggestions  for  his  subjects  from  French
life.  Among  his  works  are  "  The  Veteran  "  (1870) ;
"Dividing  the  Profits"  (1874);  "Harvester's  Re-
past" (1876);  "The  Vintage  in  France"  (1877);
"  Apres  un  Dejeuner  "  (1878) ;  "  Une  Halte  "  (1880) ;
"  Sans  Dot "  (1883) ;  "  Un  Deuil "  (1883) :  "  Chatter-
Boxes"  (1885);  and  "En  Octobre"  (1887).


KNIGHT,  Edward  Col  lings,  merchant,  b.  in
Camden  county.  N.  J.,  8  Dec,  1813.  His  ancestor
was  among  the  early  Quakers  that  came  to  Penn-
sylvania. He  became  clerk  in  a  country  store  in
1831,  and  in  1834  established  himself  in  business  in
Philadelphia.  In  1849  his  firm  was  largely  in-
terested in  the  California  trade,  and  a  steamer
sent  out  by  them  was  the  first  to  ply  on  the  wa-
ters above  Sacramento  city.  He  has  long  been
identified  with  large  commercial  interests,  and  has
served  as  director  in  numerous  financial  institu-
tions and  railroad  companies.  He  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  Bound  Brook  road  since  1874,  was  presi-
dent of  the  Central  railroad  of  New  Jersey  from
1876  till  1880,  and  is  now  (1887)  acting  president
of  the  North  Pennsylvania  road.  It  was  largely
through  Mr.  Knight's  instrumentality,  as  chairman
of  a  committee  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad,  that
the  American  steamship  line  between  Philadelphia
and  Europe  was  established,  and  he  was  chosen  its
president.  In  1856  he  was  nominated  by  the  Ameri-
can, Whig,  and  Reform  parties  for  congress,  but
failed  of  an  election.  He  was  an  elector  on  the
Republican  presidential  ticket  in  1860,  in  1873  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention,  and
in  1882  president  of  the  Bi-centennial  association,
and  one  of  the  most  active  promoters  of  the  cele-
bration that  was  held  that  year  in  commemoration
of  the  founding  of  Pennsylvania  by  William  Penn.

KNIGHT,  Edward  Henry,  mechanical  expert,
b.  in  London,  England,  1  June.  1824 ;  d.  in  Belle-
fontaine,  Ohio,  22  Jan.,  1883.  He  was  educated  at
the  Friends'  school  in  England,  and  in  1845  came
to  the  United  States,  having  previously  taken  a
course  in  surgery,  and  learned  the  art  of  steel-en-
graving. In  1846  he  settled  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
where  he  was  a  patent  attorney  for  seven  years,
and  then  followed  agricultural  pursuits  until  1863,
when  he  was  called  to  Washington  for  service  in
the  preparation  of  the  annual  reports  of  the  U.  S.
patent-office,  also  acting  as  surgeon  under  the
Christian  commission.  The  meagre  reports  that
were  then  issued  at  governmental  expense  for
gratuitous  distribution  were  replaced  by  him  in
1871  by  the  "  Official  Gazette  of  the  United  States
Patent-Office,"  which  has  since  been  issued  as  a
profitable  weekly  publication.  He  also  organized
the  classification  of  inventions,  under  which  the
work  of  the  patent-office  has  since  been  carried
on.  Mr.  Knight  was  a  member  of  the  international
juries  at  the  World's  fairs  in  Philadelphia  in  1876
and  in  Paris  in  1878,  and  at  the  Atlanta  exhibition
of  1881,  and  was  U.  S.  commissioner  at  the  World's
fair  in  Paris  in  1878,  receiving  the  appointment  of
chevalier  of  the  Legion  of  honor  from  the  French
government  in  recognition  of  his  services.  His
brain  was  found  to  weigh  64  ounces,  being  the
second  largest  on  record,  that  of  Cuvier  weighing
64J  ounces.  He  was  a  member  of  scientific  socie-
ties both  in  the  United  States  and  abroad.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1876  from  Iowa
Wesleyan  university.  He  edited  the  "  Reports  of
the  Paris  Exposition,"  and  contributed  the  chap-
ters on  "  Agricultural  Implements  "  and  "  Clocks
and  Watches,"  and,  besides  other  official  reports,
he  compiled  "A  Library  of  Poetry  and  Song"
(New  York,  1870;  revised  ed.,  1876);  "American
Mechanical  Dictionary  "  (3  vols.,  1876) ;  and  the
"  New  Mechanical  Dictionary  "  (Boston,  1884).

KNIGHT,  Henry  Cogswell,  poet,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  in  1788 ;  d.  in  Rowley,  Mass.,  10
Jan.,  1835.  He  was  early  left  an  orphan,  and,  re-
moving to  Rowley,  Mass.,  resided  with  his  mater-
nal grandfather,  Dr.  Nathaniel  Cogswell.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1812,  and  was  ordained  in


J


KNIGHT


KNOLL YS


563


the  Episcopal  church,  but  never  settled  over  a  con-
gregation, devoting  himself  to  literary  pursuits.
He  published  a  collection  of  vouthful  verses  en-
titled "  The  Cypriad  "  (Boston,  1809) ;  "  The  Broken
Harp  "  (Philadelphia,  1815) ;  and  "  Poems  "  (Bos-
ton, 1821).— His  brother,  Frederick,  poet,  b.  in
Hampton,  N.  H.,  9  Oct.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Rowley,  Mass.,
20  Nov.,  1849.  shared  with  Henry  the  home  at
Rowley,  studied  at  Harvard  and  at  Litchfield  law-
school,  and  taught  in  Penobscot,  Me.,  and  Marble-
head,  Mass.  He  then  returned  to  Rowley,  where  he
passed  his  life,  occupying  himself  in  composition.
A  memorial  of  his  life,  with  his  poems,  was  pub-
lished, entitled  "  Thorn  Cottage  "  (Boston,  1855).

KNIGHT,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Taneytown,
Frederick  co.,  Md.,  14  Feb.,  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  24  Oct.,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's
college,  Md.,  and  was  graduated  at  Washington
medical  college,  Baltimore,  in  1832.  He  settled  in
New  York  city  in  1835,  and  in  1840  devoted  him-
self to  orthopedic  surgery.  In  April,  1863,  he  gave
up  his  private  dwelling  for  a  hospital,  and  estab-
lished the  New  York  society  for  the  relief  of  the
ruptured  and  crippled.  In  1870,  the  society  hav-
ing completed  a  hospital  of  its  own,  he  was  ap-
pointed physician  in  charge.  He  invented  a  truss
and  a  life-saving  apparatus  for  use  in  heavy  surf.
Dr.  Knight  was  a  member  of  various  medical,  sci-
entific, and  benevolent  societies,  and  the  author  of
"  Improvement  of  Health  of  Children  and  Adults
by  Natural  Means"  (New  York,  1875):  "Ortho-
pedia,  or  a  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Aberrations
of  the  Human  Form"  (1874);  and  "  Static  Elec-
tricity as  a  Therapeutic  Agent "  (1882).

KNIGHT,  Jonathan,  surgeon,  b.  in  Norwalk,
Conn.,  4  Sept.,  1789;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  25
Aug.,  1864.  His  father,  Jonathan,  after  serving  as
surgeon's  mate  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  was  a
physician  in  Norwalk  for  nearly  fifty  years.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,  during  the  next
two  years  taught  in  Norwalk  and  New  London,
Conn.,  and  in  1810  returned  to  Yale  as  tutor.  He
attended  medical  lectures  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1811— '13,  was  licensed  to  practise
in  1811,  settled  in  New  Haven  in  1813.  and  was  ap-

?ointed  professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in
ale.  He  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  surgery
in  1838,  and,  resigning  in  1864,  was  appointed  pro-
fessor emeritus.  He  was  president  of  the  American
medical  association  in  1853-'4,  and  also  for  many
years  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  General  hos-
pital of  Connecticut,  and  throughout  this  period
was  either  an  attending  or  consulting  surgeon  to
the  hospital.  In  1864  he  was  influential  in  estab-
lishing at  New  Haven  the  military  hospital  that
bore  his  name.  A  sketch  of  his  life  was  published
by  Dr.  Francis  Bacon  (New  Haven,  1865).

KNIGHT,  Nehemiah  Rice,  statesman,  b.  in
Cranston,  R.  I.,  31  Dec,  1780;  d.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  19  April,  1854.  His  father,  Nehemiah,  was
a  member  of  congress  from  1803  till  his  death  in
1808.  The  son  received  a  public-school  education,
represented  Cranston  in  the  legislature  in  1800,
and,  removing  to  Providence  in  1802,  became,  in
1805,  clerk  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  From
1812  till  1817  he  was  clerk  of  the  circuit  court,  and
in  1817-'21  he  was  governor  of  Rhode  Island.
During  the  administration  of  President  Madison
he  was  collector  of  customs  at  Providence,  in  1820
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Whig  in  place
of  James  Burrill,  Jr.,  deceased,  and  was  three  times
re-elected,  serving  till  1841.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1843.  and  for
many  years  was  president  of  the  Roger  Williams
bank  in  Providence. Mr.  Knight  was  moderate


and  conciliating  in  his  political  course,  and  of  ster-
ling character.  While  governor  he  recommended
the  establishment  of  free  schools  in  the  state.

KNIGHT,  Sarah,  teacher,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass..
19  April,  1666:  d.  near  Norwalk,  Conn.,  25  Dec,
1727.  Her  father,  Capt.  Thomas  Kemble,  was  a
merchant  of  Boston,  and  she  married  Richard
Knight,  who  died  about  1703.  In  1706  she  opened
a  school  in  Boston  for  children,  and  numbered
among  her  pupils  Benjamin  Franklin  and  Samuel
Mather.  She  is  described  as  "excelling  in  the  art
of  teaching  composition,"  and,  as  a  mark  of  respect,
was  called  "  Madam  Knight."  In  1713  she  removed
to  Norwalk,  Conn.,  and  in  the  town-record  is  named
as  "  taxed  twenty  shillings  for  selling  strong  drink
to  the  Indians,"  but  it  is  added  "  Madam  Knight
accuses  her  maid,  Ann  Clark,  of  the  fact."  Madam
Knight's  "  Journey  from  Boston  to  New  York  in
the  Year  1704,  from  the  Original  Manuscript,  in-
cluding the  Diary  of  the  Rev.  John  Buckingham  of
a  Journey  to  Canada  in  1710"  (New  York.  1825;
Albany,  1865),  is  a  record  from  a  diary  in  the  au-
thor's own  handwriting  from  notes  recorded  on
the  way.  It  is  valuable  as  a  history  of  the  man-
ners and  customs  of  the  time,  and  is  full  of  graphic
descriptions  of  the  early  settlements  in  New  Eng-
land and  New  York.

KNIPE.  Joseph  Farmer,  soldier,  b.  in  Mount
Joy,  Lancaster  co..  Pa.,  30  Nov.,  1823.  He  was
educated  in  a  private  school,  served  in  the  ranks
through  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  then  engaged
in  mercantile  business  in  Harrisburg.  Pa.,  until
1861,  when  he  organized  the  46th  Pennsylvania
regiment,  and  was  commissioned  its  colonel.  He
was  promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  29
Nov.,  1862.  and  served  in  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, and  in  that  of  the  Cumberland,  commanding
a  brigade  and  then  a  division,  till  the  fall  of  At-
lanta, when  he  became  chief  of  cavalry  of  the  Army
of  the  Tennessee.  Gen.  Knipe  received  two  wounds
at  Winchester,  Va.,  two  at  Cedar  Mountain,  Ga..
and  one  at  Resaca.  Ga.  He  was  mustered  out  of
service  in  September,  1865,  and  is  now  (1887)  su-
perintendent of  one  of  the  departments  in  the
military  prison  at  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kan.

KNOLLYS,  Hansard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chalk-
well,  Lincolnshire,  England,  about  1598 ;  d.  in  Lon-
don, England,  19  Sept.,  1691.  He  was  educated  at
Cambridge,  and  afterward  was  master  of  the  free
schools  in  Gainsborough.  In  June,  1629,  he  was
made  deacon  in  the  Church  of  England,  and,  after
being  ordained  priest,  received  a  living  in  Humber-
stone.  Three  years  later  he  began  to  doubt  certain
tenets  of  the  church,  although  he  continued  to
preach  for  several  years  longer,  but  without  sur-
plice or  prayer-book.  He  then  resigned,  and  in
1636  was  imprisoned  in  Boston,  but  escaped  and
came  to  this  country,  reaching  Massachusetts  early
in  1638.  There  he  was  denounced  as  an  Antinomian,
and  called  "  Mr.  Absurd  Knowless "  by  Cotton
Mather.  He  appears  to  have  settled  in  Piscataway,
now  Dover,  N.  H.,  where  he  founded  a  church  in
September.  1638,  which  was  probably  the  first  in
New  Hampshire.  That  he  was  a  Baptist  at  this
time  there  is  little  reason  to  doubt.  An  unfortu-
nate controversy  between  two  sections  of  his  con-
gregation led  to  his  removal  to  Long  Island,  and
he  settled  finally  near  New  Brunswick.  N.  J.  In
1641  he  returned  to  England  and  preached  in  vari-
ous places,  getting  himself  into  frequent  trouble.
He  was  formally  ordained  pastor,  in  1645,  of  the
Baptist  church  which  he  had  gathered  in  London,
and  retained  this  charge  until  his  death.  Mr.
Knollvs  is  regarded  as  the  first  Baptist  clergyman
that  preached  in  the  colonies,  and  he  possessed


564


KNORTZ


KNOWLES


great  influence  among  that  denomination,  both  in
this  country  and  England.  He  published  several
books,  among  which  were  "  Flaming  Fire  in  Zion  "
(1646);  "Rudiments  of  Hebrew  Grammar"  (1048);
and  his  "  Autobiography  "  (1(572),  brought  down  to
his  death  by  William  Kiffen  (1692).  In  1845  the
Hansard  Knollys  society  was  organized  in  England
for  the  republication  of  early  Baptist  works.

KNORTZ,  Karl,  author,  b.  in  Garbenheim,
Rhenish  Prussia,  28  Aug.,  1841.  He  was  educated
at  the  gymnasium  of  Wetzlau,  and  Heidelberg  uni-
versity, and  came  in  1863  to  this  country,  where  he
engaged  in  teaching  at  Detroit  in  1864-'8,  at  Osh-
kosh,  Wis.,  in  1868-71,  and  in  Cincinnati  in  1871-4.
He  then  edited  a  German  daily  newspaper  at  In-
dianapolis, but  since  1882  has  resided  in  New  York
city,  where  he  has  devoted  himself  to  literature.
Mr.  Knortz  has  done  much  to  make  American
literature  known  and  appreciated  in  his  native
country.  He  has  published,  besides  translations  of
American  poetry,  •'  Marchen  und  Sagen  der  nord-
amerikanischen  Indianer"  (Jena,  1871);  "Ameri-
kanische  Skizzen"  (Halle,  1876);  "American
Shakespeare  Bibliography  "  (Boston,  1876) ;  "  Hu-
moristische  Gedichte"  (Baltimore,  1877);  "Long-
fellow :  Eine  literarhistorische  Studie  "  (Hamburg,
1879) ;  "  Aus  dem  Wigwam  "  (Leipsic,  1880) ;  "  Ka-
pital  und  Arbeit  in  Amerika  "  (Zurich,  1881) ;  "  Aus
der  transatlantischen  Gesellschaft "  (Leipsic,  1882) ;
"Staat  und  Kirche  in  Amerika"  (Gotha,  1882);
"  Shakespeare  in  Amerika  "  (Berlin,  1882) ;  "  Ameri-
kanische  Lebensbilder "  (Zurich,  1884) ;  "  Eines
deutschen  Matrosen  Nordpolfahrten  "  (1885) ;  "  Rep-
resentative German  Poems,"  with  translations  (New
York,  1885) ;  "  Gothe  und  die  Wertherzeit "  (Zurich,
1885) ;  "  Brook  Farm  und  Margareth  Fuller  "  (New
York.  1886) ;  and  "  Gustav  Seyffarth  "  (1886).

KNOTT,  James  Proctor,  congressman,  b.  near
Lebanon,  Marion  co.,  Ky.,  29  Aug.,  1830.  He  stud-
ied in  the  neighboring  schools  and  in  Shelbyville,
whither  his  father,  Joseph  Percy  Knott,  had  moved.
When  he  was  sixteen  years  old  he  began  to  study
law,  and  in  May,  1850,  went  to  Memphis,  Scot-
land co.,  Mo.,  and  was  employed  in  the  county-
clerk's  office  until  he  was  twenty-one,  when  he  was
licensed  to  practise.  In  1858  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature,  and  at  once  made  chairman  of  the
judiciary  committee.  During  this  session  articles
of  impeachment  were  preferred  against  Judge  Al-
bert Jackson,  and  Mr.  Knott  and  Charles  Hardin,
afterward  governor  of  Missouri,  were  chosen  as
managers.  Pending  the  trial,  which  was  held  in
June,  1859,  a  vacancy  occurred  in  the  office  of
attorney-general,  and  Mr.  Knott  was  appointed  to
fill  it  at  the  unanimous  request  of  the  senate  and
the  governor's  cabinet.  In  1860  he  was  elected  to
the  same  office  by  a  flattering  majority.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  Mr.  Knott  was  arrested
by  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon,  and,  refusing  to  take  an
oath  that  he  regarded  as  too  stringent,  was  sent  as
a  prisoner  to  the  St.  Louis  arsenal,  but  after  a  time
released,  remaining  under  surveillance  until  March,
1862.  In  1861,  as  he  refused  to  take  the  test-oath
that  was  prescribed  for  officials,  his  office  was  de-
clared vacant,  and  he  was  disbarred  from  practice.
In  1862  he  removed  to  Lebanon,  Ky.,  where  he

gractised  law,  and  in  1866  was  elected  to  congress,
[e  was  not  at  first  allowed  to  take  his  seat,  but
was  finally  admitted.  His  first  speech  was  on  the
admission  of  John  Young  Brown  to  a  seat,  and  was
directed  against  the  constitutionality  of  the  test-
oath,  its  applicability  to  members  of  congress,  and
its  retrospective  operation.  He  was  re-elected  in
1868,  and  served  on  the  committee  on  the  District
of  Columbia  and  the  committee  on  private  land


claims.  In  his  speech  against  the  bill  for  the  im-
provement of  Pennsylvania  avenue  he  obtained  a
hearing  by  giving  a  humorous  turn  to  the  debate,
and  the  bill  was  laughed  out  of  congress.  It  was
toward  the  end  of  the  same  congress  that  he  made
his  "  Duluth  "  speech,  which  gave  him  a  reputation
as  a  humorist.  Mr.  Knott  was  not  in  the  42<1  and
43d  congresses,  but  after  a  vigorous  canvass  lie  was
elected,  and  served  from  1875  till  1883.  He  was
appointed  by  Speaker  Kerr  chairman  of  the  judi-
ciary committee,  and  in  the  second  session  lie  also
became  chairman  of  the  special  committee  on  the
powers  and  privileges  of  the  house  in  reference  to
counting  the  votes  for  president.  In  the  45th  con-
gress he  was  reappointed  by  Speaker  Randall  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  the  judiciary,  and
again  in  the  46th  and  47th  congresses.  In  18H2  Mr,
Knott  declined  a  renomination,  and  in  1883  was
elected  governor  of  Kentucky.

KNOWLES,  James  Davis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  in  July,  1798;  d.  in  Newton
Centre,  Mass.,  9  May,  1838.  He  was  placed  in  a
printing-office  at  the  age  of  twelve,  and  while
learning  the  trade  studied  French  and  Latin.  At
the  age  of  twenty-one  he  became  associate  editor  of
William  G.  Goddard's  "  Rhode  Island  American."
Entering  the  Baptist  church  in  March,  1820,  he
was  licensed  to  preach  in  the  following  autumn,
and  studied  theology  in  Philadelphia  and  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  There  he  also  pursued  a  collegiate
course  in  Columbian  college,  and  after  graduation
in  1824  was  appointed  a  tutor.  On  28  Dec,  1825,  he
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  2d  Baptist  church  in
Boston,  Mass.  In  1832  he  was  compelled  by  failing
health  to  resign  his  charge,  and  from  that  time  till
his  death,  which  was  due  to  small-pox,  he  filled  the
chair  of  pastoral  duties  and  sacred  rhetoric  at  New-
ton theological  seminary,  at  the  same  time  con-
ducting for  over  two  years  the  "  Christian  Review,"
a  quarterly  magazine.  Besides  addresses  he  pub-
lished "  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Ann  H.  Judson  "  (Boston,
1829),  and  "  Memoir  of  Roger  Williams,  the  Found-
er of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  "  (1834).

KNOWLES,  Lucius  James,  inventor,  b.  in
Hardwick,  Mass.,  2  July,  1819 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  25  Feb.,  1884.  He  spent  his  early  life  on  his
father's  farm,  until  he  attained  the  age  of  fourteen,
when  for  a  time  he  studied  in  a  high-school.  Three
years  later  he  became  a  clerk  in  a  store  in  Shrews-
bury. He  had  already  begun  to  invent  and  construct
machinery,  and  now  part  of  the  store  was  trans-
formed into  a  machine-shop.  Here  he  spent  much
of  his  time  in  the  investigation  of  new  discoveries,
and  in  testing  them  by  experiments.  Many  of  the
improvements  in  reed-instruments  that  have  since
come  into  general  use  were  invented  in  this  way.
In  1840  he  put  into  operation  several  working
models  of  steam-engines,  and  during  his  experi-
ments invented  the  Knowles  safety  steam-boiler
feed-regulator.  He  also  turned  his  attention  to
magnetism  and  electricity,  studying  these  subjects
with  special  reference  to  motive  power,  and  for  a
time  the  discovery  of  photography  occupied  his  at-
tention. He  then  proceeded  to  the  manufacture
of  a  variety  of  machinery  and  materials  used  in  that
art,  continuing  so  for  two  years.  His  next  inven-
tion was  a  machine  for  spooling  thread,  which  he
began  to  manufacture  in  New  Worcester.  Later  he
turned  his  attention  to  the  production  of  fine  num-
bers of  thread,  composed  of  six  cords,  and,  after  two
years  of  experimenting,  he  was  successful  in  pro-
ducing six-cord  spool-cotton  equal  to  the  English.
In  1847  he  began  the  manufacture  of  cotton  warps
at  Spencer  under  the  firm-name  of  Knowles  and
Sibley,  and  two  years  later  the  business  was  trans-


KNOWLTON


KNOX


565


ferred  to  Warren,  Mass.  He  began  to  produce
woollen  goods  in  1853,  but  in  1859  disposed  of  his
interests.  He  thenceforth  devoted  his  attention
chiefly  to  the  development  of  his  inventions.  The
manufacture  of  his  patent  safety  steam-boiler
feeder  was  then  begun,  and  in  1858  he  began  to
construct  his  patent  steam-pump.  Soon  afterward
he  procured  patents  for  steam  pumping-engines,
an  automatic  boiler-feeder,  and  a  fancy  loom  for
producing  all  kinds  of  narrow  textile  fabrics. In

1860  he  disposed  of  one  half  of  the  steam-pump
business,  and  since  that  time,  with  gradual  increase
of  plant,  the  Knowles  pump-works  have  become  the
most  extensive  of  their  kind  in  the  United  States,
but  ultimately  were  disposed  of  to  the  George  F.
Blake manufacturing company  of  Boston. In

1861  he  began  the  manufacture  of  the  tape-bind-
ing loom  under  the  different  patents  that  had
been  secured  by  him  in  preceding  years,  and
under  his  management  this  business  grew  very
rapidly.  Mr.  Knowles  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature  in  1862  and  1865,  of  the
senate  in  1869,  and  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Williams  in  1865.

KNOWLTON,  Helen  Mary,  artist,  b.  in  Little-
ton, Mass.,  16  Aug.,  1832.  She  was  a  pupil  of
William  M.  Hunt,  and  opened  a  studio  in  Boston
in  1867.  She  has  exhibited  charcoal  sketches  or
landscapes  and  portraits  in  oil,  in  Boston,  Phila-
delphia, New  York,  and  London,  taught  art  stu-
dents in  the  town  and  country,  and  written  much
on  art.  Some  of  her  most  effective  work  is  in
charcoal.  She  has  published  the  "  Talks  on  Art "
of  William  M.  Hunt,  which  she  prepared  from
notes  that  she  had  taken  while  under  his  instruc-
tion (Boston,  1879),  and  "  Hints  to  Pupils  in  Draw-
ing and  Painting,"  relating  chiefly  to  charcoal-
drawing,  with  illustrations  from  drawings  by  Will-
iam M.  Hunt  (1879).

KNOWLTON,  Miles  Justin,  missionary,  b.  in
West  Wardsborough,  Yt..  8  Feb.,  1825  ;  d.  in  Ning-
po,  China,  10  Sept.,  1874.  He  was  educated  at
Madison  university,  HamUton.  N.  Y.,  and  studied
theology  at  the  Hamilton  seminary,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1853.  After  receiving  ordination  as  a
Baptist  minister  in  his  native  town  on  8  Oct.,  1853,
he  sailed  as  a  missionary  with  his  wife  for  Xingpo,
arriving  there  in  June,  1854.  In  1860  he  published
in  Chinese  a  manual  for  native  preachers,  called
"Scripture  Catechism."  He  taught  a  theological
class,  besides  conducting  the  mission  church  at
Dinghai  and  two  out-stations  on  the  island  of
Chusan.  Several  other  churches  were  founded  and
visited  regularly  by  him  during  his  stay  in  China.
In  1862  he  returned  to  the  United  States  for  the
restoration  of  his  health,  but  at  the  end  of  eighteen
months  resumed  his  missionary  labors.  In  1869  he
made  a  journey  to  Pekin  and  Manchuria,  and  in
1870  one  up  the  Yangtse  Kiang,  both  of  which  he
described  in  the  "  Baptist  Missionary  Magazine."
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Madison  uni-
versity in  1871.  In  1871,  while  on  a  visit  to  the
United  States,  he  wrote  a  prize  essay  on  '*  China  as
a  Mission  Field,"  and  delivered  before  the  faculties
and  students  of  theological  seminaries  a  series  of
lectures  that  were  published  under  the  title  of  "  The
Foreign  Missionarv,  his  Field,  and  his  Work "
(Philadelphia,  1872).

KNOWLTON,  Miner,  soldier,  b.  in  Connecticut
in  1804 ;  d.  in  Burlington.  X.  J.,  25  Dec,  1870.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1829,  and  commissioned  a  lieutenant  in  the  1st  ar-
tillery, to  which  regiment  he  was  attached  till  he
was  retired,  rising  to  the  grade  of  captain  in  1846.
In 1830-'7 he served as  assistant  professor  of


mathematics  at  the  military  academy,  in  1833-'7
as  assistant  teacher  of  French,  and  in  1837-44  as
instructor  of  artillery  and  cavalry.  As  a  member
of  the  artillery  board  he  aided  in  the  compilation
of  the  '*  Instructions  for  Field  Artillery  "  that  were
adopted,  6  March,  1845,  for  the  service  of  the
United  States.  With  a  view  of  studying  foreign
military  science,  he  went  to  Algeria  in  1845,  and
served  on  the  staff  of  Marshal  Bugeaud.  He  was
at  Corpus  Christi  during  the  military  occupation
of  Texas,  and  in  the  war  with  Mexico  in  mustering
volunteers  into  service  on  the  Rio  Grande,  and  in
the  recruiting  service  and  on  engineer  duty.  He
was  on  leave  of  absence  from  September,  1849,  till
1861,  when  he  was  retired  from  active  service  for
disability  resulting  from  disease  and  exposure  in
the  line  of  duty.  Capt.  Knowlton  was  the  author
of  "  Notes  on  Gunpowder,  Cannon,  and  Projectiles"
(1840) ;  and  the  compiler  of  "  Instructions  and
Regulations  for  the  Militia  and  Volunteers  of  the
United  States  "  (1861).

KNOWLTON,  Paul  Howard,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Newfane,  Windham  co.,  Vt.,  12  Sept.,
1787;  d.  in  Knowlton,  Brome  co.,  Canada  East,
28  Aug.,  1863.  He  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  special  council  by  Sir  John  Colborne,  and  in
1841,  on  the  union  of  the  provinces,  was  called  by
royal  mandamus  to  the  legislative  council.  He
was  for  upward  of  thirty-five  years  engaged  in
political  life.  He  had  been  mayor  of  Knowlton,
which  town  was  named  after  him.

KNOWLTON,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  West  Box-
ford,  Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1740 ;  killed  at  the  battle  of
Harlem  Plains,  N.  Y.,  16  Sept.,  1776.  He  served
during  six  campaigns  in  the  French  war,  and  took
part  in  the  capture  of  Havana  in  1762.  Returning
after  the  war  to  Ashford,  Conn.,  where  his  father
had  settled  in  early  life,  he  followed  farming  until
the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war.  lie  was
unanimously  elected  captain  of  a  company  of  mi-
litia that  was  raised  in  Ashford  after  the  battle  of
Lexington,  and  with  200  Connecticut  men  that
were  spared  from  Gen.  Artemas  Ward's  command
he  was  ordered  to  Charlestown  with  Col.  William
Prescott.  His  force,  consisting  of  farmers,  without
uniforms,  and  armed  for  the  most  part  with  shot-
guns, was  sent  by  Col.  Prescott  to  oppose  the  ad-
vancing British  grenadiers,  and  took  its  post  on
the  side  of  Breed's  hill,  where  the  British  were
landing,  behind  a  rail  fence,  which  was  converted
into  a  very  effective  breastwork  by  throwing  up  a
parallel  fence  and  filling  the  space  between  with
new-mown  grass.  There  they  held  their  ground
gallantly  until  the  retreat.  Knowlton  was  soon
afterward  promoted  major,  and  on  8  Jan.,  1776,
made  a  daring  and  successful  incursion  into
Charlestown.  He  commanded  a  regiment  of  light
infantry  that  formed  the  advance-guard  of  the
army  at  New  York  in  1776.  and  was  afterward
commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  a  regiment  of
rangers  selected  from  the  Connecticut  troops.
While  reconnoitring  the  enemy's  position  near
Bloomingdale  on  the  morning  of  the  battle  of  Har-
lem Heights,  he  was  attacked  by  Highlanders  and
Hessians.  Gen.  Washington  sent  Maj.  Leitch  to
his  aid,  with  orders  to  fall  on  the  enemy's  rear,
while  a  feint  in  front  engaged  their  attention.
Knowlton's  rangers  and  the  Yirginians  attacked
the  British  on  the  flank  instead  of  in  the  rear,  and
both  officers  were  killed  in  front  of  their  men.
Knowlton's  loss  was  lamented  by  Washington,  who
mentioned  him  in  his  general  orders  as  a  soldier
who  "  would  have  been  an  honor  to  any  country."

KNOX,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25
Julv,  1750;  d.  in  Thomaston,  Me.,  25  Oct.,  1806.


566


KNOX


KNOX


He  received  a  good  education  in  the  schools  of  his
native  city,  early  exhibited  a  taste  for  military
service,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  was  chosen  an
officer  in  a  company  of  grenadiers,  composed  of
the  young  men  of  Boston,  which  was  distinguished
for  its  good  discipline.  At  twenty  he  began  busi-
ness as  a  bookseller.  He  took  sides  warmly  with
the  colonies  in  their  controversy  with  the  mother

country,  and  after
the  battles  of  Lex-
ington and  Con-
cord abandoned
his  business  and
hastened  to  join
the  army  that  was
assembled  at  Cam-
bridge. He  fought
gallantlyin  the  bat-
tle of  Bunker  Hill,
and  when  after-
ward Gen.  Wash-
ington joined  the
army,  he  had  the
rank  of  colonel.  In
laying  siege  to  the
city,  Washington
found  himself  em-
^Z/*  barrassed by  the

//Is/IPX  want of suffi-

cient  artillery,  and
young  Knox  conceived  the  idea  of  obtaining  a  sup-
ply from  Lake  George  and  the  forts  on  the  Canadian
frontier.  The  peril  and  difficulty  of  transporting
heavy  guns  that  great  distance  through  the  woods,
and  part  of  the  way  over  mere  wood  roads,  were  so
great  that  his  proposition  was  unfavorably  received.
But/after  an  interview  with  the  enthusiastic  young
officer.  Washington,  who  readily  formed  an  esti-
mate of  the  man,  gave  his  consent,  and  Knox  set
out  in  November  on  his  hazardous  enterprise.  He
started  on  this  month  so  as  to  be  ready  to  move
when  snow  covered  the  ground,  as  it  was  only  then
that  heavy  guns  could  be  transported  down  the
lakes  and  across  the  state.  Setting  out  on  horse-
back with  a  squad  of  men,  he  reached  Lake  Cham-
plain,  where  ice  had  formed,  and  by  extraordinary
efforts  was  able  to  return  in  December.  He  had
gathered  together  42  sleds,  on  which  he  loaded
13  brass  and  26  iron  cannon,  8  brass  and  6  iron
mortars,  2  iron  howitzers,  2,300  pounds  of  lead,  and
a  barrel  of  flints — 55  guns  in  all.  The  long  pro-
cession moved  slowly,  but  at  last  it  reached  Boston,
and  as  it  passed  into  the  American  lines  it  was  re-
ceived with  shouts  by  the  troops.  Knox  was
warmly  complimented  by  Washington,  and  con-
gress, as  a  reward  for  his  services,  made  him
brigadier-general  of  the  artillery.  The  addition  of
55  cannon  was  a  great  re-enforcement  in  those
times,  and  Washington  at  once  began  preparations
for  a  bombardment  of  the  city,  but  circumstances
caused  him  to  change  his  plans,  and  the  guns
served  a  better  purpose  not  long  afterward  on
Dorchester  heights.  Prom  this  time  Knox  was
the  constant  companion  of  Washington  throughout
the  war  and  his  warm  personal  friend  and  coun-
sellor. Before  the  battle  of  Trenton  he  was  sent
by  the  general  to  cross  the  Delaware  and  march
on  the  place.  This  he  did  before  the  stream  became
choked  with  ice.  Halting  where  Washington  with
his  army  was  struggling  amid  the  floating  ice  and
in  the  darkness,  he  stood  on  the  shore,  and  with
his  voice  indicated  where  the  landing  should  be
made.  He  then  pushed  his  guns  on  through  the
blinding  snow-storm,  and  they  were  soon  thunder-
ing by  the  camp  of  the  astonished  Hessians. He


brought  his  young  and  beautiful  wife  to  Valley
Forge  to  cheer  the  encampment,  and  in  the  bat-
tle of  Monmouth,  in  the  following  summer,  did
good  service.  Though  for  so  young  and  un-
trained an  officer  he  handled  his  guns  with  great
skill  and  effect,  vet  once  he  made  a  serious  mistake
in  judgment.  In  the  surprise  and  flight  of  the
British  at  Germantown  about  200  of  the  enemy
threw  themselves  into  the  Chew  farm-house.  As
he  came  up  to  it  he  halted  and  began  to  unlimber
his  guns.  Gen.  Artemas  Ward,  seeing  him  halt,
inquired  his  motive,  and  Knox  replied,  "It  is  a
rule  in  war  never  to  leave  a  fort  in  ycur  rear."
They  sent  off  for  Gen.  Thomas  Conway  to  decide
the  matter,  but  he  could  not  be  found.  Knox  held
to  his  opinion,  and  the  favorable  moment  was  lost.
He  fought  gallantly  at  Brandywine  and  James-
town, and  when  the  army  was  besieging  Yorktown
he  visited  with  Washington  the  flag-ship  of  De
Grasse,  being  the  only  American  officer  that  ac-
companied the  commander-in-chief.  In  the  siege
of  this  place  his  artillery  practice  held  its  own
beside  that  of  the  accomplished  artillerists  of
France.  Immediately  after  the  surrender  of  Corn-
wallis,  congress,  acting  under  the  advice  of  Wash-
ington, made  him  major-general,  and  he  was
appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  to  settle  the
terms  of  exchange  of  prisoners.  He  was  after-
ward quartered  in  New  Windsor,  N.  Y.,  near  Gen.
Washington,  the  families  of  the  two  generals
living  on  the  most  familiar  terms.  Knox  accom-
panied Washington  to  the  "  Old  Temple,"  where
the  latter  delivered  his  reply  to  the  famous  New-
burg  letters.  When  it  was  finished,  as  soon  as
Washington  had  disappeared  through  the  door,
Knox  rose  and  moved  a  resolution  of  thanks  to
him,  declaring  that  the  army  "  returned  his  affection
with  all  the  strength  of  which  the  human  heart  is
capable."  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Society
of  the  Cincinnati,  and  for  years  its  chief  secretary.
He  was  deputed  to  receive  the  surrender  of  New
York.  When  Washington  bade  farewell  to  his  offi-
cers in  Fraunce's  tavern,  New  York,  Knox  was  the
first  to  advance  and  receive  his  embrace,  and  wept
on  his  neck.  In  1785  he  was  appointed  by  congress
to  succeed  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  as  secretary  of
war,  and  he  held  the  office  for  eleven  years.  The
navy  department  was  afterward  attached  to  it,  yet
he  discharged  the  duties  of  both  with  marked
ability.  The  meagre  salary  he  received  not  being
sufficient  to  support  his  family,  he  resigned  and
removed  to  Maine,  where  his  wife  owned  a  tract
of  land.  But  he  did  not  wholly  retire  from  public
life,  and  was  frequently  elected  both  to  the  legisla-
ture and  council  of  the  state.  In  1798,  when  war
seemed  probable  with  France,  he  was  called  to  take
his  place  in  the  army.  But  the  threatened  danger
passing  by,  he  returned  to  Thomaston.  Maine.
His  death  was  caused  by  his  accidentally  swallow-
ing a  chicken-bone,  which  caused  internal  inflamma-
tion. Knox  was  amiable,  upright,  and  pure  in  his
private  life,  and  though  ardent,  impulsive,  and  en-
thusiastic, he  was  yet  sound  in  judgment  and  cool
in  action.  See  "  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Henry
Knox,"  by  Francis  S.  Drake  (Boston,  1874).— His
wife,  Lucy,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  about  1754;  d.  in
Thomaston.  Me.,  in  1824,  was  the  daughter  of  the
secretary  of  the  province  of  Massachusetts,  whose
name  was  Flucker.  She  was  considered  the  belle
of  Massachusetts,  and  when  she  betrayed  an  at-
tachment for  a  poor  tradesman,  who  was  moreover
a  Whig  and  an  officer  in  the  provincial  militia,
her  parents  were  greatly  incensed,  and  her  father
told  her  that  she  must  choose  between  her  family
and  her  lover. The  family  left  the  country  soon


KNOX


KNOX


567


after  the  battle  of  Lexington.  The  lovers  had
already  been  joined  in  wedlock.  They  escaped  to-
gether from  Boston  when  it  was  occupied  by  the
British,  and  Mrs.  Knox  followed  her  husband
through  all  the  campaigns.  Her  spirit  and  gayety
encouraged  the  soldiers  to  endure  hardships  that
they  saw  her  bear  with  patience.  Not  only  her
husband,  but  Gen.  Washington,  relied  on  her  judg-
ment in  affairs  of  moment,  while  in  social  and
ceremonial  matters  she  was  the  arbiter  in  the  army,
and  afterward  the  chief  adviser  of  Mrs.  Washing-
ton in  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  She  grew
corpulent,  like  her  husband,  but  her  activity  never
abated,  and  her  conversational  talents  and  power
of  management  gave  her  great  influence  in  social
and  political  circles.  After  her  husband  had  re-
tired to  private  life  Madame  Knox,  as  she  was
usually  called,  continued  to  exercise  a  lavish  hos-
pitality, frequently  entertaining  a  hundred  guests
in  their  mansion,  which  was  built  near  the  head  of
St.  George's  river  on  an  estate  skirting  Penobscot
bay  that  she  inherited  from  her  maternal  grand-
father. Gen.  Samuel  Waldo.

KNOX,  Husrh.  clergvman,  b.  in  Ireland  about
1733;  d.  in  Santa  Cruz,  W.  I.,  in  October,  1790.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1751,  and  found
employment  as  assistant  teacher  under  the  Rev.
John  Rodgers  at  Middletown,  Del.  He  fell  in
with  frivolous  companions,  and  on  one  occasion
entertained  them  with  an  imitation  of  Dr.  Rod-
gers's  preaching.  Overcome  with  remorse  for  this
act  of  irreverence,  he  went  to  Princeton  and  applied
for  admission  to  the  college,  with  the  intention  of
devoting  himself  to  the  Christian  ministry.  He
was  graduated  in  1754,  and,  after  studying  theology
a  year  longer,  was  ordained,  and  went  to  Saba
in  the  West  Indies  as  pastor  of  the  Reformed
Dutch  church  on  that  island.  In  1772  he  resigned
his  charge  in  order  to  become  pastor  of  the  Pres-
byterians who  had  settled  on  the  Danish  island  of
Santa  Cruz.  Alexander  Hamilton  was  placed  un-
der Mr.  Knox's  instruction  in  boyhood,  and
remained  his  life-long  friend.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Glasgow  university,  and  pub-
lished two  volumes  of  sermons  (Glasgow,  1772).

KNOX,  James,  pioneer  hunter.  He  was  a
resident  of  western  Virginia,  and  in  17G9  was  the
leader  of  forty-two  men  from  southwest  Virginia
and  North  Carolina  who  met  at  Reedy  creek  in
June  and  crossed  through  Cumberland  gap  west-
ward for  the  purpose  of  hunting  and  trapping.
Each  had  one  or  more  horses,  with  arms  and  camp
equipage.  Fording  the  south  fork  of  Cumberland
river,  they  halted  at  what  is  since  known  as  Price's
meadow,  near  a  flowing  spring,  six  miles  from
Monticello,  Wayne  co„  Ky.,  and  there  made  a  per-
manent camp  for  their  supplies  and  skins,  for  de-
posit every  five  weeks.  They  hunted  during  the
year  over  the  country  of  Upper  Green  and  Barren
rivers,  and  found  much  of  it  open  prairie  covered
with  high  grass.  In  October,  1769,  Col.  Knox
with  nine  men  sought  fresher  hunting-grounds
northward.  They  met  a  party  of  friendly  Cherokee
Indians,  whose  leader,  Captain  Dick,  directed  them
to  the  blue-grass  region  on  the  south  side  of
Kentucky  river.  Following  this  direction,  they
came  to  a  stream  in  the  midst  of  this  fertile  region,
and  found  game  so  abundant  that  they  gave  it
the  name  of  Dick's  river,  which  it  bears  to  the
present  day.  Here  they  were  on  the  borders  of
the  country  that  was  ranged  over  by  Daniel  Boone
and  his  companions  for  the  same  two  years,  yet
neither  party  knew  of  the  other's  presence  in  the
wilderness.  In  1774  Knox  led  his  men  100  miles
farther west,  and  built  a  camp  and station for


skins  on  a  site  nine  miles  east  of  Greensburg.  on
Green  river,  where  they  slew  many  thousands  of
bears,  panthers,  otters,  beavers,  deer,  and  other
game.  After  over  three  years'  absence,  most  of
the  party  returned  home,  "and  were  named  and
known  afterward  as  the  "  long  hunters,"  from  their
prolonged  absence.  Drake's  pond  and  lick,  Bled-
soe's lick,  and  Manseo's  lick,  were  discovered  and
marked  on  this  expedition,  and  each  named  after
the  finder.  Col.  Knox  returned  to  Kentucky  in
1775  and  settled.  For  years  afterward  he  figured
in  the  civil  and  military  events  of  the  state,  and
in  1795-1800  was  state  senator  for  Lincoln  county.

KNOX,  John,  clergyman,  b.  near  Gettysburg,
Pa:,  17  June,  1790;  d.  in  New  York  city,  8  Jan.,
1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in
1811,  studied  theology  under  Dr.  John  M.  Mason,
was  licensed  by  the  Associate  Reformed  presbytery
of  Philadelphia  in  1815,  and  became  pastor  of  the
Collegiate  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  New  York
city  in  1816.  For  the  last  twenty-five  years  of  his
life  he  was  the  senior  pastor.  He  published  oc-
casional sermons  and  tracts.  See  his  "  Memorial,"
by  Thomas  De  Witt  and  others  (New  York,  1858).

KNOX,  John  J.,  merchant,  b.  in  Canajoharie,
N.  Y.,  18  March,  1791 ;  d.  in  Knoxboro,  N.  Y,  31
Jan.,  1876.  He  settled  at  Augusta,  Oneida  co.,
N.  Y.,  in  1811,  and  the  village  which  was  his  resi-
dence was  subsequently  named  for  him  Knoxboro.
He  was  the  principal  contractor  in  1837  for  a  sec-
tion of  the  Erie  canal  at  Little  Falls,  and  in  1839
was  chosen  president  of  the  bank  of  Vernon,  and
served  for  twenty-four  years.  Gov.  De  Witt  Clin-
ton appointed  him  brigadier-general  of  militia  in
1826.  Gen.  Knox  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Harrison  ticket  in  1840  and  on  the  Lincoln  ticket
in  1860.  For  forty-seven  years  he  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Hamilton  college,  and
for  thirty  years  its  chairman. — His  brother,  James,
lawyer,  b.  in  Canajoharie,  N.  Y.,  4  July.  1807:  d.
in  Knoxville,  111.,  8  Oct..  1876.  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1830,  studied  law  in  Utica.  N.  Y.  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833.  In  1836  he  removed
to  Knoxville,  111.,  and  engaged  in  commercial  and
agricultural  pursuits.  He  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1847,  and  a  rep-
resentative in  congress  from  5  Dec.  1853,  till  3
March,  1857.  He  gave  $50,000  to  Hamilton  col-
lege, in  part  for  an  additional  endowment  of  the
professorship  of  political  economy,  and  in  part  for
a  hall  of  natural  history,  and  a  like  sum  to  \  ale  col-
lege.— John  J.'s  son.  John  Jay,  comptroller  of  the
currency,  b.  in  Knoxboro,  N.  Y..  19  March,  1828,
was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in  1849.  and  trained
to  business  in  the  bank  of  Vernon.  From  1857  to
1862  he  was  a  private  banker  in  St.  Paul.  Minn.
In  January,  1862.  he  contributed  a  paper  to
"  Hunt's  Merchant's  Magazine,"  in  which  he  ad-
vocated the  establishment  of  a  national  banking
system,  with  circulation  guaranteed  by  the  gov-
ernment. Secretary  Chase's  attention  was  at-
tracted to  its  author,  who  was  given  an  appoint-
ment under  the  government  in  the  same  year,  and
did  important  work  in  San  Francisco  and  New
Orleans.  In  1866  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the
mint  and  coinage  correspondence  of  the  treasury
department  at  Washington,  was  appointed  deputy
comptroller  of  the  currency  on  10  Oct.,  1867,  by
Secretary  McCulloch,  and  advanced  to  the  comp-
trollership  on  24  April.  1872,  by  President  Grant,
His  report  on  the  mint  service,  containing  a  codifi-
cation of  the  coinage  laws  with  amendments,  was
printed  by  order  of  congress  in  1870.  The  bill
which  he  prepared  was  passed,  with  a  few  modifi-
cations, under  the  title  of  "  The  Coinage  Act  of


568


KNOX


KNOX


1873,"  and  an  amendment  to  the  bill,  in  recogni-
tion of  his  services,  made  the  comptroller  of  the
currency  a  member  of  the  assay  commission.  The
bill  provided  for  the  discontinuance  of  the  coinage
of  the  silver  dollar  and  the  accompanying  report
gave  reasons  therefor.  He  was  continued  in  the
office  of  comptroller  by  President  Hayes  in  1877,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  arrangements  for
making  the  assistant  treasurer  a  member  of  the
New  York  clearing-house,  and  for  the  resumption
of  specie  payments  on  1  Jan.,  1879,  and  in  the
negotiations  with  bankers  relative  to  the  plan  for
the  issue  of  3£  per  cent,  bonds  in  1882.  He  was
again  appointed  comptroller  by  President  Arthur,
but  resigned  in  1884,  and  became  president  of
the  National  bank  of  the  republic  in  New  York
city.  His  twelve  annual  reports  constitute  a  stand-
ard authority  on  financial  questions  that  have
arisen  out  of  the  civil  war.  He  has  delivered  ad-
dresses before  the  American  bankers'  association
and  similar  bodies,  lectured  to  the  students  of
Johns  Hopkins  university,  contributed  articles  on
financial  subjects  to  cyclopaedias,  published  a
monograph  on  M  United  States  Notes,  or  a  History
of  the  Various  Issues  of  Paper  Money  by  the  Gov-
ernment of  the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1884 ;
revised  ed.,  1887),  and  collected  material  for  a  his-
tory of  banking  in  the  United  States. — John  J.'s
grandson,  George  William,  missionary,  b.  in
Rome,  N.  Y.  11  Aug.,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Ham-
ilton in  1874,  and  at  Auburn  seminary  in  1877.
Immediately  after  completing  his  theological  stud-
ies he  sailed  for  Japan,  and  engaged  in  missionary
work.  He  became  professor  of  nomiletics  in  the
Union  theological  seminary  of  Tokio,  and  in  1886
professor  of  ethics  in  the  Imperial  university  of
Japan.  He  has  published  in  the  Japanese  language
"  A  Brief  System  of  Theology,"  "  Outlines  of  Homi-
letics  "  (Tokio,  1884) ;  "  Christ  the  Son  of  God,"  and
"The  Basis  of  Ethics"  (1885);  and  in  English  a
work  on  "  The  Japanese  Systems  of  "Ethics"  (1886).

KNOX,  Samuel  Richardson,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  28  Aug.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Everett,
Mass.,  20  Nov.,  1883.  His  father  and  grandfather
were  Boston  pilots.  After  a  voyage  in  a  merchant
vessel  that  was  commanded  by  his  brother,  he  en-
tered the  navy  as  a  midshipman  on  1  April,  1828,
served  in  the  Mediterranean  and  Pacific  fleets,  and
was  on  furlough  and  engaged  in  exploring  the
northwest  coast  of  North  America  from  November,
1833,  till  March.  1837.  In  1837-'8  he  accompa-
nied Lieut.  Charles  Wilkes  in  surveys  of  Savannah
and  May  rivers  and  George's  bank  and  shoals,
commanding  the  schooner  "  Hadassah."  He  served
in  1838-'42  on  the  Wilkes  exploring  expedition,
as  commander  of  the  "  Flying  Fish."  His  schoon-
er approached  nearer  to  the  south  pole  than  any
other  vessel  in  the  squadron.  Knox's  highland,
in  latitude  70°  14'  S.,  was  named  in  his  honor.
He  was  promoted  lieutenant  on  1  Sept.,  1841,  and
during  the  Mexican  war  commanded  a  landing-
party  of  marines  and  sailors  at  the  capture  of  the
castle  of  San  Juan  de  Ulloa,  Vera  Cruz,  led  a  shore-
party  at  the  assault  on  Tuspan.  and  afterward  com-
manded the  "  Flirt "  and  the  "  Wasp."  In  1849-52
he  surveyed  the  coasts  of  California  and  Oregon.
He  was  retired  on  13  Sept.,  1855,  but  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  was  engaged  in  blockad-
ing service  off  Galveston,  Texas,  where  he  had  a
skirmish  with  the  enemy's  batteries,  and  at  Bara-
taria  and  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  chasing
two  armed  steamers  up  that  river.  He  was  made  a
captain  on  the  retired  list  on  4  April,  1867.

KNOX,  Thomas  Wallace,  traveller,  b.  in  Pem-
broke, N.  H.,  26  June,  1835. He  was  educated  at


the  academies  in  Pembroke  and  Pittsfield,  N.  H.,
became  a  teacher,  and  established  an  academy  in
Kingston,  N.  H.  In  1860  he  went  to  Colorado  to
seek  gold,  and  there  became  a  reporter,  and  after-
ward city  editor  of  the  Denver  "  Daily  News,"
and  correspondent  for  various  eastern  newspa-
pers. He  went  in  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  to  the  southwest,  and  served  as  a  volunteer
aid  in  two  campaigns.  He  sent  letters  to  the
New  York  "  Herald,"  and,  after  receiving  a  wound
in  a  skirmish  in  Missouri,  went  to  New  York  to
become  a  journalist  and  general  writer.  His  let-
ters from  the  seat  of  war  were  republished  under
the  title  of  "  Camp-Fire  and  Cotton-Field  "  (New
York,  1865).  In  1866  he  went  on  a  journey  around
the  world  as  a  newspaper  correspondent.  In  Si-
beria, where  he  accompanied  an  expedition  that
was  sent  out  by  an  American  company  to  build  a
telegraph-line,  he  travelled  3,600  miles  in  sledges
and  1,400  miles  in  wagons.  The  narrative  of  his
journey  was  republished  under  the  title  of  "  Over-
land through  Asia  "  (Hartford,  1870).  He  went  to
Ireland  in  1875,  and  telegraphed  the  score  of  the  in-
ternational rifle-match  at  Dollymount  by  means  of
a  device  of  his  invention,  indicating,  by  the  use  of
Morse  signals,  the  spot  in  which  each  ball  struck
the  target.  This  he  developed  into  a  system  of
topographical  telegraphy,  which  he  sold  to  the
U.  S.  government  for  the  transmission  of  weather-
maps.  In  May,  1877,  he  set  out  on  a  second  voy-
age around  the  world,  arriving  at  Paris  in  time
to  serve  as  a  member  of  the  international  jury  at
the  Paris  universal  exposition  of  1878.  Besides  the
works  already  mentioned,  he  is  the  author  of  "  Un-
derground Life  "  (Hartford,  1873) ;  "  Backsheesh  "
(1875) ;  "  The  Boy  Travellers  in  China  and  Japan  "
(New  York,  1879) ;  followed  by  a  similar  volume  on
"  Siam  and  Java,"  for  which  the  king  of  Siam  con-
ferred on  him  the  order  of  the  white  elephant
(1880);  "How  to  Travel"  (1880);  "The  Young
Nimrods  in  North  America,"  "  The  Boy  Travellers
in  Ceylon  and  India,"  and  "  Pocket-Guide  for  Eu-
rope" (1881);  "The  Young  Nimrods  in  Europe,
Asia,  and  Africa,"  "  The  Boy  Travellers  in  Egypt
and  the  Holy  Land,"  and  "  Pocket-Guide  around
the  World  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Boy  Travellers  in  Africa  "
(1883) ;  "  The  Voyage  of  the  '  Vivian  '  to  the  North
Pole  "  (1884) ;  "  Lives  of  Blaine  and  Logan  "  (Hart-
ford, 1884) ;  "  Marco  Polo  for  Boys  and  Girls  "  and
"The  Boy  Travellers  in  South  America"  (New
York,  1885) ;  "  Robert  Fulton  and  Steam  Naviga-
tion "  (1886);  "Life  of  Henry  Ward  Beecher"
(Hartford,  1887) ;  "  Decisive  Battles  since  Waterloo  "
(New  York,  1887) ;  "  Dog  Stories  and  Dog  Lore  " ;
and  "  The  Boy  Travellers  on  the  Congo  (1887).

KNOX,  William,  British  politician,  b.  in  Ire-
land in  1732  ;  d.  in  Ealing,  England,  25  Aug.,  1810.
He  accompanied  Gov.  Henry  Ellis  to  Georgia  as
provost-marshal  in  1756,  and  returned  to  England
in  1761.  After  the  close  of  the  French  war  he
sent  a  memorial  to  Lord  Bute  recommending  the
creation  of  a  colonial  aristocracy,  and  representa-
tion of  the  colonies  in  the  British  parliament.  Soon
afterward  he  was  appointed  agent  in  Great  Britain
for  Georgia  and  East  Florida;  but  his  commission
was  withdrawn  in  1765  in  consequence  of  his  pub-
lishing two  pamphlets  in  defence  of  the  stamp-act,
which  he  considered  a  mode  of  taxation  least  likely
to  meet  with  objection  in  America.  One  of  them
was  entitled  "  A  Letter  to  a  Member  of  Parliament,"
the  other  "  The  Claims  of  the  Colonies  to  an  Ex-
emption from  Internal  Taxes."  In  1768  he  pub-
lished his  principal  political  work,  "  The  Present
State  of  the  Nation."  The  views  of  colonial  policy
that  he  expressed  in  this  book  were  controverted


KNYPFIAUSEN


KOEHLER


569


by  Edmund  Burke,  whose  reply  elicited  a  new
pamphlet  from  Knox  in  1769.  The  same  year
he  published  "The  Controversy  between  Great
Britain  and  her  Colonies  Reviewed."  In  1770
he  was  made  under-secretary  of  state  for  Ameri-
can affairs.  He  published  a  pamphlet  in  defence
of  the  Quebec  act  in  1774,  and  soon  afterward
drew  up  a  project  for  the  permanent  union  of  the
colonies  and  settlement  with  them.  Lord  North's
conciliatory  proposition  of  1776  was  probably  based
on  this  report.  In  1780  he  suggested  the  creation
of  a  separate  loyalist  colony  in  the  part  of  Maine
that  lies  east  of  Penobscot  river,  with  Thomas
Oliver  for  governor  and  Daniel  Leonard  for  chief
justice.  The  king  and  ministers  were  in  favor  of
this  project,  but  it  was  abandoned  because  the  at-
torney-general held  that  the  district  was  a  part  of
Massachusetts.  Knox  continued  under-secretary
for  America  until  the  post  was  abolished  at  the
close  of  the  war  of  independence.  He  was  still
consulted  after  that  with  regard  to  the  remaining
colonies,  and  in  July,  1783,  drafted  an  order  in
council  excluding  American  shipping  from  the
West  Indies.  At  his  suggestion  the  province  of
New  Brunswick  was  created  in  1784,  and  lands
were  granted  to  the  expelled  loyalists  of  New  Eng-
land and  New  York.  After  the  death  of  Sir  James
Wright  he  was  attorney  for  the  loyalists  of  Georgia,
to  press  their  claims  on  the  British  government
for  compensation  on  account  of  losses  of  property
through  the  war.  He  secured  a  pension  for  him-
self and  for  his  wife  as  American  sufferers.  He
also  published  a  valuable  collection  of  "  Extra-
Official  State  Papers"  (1789).

KNYPHAUSEN,  Baron  Wilhelm  von,  soldier,
b.  in  Liitzberg,  Germany,  4  Nov.,  1716:  d.  in  Cas-
sel,  7  Dec,  1800.  His  father  was  colonel  in  a  Ger-
man regiment  under  the  Duke  of  Marlborough.
Knyphausen  was  educated  in  Berlin,  entered  the
Prussian  military  service  in  1734.  and  in  1775  be-
came a  general  officer  in  the  army  of  Frederick  the
Great.  He  came  to  this  country  as  second  in  com-
mand of  an  army  of  12,000  so-called  "  Hessians  "
under  Gen.  von  Heister  (q.  v.).  With  6.000  soldiers
he  set  sail  from  Bremen  for  the  port  of  New  York,
and  on  18  Oct.  landed  at  Staten  island,  after  a

Eassage  of  twenty  weeks.  In  1777  disagreements
etween  Gen.  Howe  and  Gen.  von  Heister  caused
the  latter's  recall,  and  gave  Knyphausen  the  entire
command  of  the  German  auxiliaries.  He  served
in  the  battles  of  Long  Island,  White  Plains,  Fort
Washington,  Brandywine,  and  Monmouth.  For
several  years  the  main  body  of  his  soldiery  occu-
pied the  upper  part  of  Manhattan  island,  and  dur-
ing the  temporary  absence  of  Sir  Henry  Clinton,
in  1780,  he  was  in  command  of  the  city.  Bodily
infirmity  and  the  loss  of  an  eye  caused  his  retire-
ment in  1782,  when  he  returned  to  Europe,  hav-
ing, as  he  said,  achieved  neither  glory  nor  advance-
ment. At  the  end  of  his  life  Knyphausen  became
military  governor  of  Cassel.  He  was  a  taciturn
and  discreet  officer,  who  understood  the  temper
of  his  troops,  and  rarely  entered  on  hazardous  ex-
ploits. His  was  a  hireling  army  of  recruits  gath-
ered from  work-houses,  and  by  impressment,  and
drilled  in  the  use  of  arms  on  shipboard.  As  he
frequently  declared,  on  such  forces  a  judicious  com-
mander could  place  little  reliance;  they  dwindled
less  bv  death  than  bv  desertion.

KOEHLER.  Alexander  Daniel  (kuh-ler),  Ger-
man botanist,  b.  in  Altenkirchen,  Riigen  island,
18  April,  1762 :  d.  in  Langenbranden,  Wiirtemberg,
6  Dec,  1828.  He  inherited  from  his  father  an  in-
dependent fortune,  and  occupied  himself  with  bo-
tanical studies. A  letter  from Alexander  von


Humboldt,  then  in  America,  determined  him  to
make  that  country  the  field  of  his  studies  for  sev-
eral years,  and  he  went  in  1801  to  Santa  Fe  de
Bogota,  and  was  for  seven  years  a  collaborator  of
Jose  Mutis,  the  Spanish  botanist.  On  his  sugges-
tion. Mutis  established  in  1801  an  astronomical  ob-
servatory in  Santa  Fe.  and  Koehler  provided  it
with  valuable  instruments.  After  the  death  of
Mutis  in  1808,  he  resolved  to  finish  part  of  the  lat-
ter's work,  and,  going  to  Brazil,  made  a  thorough
study  of  the  palm-trees  of  that  country.  The  civil
wars  that  desolated  the  northern  part  of  South
America  at  that  time  put  a  stop  to  his  explora-
tions, and,  passing  to  Peru,  he  visited  that  coun-
try, studying  also  the  political  institutions  of  Chili
before  returning  in  1816.  He  devoted  the  remain-
der of  his  life  to  the  publication  of  the  materials
he  had  collected  during  his  travels,  and  read  sev-
eral papers  before  the  academies  of  sciences  of
Munich  and  Berlin,  of  which  he  was  a  correspond-
ing member.  He  kept  up  also  a  correspondence
with  Humboldt,  and  furnished  him  with  notes
and  information  which  the  explorer  utilized  in  the
revised  edition  of  his  travels  through  America.
Among  his  works  are  "Reise  nach  Brasilien"
(Stuttgart,  1817);  "  Wanderungen  in  Peru  und
Chile "  (2  vols.,  1818) ;  "  Karte  von  dem  pana-
mischen  Isthmus"  (Munich.  1821);  "Flora  Brasi-
liensis"  (4  vols.,  Berlin,  1821-3):  "Flora  Vene-
zuliensis"  (4  vols..  1822);  "Studien  uber  den  of-
fentlichen  Cnterricht  in  Chile  "  (Stuttgart.  1823);
"  Reisen  durch  Nordwest  -  Yenezuela  "  (Leipsic,
1824);  "Genera  et  species  palmarum"  (Stuttgart,
1825) ;  "  Sertum  Peruanum  "  (2  vols.,  Berlin,  1826) ;
"  Institutiones  botanicae"  (Stuttgart,  1827);  and
"  Conspectus  polvgalorum  florae  Brasilica?  meri-
dionalis"  (2  vols.,*  Berlin,  1827).

KOEHLER.  John  Daniel,  Moravian  bishop,  b.
near  Stendal,  Germany,  28  Aug.,  1737;  d.  in  Neu-
dietendorf,  Germany,  28  Jan.,  1805.  He  was  a
graduate  of  the  University  of  Halle.  In  1783  he
came  to  the  United  States  and  took  charge  of  the
church  at  Salem,  N.  C,  and  on  9  May,  1790,  he
was  consecrated  to  the  episcopate  and  became  the
presiding  bishop  of  the  southern  district.  After
filling  this  office  for  eleven  years  he  went  to  Europe
in  order  to  attend  the  general  synod  of  the  Mora-
vian church,  and  on  the  adjournment  of  that  body
he  did  not  return  to  the  United  States,  but  spent
his  remaining  years  in  Germany.

KOEHLER*.  Robert,  painter,  b.  in  Hamburg,
Germany.  28  Nov.,  1850.  He  was  brought  to  the
United  States  in  1854,  educated  in  Milwaukee,
Wis.,  and  apprenticed  to  a  lithographer  in  1866.  He
exercised  that  trade  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  in  New
York  city,  where  he  studied  drawing  in  the  night
classes  of  the  National  academy  of  design.  In
1873  he  went  to  Europe  to  study  with  means  fur-
nished by  George  Ehret,  of  New  York,  whose  at-
tention had  been  drawn  to  the  young  artists's
ambition  and  capabilities.  He  was 'a  pupil  in  the
Munich  art  academy,  under  Ludwig  Loefftz  and
Franz  Defregger.  He  began  to  exhibit  in  the  Na-
tional academy,  New  York,  in  1877.  In  1885  he
took  charge  of  a  private  school  of  art  in  that  city.
He  organized  the  American  department  of  the  In-
ternational art  exhibition  at  Munich  in  1883,  and
was  appointed  by  the  Bavarian  authorities  to  act  in
the  same  capacity  in  the  exhibition  of  1888.  His
works,  which  have  been  few,  manifest  study  and
can.  and  in  technique  and  treatment  are  good  ex-
amples of  the  Munich  school.  The  principal  ones
are  "Holy-day  Occupation"  (1881);  "Her  Only
Support"'  (1882);  "The  Socialist."  a  German  agi-
tator delivering  a  harangue  (1883); and "The


570


KOEHLER


KOERNER


Strike,"  a  large  composition  which  attracted  atten-
tion on  the  walls  of  the  National  academy  in  1886.

KOEHLER,  Sylvester  Rosa,  author,  b.  in
Leipsic,  Germany,  11  Feb.,  1887.  His  grandfather
was  a  musician  and  composer  of  note,  and  his  fa-
ther an  artist.  Mr.  Koehler  came  to  this  country
in  1849,  after  he  had  received  the  rudiments  of  a
classical  education.  His  present  home  is  in  Rox-
bury,  Mass.  He  edited  the  "  American  Art  Re-
view "  while  it  existed,  and  has  contributed  largely
on  art  to  periodicals  in  this  country  and  Europe.
He  has  published  translations  of  Von  Betzold's
"Theory  of  Color."  edited  by  Prof.  Edward  C.
Pickering  (Boston,  1876),  and  Lalanne's  "  Treatise
on  Etching,"  with  notes  (1880),  and  is  the  author
of  "Art  Education  and  Art  Patronage  in  the
United  States "  (1883),  and  "  Etching,  an  Outline
of  its  Technical  Processes  and  its  History,  with
Some  Remarks  on  Collections  and  Collecting "
(New  York.  1885).  Mr.  Koehler  wrote  the  text  for
"  Original  Etchings  by  American  Artists  "  (1883)
for  "Twenty  Original  American  Etchings"  (1884)
and  for  "  American  Art "  (in  press,  1887).  He  also
edited  the  "  United  States  Art  Directory  and
Year  Book  "  for  1832  and  1884,  and  is  now  (1887)
engaged  on  a  history  of  color-painting.

KOENIG,  George  Augustus,  chemist,  b.  in
Willstedt,  Baden,  Germany,  about  1845.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Carlsruhe  polytechnic  school  in
1863  as  a  mechanical  engineer,  and  then  studied
the  natural  sciences,  especially  geology  and  min-
eralogy, at  the  universities  of  Heidelberg  and
Berlin,  receiving  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
former  in  1867.  Subsequently  he  spent  a  year
at  Freiberg,  Saxony,  where  he  devoted  his  atten-
tion to  the  practice  of  mining  and  metallurgy,  and
in  October,  1868,  he  came  to  the  United  States.
At  first  he  was  engaged  in  industrial  chemistry,
manufacturing  sodium  stannate  from  scrap  tin,
but  in  1869  he  became  chemist  to  the  Tacony
chemical  works  in  Philadelphia,  for  which  corpora-
tion he  examined  mining  property  in  Mexico,  nota-
bly in  the  Botapelas  district  of  Chihuahua.  In
1874  he  was  appointed  assistant  professor  of  chem-
istry and  mineralogy  in  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, becoming  acting  professor  of  geology  and
mining  in  1879,  and  professor  of  mineralogy  and
metallurgy  in  1886.  His  scientific  work  includes
the  invention  of  chromometry  or  the  application
of  complementary  colors  to  the  quantitative  esti-
mation of  metals  that  are  dissolved  in  known
quantities  of  glass  fluxes,  the  description  of  four
new  species  of  minerals,  and  the  re-examination
and  more  perfect  determination  of  numerous  other
species,  and  the  development  of  a  method  for  free-
ing the  silver  from  low-grade  ores  by  the  combined
action  of  chlorine,  a  concentrated  solution  of  salt,
and  steam  pressure,  for  which  a  patent  was  issued
in  1880,  but  which  failed  of  commercial  success.
He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  was  one
of  the  Seybert  commission  appointed  by  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  to  investigate  spiritualism.
Dr.  Koenig's  investigations  have  been  published  in
the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Philosophical
Society,"  in  the  "Journal"  of  the  Philadelphia
academy  of  natural  sciences,  of  which  societies  he
is  a  member,  and  in  other  chemical  journals  at
home  and  abroad.

KOENIG,  Juan  Ramon  (kuh'-nig),  South
American  scientist,  b.  in  Malines,  Flanders,  in
1623 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  19  July,  1709.  He  was  a
priest,  and  came  to  Peru  in  1655,  in  the  suite  of
the  viceroy,  the  Count  of  Alba  de  Aliste,  who  ap-
pointed him  chaplain  of  the  hospital  of  Espiritu
banto. Koenig  taught  various  branches  at  the


college  of  San  Marcos,  especially  cosmography.  By
royal  order  he  visited  in  1672  the  principal  places
of  Peru  to  take  observations  of  their  latitude  and
longitude,  for  which  purpose  he  had  to  construct
for  himself  several  mathematical  instruments  that
were  not  to  be  obtained  in  Peru.  In  1677  he  was
appointed  successor  of  Francisco  Lozano  in  the
chair  of  mathematics,  and  was  also  appointed  royal
cosmographer.  In  1781  he  engraved  with  his  own
hands  a  map  of  Peru  on  a  silver  plate,  which  was
highly  praised  by  the  French  geographer,  Louis
Feuillet.  When  the  viceroy,  the  Duke  of  La  Pa-
lata,  resolved  in  1682  to  fortify  the  city  of  Lima,
Koenig,  together  with  Gen.  Venegas  Osorio,
formed  the  plan  for  the  fortifications,  and  directed
their  execution.  Koenig  wrote  "  Problema  de  la
duplication  del  Cubo "  (Madrid,  1678),  and  from
1680  till  1708  published  in  Lima  daily  weather  ob-
servations under  the  title  of  "  Conocimiento  de  los
tiempos."  During  his  last  years  he  had  accumu-
lated much  material  for  a  geography  of  Peru,  but,
unfortunately,  aiter  his  death  a  friend  burned
nearly  all  his  papers,  to  avoid  making  public  his
private  matters,  and  thus  the  manuscript  was  lost.

KOEPPEN,  Adolphus  Louis,  educator,  b.  in
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  14  Feb.,  1804;  d.  in  Ath-
ens. Greece,  14  April,  1873.  He  was  destined  for
the  army,  but  studied  law,  and  in  1825  entered
the  royal  board  of  commerce.  In  1834,  during  a
visit  to  Greece,  he  was  invited  by  King  Otho  to
fill  the  professorship  of  history,  archaeology,  and
modern  languages  at  the  royal  military  college  of
the  Euelpides,  which  was  then  situated  in  the
island  of  ^Egina.  He  was  obliged  to  retire  in
1843,  in  consequence  of  a  popular  demonstration
against  the  German  system  of  government,  and  re-
turned to  Denmark,  but  in  1846  came  to  the  United
States  at  the  invitation  of  the  Historical  society  of
Philadelphia,  before  which  he  delivered  a  course
of  lectures  on  "  Ancient  and  Modern  Athens  and
Attica."  These  were  repeated  within  the  next  few
years  in  an  enlarged  form  before  the  Lowell  insti-
tute in  Boston,  the  Smithsonian  institution  in
Washington,  the  University  of  Virginia,  Brown
university,  and  other  similar  bodies.  In  1850-'l
he  gave  lectures  on  the  political,  social,  and  liter-
ary history  of  the  middle  ages.  About  the  same
time  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  history,  aes-
thetics, and  modern  languages  in  Franklin  and
Marshall  college,  Lancaster,  Pa.  He  published
"  The  World  in  the  Middle  Ages,"  accompanied  by
an  "  Historico-Geographical  Atlas  of  the  Middle
Ages"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1854).

KOERNER,  Gustav,  jurist,  b.  in  Frankfort-on-
the-Main,  Germany,  20  Nov.,  1809.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  law  at  Heidelberg  in  1832,  came  to  the
United  States  in  1833,  and  studied  American  juris-
prudence at  Transylvania  university  in  1834-'5,
after  which  he  practised  his  profession  in  Belleville,
111.,  where  he  now  (1887)  resides.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  in  1842-3,  and  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Illinois  from  1845  till  1851.
From  1853  till  1857  he  served  as  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  the  state.  He  was  instrumental  in  raising
the  43d  Illinois  regiment  in  1861,  but,  before  its
organization  was  completed,  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  volunteers  in  August,  1868,  and  assigned
as  aide  to  Gen.  Fremont,  upon  whose  removal  he
was  assigned  to  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck's  staff,  but
resigned  in  April,  1862,  owing  to  impaired  health.
In  July,  1862,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to
Spain,  which  post  he  resigned  in  January,  1865.  He
was  a  member  for  the  state  at  large  of  the  Chicago
conventions  that  nominated  Lincoln  in  1860  and
Horace  Greeley  in  1872. In  1867  he  was  appointed


KOHL


KOLLOCK


571


president  of  the  board  of  trustees  that  organized
the  Soldiers'  orphans'  home  at  Bloomington,  111..
and  in  1870  became  president  of  the  first  board  of
railroad  commissioners  of  Illinois.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Collections  of  the  Important  General
Laws  of  Illinois,  with  Comments  "  (in  German,  St.
Louis,  1838);  "From  Spain"  (Frankfort-on-the-
Main,  1866) :  "  Das  deutsche  Element  in  den  Ver-
einigten  Staaten,  1818-1848  "  (Cincinnati,  1880 ;  2d
ed..  New  York,  1885) ;  and  a  number  of  pamphlets.

KOHL,  John  George,  traveller,  b.  in  Bremen,
Germany,  28  April,  1808 ;  d.  there,  28  Oct.,  1878.
He  studied  law  at  the  universities  of  Heidelberg,
Gottingen,  and  Munich,  and  after  spending  six
years  as  a  tutor  in  Courland,  visited  Russia.  Sub-
sequently he  travelled  through  Europe  and  pub-
lished numerous  works.  Having  collected  mate-
rial relating  to  the  early  history  of  America,  he
came  to  this  country  in  1854  and  remained  until
1858,  when  he  returned  to  Bremen  and  became
city  librarian  in  1863.  He  prepared  for  the  U.  S.
government  a  series  of  valuable  maps  of  America,
and  published,  at  the  request  of  the  U.  S.  coast  sur-
vey, the  "  History  of  the  Discovery  of  the  U.  S.
Coast"  and  the  "  History  and  Investigation  of  the
Gulf  Stream  "  (Bremen,  1868).  Those  of  his  pub-
lications that  relate  to  this  country,  many  of  which
have  been  translated  into  English,  are  "  Travels  in
Canada  "  (Stuttgart,  1856) ;  "  Travels  in  the  United
States"  (New  York,  1857);  "History  of  the  Two
Oldest  Charts  of  the  New  World  "  (Weimar,  1860) ;
"History  of  the  Discovery  of  the  Northeastern
Coast  of  America  "  ("  Maine  Historical  Collections,"
Portland,  1869) ;  a  series  of  lectures  entitled  "  His-
tory of  the'Discovery  of  America  "  (Dresden,  1861  ;
English  translation,  1862) ;  and  "  History  of  the
Discovery  and  Voyage  through  the  Straits  of  Ma-
gellan "  (Berlin,  1877).  He  also  published  a  "  Lec-
ture on  the  Plan  of  a  Chartographieal  Depot  for
the  History  and  Geography  of  the  American  Con-
tinent" (Smithsonian  reports,  Washington,  1856),
and  a  descriptive  catalogue  of  those  maps,  charts,
and  surveys  relating  to  America  that  are  men-
tioned in  vol.  iii.  of  Hakluyt's  "Voyages"  (1857).

KOHLMANN,  Anthony,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kai-
sersberg,  France,  13  July,  1771  ;  d.  in  Rome.  Italy,
in  April,  1838.  He  studied  the  classics  in  Colmar,
France,  and  philosophy  and  theology  in  the  Col-
lege of  Freiburg,  Switzerland,  where  he  was  or-
dained priest  in  1796.  The  same  year  he  became
a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  sacred  heart  at
Gogingen.  He  was  driven  from  Belgium  by  the
French  revolutionists,  and  settled  finally  at  Hagen-
brunn,  Austria,  in  1797.  During  an  epidemic  in
1799  he  devoted  himself  with  such  zeal  to  the  suf-
ferers that  he  was  known  among  them  as  the
"  Martyr  of  Charity."  He  was  next  engaged  in  at-
tending sick  soldiers  in  Italy,  was  president  of  the
College  of  Dillingen  in  Bavaria  and  of  a  college  in
Amsterdam,  and  finally,  on  the  re-establishment  of
the  Jesuit  order  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Arch-
bishop Carroll,  came  to  the  United  States  as  a
member  of  that  society,  arriving  in  Baltimore,  3
Nov.,  1806.  He  was  appointed  to  visit  the  Roman
Catholic  congregations  of  Pennsylvania.  In  addi-
tion to  his  other  duties,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  de-
livering two  sermons  every  day — one  in  German
and  one  in  English.  He  was  appointed  pastor  in
New  York  in  1808,  and  founded  an  academy  for
boys  called  the  New  York  literary  institution,  and
another  for  girls  under  the  charge  of  the  Ursuline
nuns.  He  was  present  in  1809  at  the  death-bed  of
Thomas  Paine,  and  has  left  an  impressive  descrip-
tion of  that  event.  During  his  ministry  in  New
York  restitution  of  stolen  goods  was  made  through


his  instrumentality,  and  Father  Kohlmann  was
cited  before  court  to  give  evidence  in  regard
to  the  person  from  whom  he  had  received  the
property.  This  he  refused  to  do  on  the  ground
that  the  information  was  given  to  him  in  con-
fession. It  was  finally  decided  that  a  priest  was
excused  from  answering  in  such  cases,  and  the
principle  of  this  decision  was  afterward  embodied
in  a  statute.  It  was  chiefly  through  his  efforts
that  the  cathedral  in  Mulberry  street,  the  second
Roman  Catholic  church  in  the*  city  of  New  York,
was  completed,  4  May,  1815.  He  left  New  York
the  same  year  to  take  charge  of  the  novitiate  of  the
Jesuits  at  Whitemarsh,  Md.,  and  in  1817  he  be-
came superior  of  the  order  in  the  United  States.
He  also  filled  the  post  of  rector  of  Georgetown  col-
lege from  1818  till  1820.  In  1821  he  exchanged
the  superiorship  of  the  mission  for  that  of  Wash-
ington seminary,  over  which  he  presided  three
years.  In  1824  he  was  summoned  to  Rome,  where
he  taught  theology  for  five  years  in  the  Roman
college.  He  held  several  high  official  positions,
and  enjoyed  the  esteem  of  successive  popes  up  to
his  death.  His  works  include  "  A  True  Exposition
of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Catholic  Church  touching
the  Sacrament  of  Penance"  (New  York,  1813);
"  Centurial  Jubilee  to  be  celebrated  by  all  the
Reformed  Churches  throughout  the  United  States  "
(1817) ;  "  The  Blessed  Reformation :  Martin  Luther
portrayed  by  Himself  (Philadelphia,  1818);  and
thirteen  pamphlets  on  Unitarianism  in  reply  to
Jared  Sparks,  who  was  then  a  minister  in  Balti-
more, Md.  These  were  published  in  book-form
as  "Unitarianism  Philosophically  and  Theologi-
cally P^xamined  "  (2  vols.,  Washington,  1821).

KOHNE,  Frederick,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Rhe-
da.  Westphalia,  Prussia.  30  March,  1757:  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  26  May,  1829.  He  emigrated  to
this  country  in  1780.  and  obtained  a  clerkship  in
Charleston.  S.  C.  Subsequently  he  entered  into
business,  and  retired  in  1807  with  a  fortune.  The
remainder  of  his  life  was  spent  in  Philadelphia
and  Charleston.  He  bequeathed  nearly  $400,000
to  various  societies  and  charities  connected  with
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  both  Pennsyl-
vania and  South  Carolina,  and  directed  that  his
residuary  estate  should  be  left  so  that  the  colored
population  might  share  in  its  benefits.

KOLLOCK.  Mary,  artist,  b.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  in
1840.  She  studied  art  in  Philadelphia  for  three
years  under  Robert  Wylie  in  the  Academy  of  fine
arts,  and  subsequently  took  lessons  in  landscape
from  John  B.  Bristol  and  others.  Afterward  she
spent  a  year  in  Paris,  studied  at  the  Julien  school,
and  sketched  in  the  north  of  France.  She  is  a
member  of  the  Art  students*  league,  and  of  the
Ladies'  art  association.  New  York,  in  which  she  is
now  (1887)  instructor  in  painting.  Her  contribu-
tions to  the  exhibitions  of  the  National  academy
of  design  include  "  Morning  in  the  Mountains  "and
"  On  the  Road  to  Mt.  Marcy  "  (1877) ;  "  A  Novem-
ber Day"  and  an  "Evening  Walk"  (1878);  "A
Gleam  of  Sunshine  "  (1882) ;  "  On  Rondout  Creek  "
and  "The  Old  Fiddler"  (1883);  "Under  the
Beeches"  (1885);  "A  Glimpse  of  the  Catskills"
(1886);  and  "Early  Morning  in  the  Mountains"
(1887).  To  the  Centennial  exhibition  of  1876  she
sent  "Midsummer  in  the  Mountains."

KOLLOCK,  Sheiwd,  editor,  b.  in  Lewiston,
Del.,  in  1750;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  28  July.  1839.
He  was  commissioned  lieutenant  early  in  the  Revo-
lution, and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Trenton  and
other  engagements.  In  1779  he  resigned  and  be-
gan a  newspaper  entitled  the  "  New  Jersey  Journal "
in  Chatham. He  removed  his  press  to  New  York


572


KOLTES


KOSCIUSZKO


in  1783,  and  established  the  "New  York  Gazet-
teer," and  in  1787  removed  to  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,
and  revived  his  first  journal,  which  he  edited  for
thirty-one  years.  He  was  judge  of  common  pleas
thirty-five  years  and  postmaster  of  Elizabethtown
from  1820  till  1829. — His  son,  Henry,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  Providence,  N.  J.,  14  Dec,  1778 ;  d.  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  29  Dec,  1819,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1794,  and  was  tutor  there  from  1797
till  1800,  at  the  same  time  studying  theology.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  on  7  May,  1800,  and  in
December  he  became  professor  of  divinity  in
Princeton,  and  pastor  of  the  church  there.  Prom
1800  till  his  death  he  was  pastor  of  the  independ-
ent Presbyterian  church  in  Savannah,  Ga.  In
1817  he  spent  eight  months  in  England  to  collect
materials  for  a  life  of  John  Calvin.  Dr.  James  W.
Alexander,  in  his  memoir  of  Archibald  Alexander
(New  York,  1854),  spoke  of  him  as  "  one  of  the  most
ornate  yet  vehement  orators  whom  our  country
has  produced."  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1806.  His  sermons  were  published,  with
a  memoir,  by  his  brother  (4  vols.,  Savannah,  1822).
— Another  son,  Shepard  Kosciuszko,  clergyman,
b.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  29  June,  1795;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  April,  1865,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1812,  studied  theology  with  Dr.  John
McDowell  and  his  brother,  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1814,  and  ordained  in  1818  as  pastor  of  a  Presby-
terian church  in  Oxford,  N.  C.  He  was  soon  ap-
pointed professor  of  rhetoric  and  logic  in  the  Uni-
versity of  North  Carolina,  and  in  1825  called  to
the  Presbyterian  church  of  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he
remained  ten  years.  He  then  returned  to  New
Jersey,  and  was  for  three  years  agent  of  the  Board
of  domestic  missions.  He  was  successively  pastor
in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  and  Greenwich,  N.  J.,  till
1860,  and  in  that  year  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,
where  he  preached  to  the  benevolent  institutions  of
the  city  until  1863.  Princeton  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1850.  He  contributed  to  the
"  Princeton  Review,"  and  published  discourses  and
"  Pastoral  Reminiscences,"  translated  into  French
and  issued  in  Paris  (New  York,  1849).

KOLTES,  John  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Rhenish
Prussia  in  1823 ;  d.  near  Gainesville,  Va.,  30  Aug.,
1862.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1846,  and  served
throughout  the  Mexican  war  as  orderly  sergeant.
After  its  close  he  became  an  officer  of  the  marine
corps,  and  was  subsequently  employed  in  the  U.  S.
mint  in  Philadelphia.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  he  raised  and  commanded  a  regiment  of  Ger-
mans. He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Gainesville,
Va.  He  had  been  acting  brigadier-general  in  Gen.
Adolph  Von  Steinwehr's  division  for  four  months,
and  his  friends  who  had  secured  his  promotion  to
this  rank  were  carrying  his  commission,  when  they
met  his  body  as  it  was  borne  from  the  battle-field.

KONDIARONK,  also  known  as  the  Rat,  chief
of  the  Tionnontates  Hurons,  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,
2  Aug.,  1701.  He  was  considered  by  the  French
of  Canada  the  bravest  and  ablest  Indian  they  had
ever  met.  He  was  constantly  at  war  with  the
French  until  1688,  when  Denonville,  the  governor,
succeeded  in  making  a  treaty  with  him.  In  pursu-
ance of  this  treaty,  Kondiaronk  set  out  on  26  May,
at  the  head  of  100  men,  from  Mackinaw  to  attack
the  Iroquois.  He  took  Catarocouy  on  the  road,
and  then  learned  that  the  French  were  negotiating
with  the  Iroquois  tribes,  and  that  the  French
governor  would  not  tolerate  any  hostility  on  the
part  of  the  Hurons.  Kondiaronk  was  surprised  at
this  change  of  affairs,  but  made  no  complaint,  and
withdrew  from  the  fort,  pretending  to  go  to  his
village. He  had  learned,  however,  that  Iroquois


deputies  and  hostages  were  on  their  way  to  Mon-
treal, and,  after  lying  in  wait  for  them  several  days
at  Hungry  bay,  rushed  on  them  with  his  kind,
killing  twenty  and  taking  the  rest  prisoners.  His
intrigues  after  this  exploit  were  marked  by  clever
diplomacy,  and  had  the  effect  of  involving  the
French  and  the  Iroquois  in  war,  during  the  course
of  which  he  baffled  all  Denonville's  steps  for
effecting  peace.  In  1689  he  arranged  a  plan  with
the  Iroquois  for  exterminating  the  Ottawas,  the
execution  of  which  was  prevented  at  the  last  mo-
ment by  Nicolas  Perrot,  who  learned  of  the  plot
from  an  Aniez  Indian.  In  1690  he  was  instru-
mental in  prevailing  on  the  Ottawas  to  treat  with
the  Iroquois  without  the  intervention  of  the
French.  He  afterward  became  a  firm  friend  of
the  French,  and  did  them  good  service  on  many
occasions.  In  1697  he  landed  at  the  head  of  Lake
Michigan  with  150  warriors,  and  found  that  the
Iroquois  were  encamped  at  some  distance  to  the
number  of  250,  but  with  canoes  for  only  sixty.  He
advanced  to  the  spot,  but  immediately  feigned
flight,  and  being  pursued  by  sixty  Iroquois  in  their
canoes,  turned  and  routed  them.  He  afterward
prevented  the  Hurons  of  Mackinaw  from  following
the  Baron,  one  of  their  chiefs  in  the  English  inter-
est, to  New  York.  He  accompanied  De  la  Motte
Cadillac  to  Montreal  in  the  same  year,  where  Fron-
tenac  treated  him  with  distinction.  He  took  an
active  part  in  bringing  about  the  treaty  between
the  hostile  tribes  and  the  French  in  Montreal  in
1700.  Kondiaronk  was  at  Montreal  again  in  1701.
and  it  was  by  his  influence  that  De  Callieres,  the
governor,  hoped  to  persuade  the  different  tribes  to
make  a  mutual  interchange  of  prisoners  and  to
submit  their  differences  in  future  to  the  French
governor.  His  death  was  a  heavy  blow  to  the
French  interest.  He  was  converted  by  Father  de
Carheil,  and  was  accustomed  to  say  that  the  only
Frenchmen  of  talent  he  had  met  were  De  Carheil,
De  Callieres,  and  Count  Frontenac

KONSCHAK,  Count  Ferdinand,  clergyman,  b.
in  Warasdin,  Croatia,  2  Dec,  1703 ;  d.  in  California
in  1760.  He  entered  the  Jesuit  order,  22  Oct..  1719,
and,  after  teaching  in  Buda,  set  out  as  a  missionary
for  Mexico,  where  he  labored  for  several  years.
He  was  at  first  superior  of  the  mission  of  St.  Igna-
tius in  California,  and  afterward  visitor  of  all  the
Jesuit  missions.  His  works  that  he  published  after
his  arrival  in  Mexico  are  "  Vida  y  muerte  del  P.
Antonio  Tempis,  Jesuita  Misionero  de  Californias  "
(Mexico,  1748);  "Apostolicos  Afanes  de  la  Com-
pania  de  Jesus,  etc."  (Barcelona,  1754 ;  Paris,  1767) ;
and  "  Historia  de  las  Misiones  de  Californias,  nom-
bradas:  los  Dolores  del  Norte,  y  la  Magdalena,"
which  remained  in  manuscript,  but  supplied  Vene-
gas  {q.  v.)  with  nearly  all  the  materials  for  his  his-
tory of  California.  A  narrative  of  Konschak's
addressed  to  the  confessor  of  the  viceroy  of  Naples,
dated  Vera  Cruz,  24  April,  1731,  is  in  the  37th
volume  of  the  "  Weltbote  "  (Augsburg,  1728-'50).

KOQUETHAGACHTON,  called  by  the  English
"  White  Eyes,"  Delaware  chief,  d.  in  Fort  Laurens,
Ohio,  in  November,  1778.  He  was  appointed  by
Netawatwes,  chief  of  the  Turtle  tribe,  his  first
councillor,  and  on  his  death,  in  1776,  succeeded
him.  In  Dunmore's  war.  as  well  as  during  the
Revolution,  White  Eyes  strove  strenuously  to  keep
the  Delawares  neutral.  Failing  in  this  in  the  lat-
ter contest,  he  joined  the  Americans,  and  died
when  Mcintosh's  expedition  was  about  to  move
against  the  Sanduskv  towns.

KOSCIUSZKO,  Tadeusz  (Thaddeus)  (kos-se-
us'-ko),  Polish  patriot,  b.  near  Novogrudek,  Lithu-
ania, 12  Feb.,  1746 ;  d.  in  Solothurn,  Switzerland,


KOSCIUSZKO


KOSTER


573


S- s7^>u


W<^iWZ/


15  Oct.,  1817.  He  was  descended  from  a  noble
Lithuanian  family,  studied  at  the  military  acad-
emy of  Warsaw,  and,  completing  his  education  in
France  at  the  expense  of  the  state,  returned  to  Po-
land, entered  the  army,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of
captain.  An  unrequited  passion  for  the  daughter
of  the  Marquis  of  Lithuania  induced  him  to  leave

Poland  in  1775  and
offer  his  assistance
to  the  Americans  in
their  war  for  in-
dependence. The
number  of  foreign
auxiliary  officers
had  become  numer-
ous, and  Washing-
ton had  complained
to  congress,  in  Oc-
tober, 1776,  that  he
was  unable  to  em-
ploy many  of  them,
owing  to  their  ig-
norance of  English.
Kosciuszko,  how-
ever, arrived  with
letters  of  recom-
mendation from
Benjamin  Franklin
to  Washington,  who  inquired  what  he  could  do.
"  I  come  to  fight  as  a  volunteer  for  American  in-
dependence," answered  Kosciuszko.  "  What  can
you  do?  "  asked  Washington.  "  Try  me,"  was  the
reply.  He  received  his  commission  as  a  colonel  of
engineers  on  18  Oct.,  1776,  and  repaired  to  his
post  with  the  troops  under  Gen.  Gates,  who  de-
scribed him  as  "  an  able  engineer,  and  one  of  the
best  and  neatest  draughtsmen  that  he  ever  saw."
and  selected  him  for  the  northern  service,  ordering
him,  "  after  he  had  made  himself  thoroughly  ac-
quainted with  the  works,  to  point  out  where  and
in  what  manner  the  best  improvements  and  addi-
tions could  be  made  thereto."  Kosciuszko  there-
fore planned  the  encampment  and  post  of  Gates's
army  at  Bemis  Heights,  near  Saratoga,  from
which,  after  two  well-fought  actions,  Burgoyne
found  it  impossible  to  dislodge  the  Americans.
Kosciuszko  was  subsequently  the  principal  engi-
neer in  executing  the  works  at  West  Point.  He
became  one  of  Washington's  adjutants,  and  aided
Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  in  the  unsuccessful  siege  of
Ninety-Six,  receiving  for  his  services  the  thanks
of  congress  and  the  brevet  of  brigadier -gen-
eral, 13  Oct.,  1783.  One  of  Washington's  latest
official  acts  was  to  intercede  with  congress  for  the
bestowal  of  these  honors.  He  was  also  made  a
member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  At  the
end  of  the  war  he  returned  to  Poland,  where  he
lived  several  years  in  retirement.  When  the  Polish
army  was  reorganized  in  1789,  he  was  appointed  a
major-general,  and  fought  in  defence  of  the  con-
stitution of  3  May,  1791,  under  Prince  Poniatowski,
against  the  Russians.  He  was  in  the  battle  of
Zielence,  18  June,  1792,  and  in  that  of  Hubienka,
17  July,  1792,  where,  with  only  4,000  men.  he  kept
15,000  Russians  at  bay  for  six  hours,  making  his
retreat  without  great  loss.  But  the  patriots
were  overwhelmed  by  numbers,  and  when  King
Stanislas  submitted  to  the  second  partition  of
Poland,  Kosciuszko  resigned  his  commission  and
retired  to  Leipsic,  where  he  received  from  the  na-
tional assembly  the  citizenship  of  France.  He  de-
termined to  make  a  second  effort  for  Poland,  and
a  rising  of  his  countrymen  was  secretly  planned.
Kosciuszko  was  elected  dictator  and  general-in-
ehief. On  24  March,  1794,  he  suddenly  appeared


in  Cracow,  issued  a  manifesto  against  the  Russians,
and  hastily  collected  a  force  of  about  5,000  peas-
ants, armed  mostly  with  scythes.  At  Raclawice  he
routed  a  Russian  corps  that  was  almost  twice  as
strong,  and  returned  in  triumph  to  Cracow.  He
committed  the  conduct  of  government  affairs  to  a
national  council  that  was  organized  by  himself,
and  after  receiving  re-enforcements  moved  for-
ward in  quest  of  the  Russian  army.  The  march
was  opposed  by  the  king  of  Prussia  at  the  head  of
40,000  men,  and  Kosciuszko,  whose  force  was  only
13,000,  was  defeated  at  Szczekociny,  6  June.  1  ?!)4.
Unable  to  check  the  prevailing  anarchy,  Kosciusz-
ko resigned  his  dictatorship  and  retired  with  his
army  to  Warsaw,  and  defended  it  against  the
Prussians  and  Russians,  whom  he  compelled  to
raise  the  siege.  Austria  now  took  part  against
him  with  150.000  men,  and  he  was  routed  at
Maciejowice,  10  Oct.,  1794.  Kosciuszko  fell  covered
with  wounds.  He  was  imprisoned  in  St.  Peters-
burg for  two  years,  until  the  death  of  Catherine,
when  the  Emperor  Paul  gave  him  his  liberty,  with
many  marks  of  esteem.  The  czar,  in  releasing
him,  offered  him  his  sword,  but  Kosciuszko  refused
to  accept  it,  saying,  "  I  have  no  need  of  a  sword ;
I  have  no  country  to  defend."  Subsequently  his
countrymen  in  the  French  army  of  Italy  presented
him  with  the  sword  of  John  Sobieski.  On  crossing
the  Russian  frontier  he  returned  to  the  czar  the
patent  of  his  pension  and  every  testimonial  of  Rus-
sian favor,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his  life  in  retire-
ment. He  visited  the  United  States  in  1797,  where
he  was  received  with  distinction,  and  obtained  from
congress  a  grant  of  land,  in  addition  to  the  pen-
sion that  he  had  received  after  the  Revolutionary
war.  He  then  resided  in  Fontainebleau  until  1814,
engaged  in  agriculture.  When  Napoleon  was
about  to  invade  Poland  in  1806  he  wished  to  em-
ploy Kosciuszko,  who,  being  under  parole  not  to
fight  against  Russia,  refused  to  enlist,  and  the
proclamation  to  the  Poles  that  appeared  in  the
••  Moniteur"  under  his  name  in  1806  he  declared
to  be  a  forgery.  In  1816  he  removed  to  Solothurn,
Switzerland,  and  in  the  following  year  sent  a  deed
of  manumission  to  all  the  serfs  on  his  Polish  es-
tate. His  death  was  caused  by  a  fall  from  his
horse  over  a  precipice.  The  Emperor  Alexander
had  him  interred  be-
side Poniatowski  and
Sobieski  in  the  cathe-
dral of  Cracow,  near
which  city  the*  people
raised  to  his  memory
a  mound  150  feet  high,
the  earth  of  which  was
brought  from  every
great  battle-field  of
Poland.  From  a  fan-
cied resemblance  to
this  mound  the  lofti-
est mountain  in  Aus-
tralia has  received  the
name  of  Mount  Kos-
ciuszko.  A  monument

of  white  marble,  designed  by  John  H.  B,  Latrobe,
and  represented  in  the  illustration,  was  erected  to
his  memory  at  West  Point  by  the  U.  S.  military
academy  cadet  corps  of  1828,  at  a  cost  of  $5,000.
See  Chodzko's  "  Histoire  militaire,  politique  et
privee  de  Kosciuszko  "  (Paris,  1837) ;  and  Falken-
stein's  "  Leben  Kosciuszko's  "  (Leipsic,  1825).

KOSTER,  Henry,  English  explorer,  b.  in  Liver-
pool in  1793;  d.  m  Pernambuco,  20  May,  1820.
His  father  was  a  merchant  in  Liverpool,  and  sent
his  son,  who  had  been  ordered  to  travel  for  his


574


KOTZEBUE


KRAUTBAUER


health,  to  his  agent  in  Pernambuco.  Young  Henry
landed  in  that  city  on  7  Dec,  1809,  and,  acquiring
strength  in  a  few  months,  began  to  explore  the
country,  studying  its  natural  productions.  In  the
summer  of  1811  he  paid  a  short  visit  to  England,
returning  on  27  December  to  Pernambuco,  where
he  had  resolved  to  make  his  home.  He  afterward
bought  the  island  of  Itamaraca,  which  he  colo-
nized. Koster  was  the  first  to  give  to  Europeans
exact  notions  about  the  remote  provinces  of  Bra-
zil, where  he  travelled.  He  published  ••  Travels  in
Brazil "  (London,  1816),  and  "  Explorations  in
Northern  Brazil,  1809-'15,  through  the  Provinces
of  Pernambuco,  Ceara,  Parahiba,  etc."  (1816).

KOTZEBUE,  Otto  von,  Russian  explorer,  b.
in  Revel,  Russia,  30  Dec,  1787;  d.  there,  15  Feb.,
1846.  His  father  was  the  celebrated  dramatist.  The
son  was  educated  at  the  Academy  of  St.  Peters-
burg, and  entered  the  Russian  navy.  In  1815  he
commanded  an  expedition  that  was  equipped  and
sent  o\it  at  the  expense  of  Count  Rumiantzeff,
chancellor  of  the  empire,  to  explore  the  South  sea
and  Bering  strait,  in  search  of  a  northeast  passage
to  the  Atlantic.  After  exploring  the  South  sea
islands  they  steered  toward  Kamtchatka,  and  dis-
covered, on  20  April,  an  island  to  which  they  gave
the  name  of  their  patron,  Rumiantzeff.  Kotzebue
also  discovered  several  islands  and  bays  and  a
sound  northeast  of  Bering  strait,  which  he  called
Kotzebue  sound.  He  arrived  in  Russia,  23  July,
1818,  and  in  1823  was  appointed  by  Alexander  I.
to  command  the  "  Predpriatie,"  and  ordered  to  the
west  coast  of  North  America  to  protect  the  Rus-
sian American  company  from  the  smuggling  of
foreign  traders.  In  1829  he  retired  from  active
service  and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  with  his  fam-
ily in  Esthonia.  He  was  the  author  of  •'  Travels
through  Italy,  1804-'5  "  (4  vols.,  London,  1807) ;
"Journey  in  Persia"  (English  translation,  Phila-
delphia, 1820) ;  "  A  Voyage  of  Discovery  into  the
South  Sea  and  Bering  Strait  in  the  Years  1815— '18  "
(3  vols.,  Weimar,  St.  Petersburg,  and  London,
1821) ;  and  "  A  New  Voyage  Round  the  World  in
the  Years  1823-6 "  (2  vols.,  Weimar  and  London,
1830).

KOUNS,  Nathan  Chapman,  author,  b.  in  Ful-
ton, Callaway  co.,  Mo.,  17  Dec,  1833.  His  paternal
ancestors,  who  came  to  this  country  with  Lord
Baltimore,  were  from  Strasbourg.  Mr.  Kouns
was  educated  chiefly  at  home,  and  at  St.  Charles
college,  Mo.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1852.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
until  he  entered  the  Confederate  army,  in  which
he  served  during  the  civil  war,  being  several  times
wounded.  He  afterward  returned  to  the  practice  of
the  law,  and  in  January,  1887,  was  appointed  by
the  supreme  court  of  Missouri  librarian  of  the  state
library  at  Jefferson  City.  He  is  the  author  of
"Dorcas,  Daughter  of  Faustina"  (New  York,
1863),  and  "  Arius,  the  Libyan  "  (1883),  and  of  two
other  works  that  are  still  in  manuscript.

KOUNTZ,  John  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Richfield,
Lucas  co.,  Ohio,  25  March,  1846.  He  attended
school  in  Maumee  City,  Ohio,  until  the  age  of  four-
teen, and  in  September,  1861  enlisted  as  a  drum-
mer-boy in  the  37th  Ohio  infantry.  At  the  battle
of  Mission  Ridge,  Tenn.,  25  Nov.,  1863,  when  the
drum-corps  was  ordered  to  the  rear  he  threw  away
his  drum,  seized  a  musket,  and  was  severely  wound-
ed in  the  first  assault,  being  left  in  the  field  under
the  enemy's  guns  until  he  was  rescued  by  his  com-
pany. This  episode  is  the  subject  of  a  poem  by
Mrs.  Kate  B.  Sherwood,  entitled  "  The  Drummer-
Boy  of  Mission  Ridge,"  which  attained  a  wide
reputation. He  remained  in  the  hospital  of  Louis-


ville until  he  was  honorably  discharged  from  the
service  on  25  April,  1864,  and  on  his  return  to
civil  life  he  attended  school  for  one  year,  after
which  he  was  treasurer  of  Lucas  countv  from
1872  till  1874,  and  county  recorder  in  1875-'8.
He  has  been  connected  with  the  Grand  army  of
the  republic  since  its  organization  in  1866,  and  was
elected  its  commander-in-chief  on  25  July,  1884.
In  the  presidential  contest  that  occurred  during
his  official  term  he  issued  an  order  to  bar  politics
from  this  organization.  He  is  now  (1887)  president
of  the  Toledo  fire-underwriters'  association.

KRACKOWIZER,  Ernest,  physician,  b.  ia
Styria,  Austria,  in  1822 ;  d.  in  Sing  Sing,  N.  Y.,
23  Sept.,  1875.  He  studied  medicine  in  Vienna
and  Padua,  where,  as  captain  of  the  students'
league,  he  became  involved  in  the  insurrection  of
1848.  He  came  to  this  country,  settled  in  Brook-
lyn, where  he  practised  until  he  removed  to  New
York  in  1857.  He  established  the  German  dis-
pensary, and  assisted  in  reorganizing  Bellevue
hospital  medical  college  in  1874.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  committee  of  seventy  during  the  mu-
nicipal reform,  a  member  of  several  medical  socie-
ties, and  attached  to  Mount  Sinai  and  other  hos-
pitals. He  contributed  to  medical  periodicals.

KRAITSIR,  Charles,  philologist,  b.  in  Schmol-
nitz,  Hungary,  28  Jan.,  1804;  d.  in  Morrisania,
N.  Y.,  7  May,  1860.  He  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  Pesth  in  1828,  and  in  1831  went  to  Poland
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  revolution  there.
He  came  to  this  country  in  1833  with  the  inten-
tion of  founding  a  Polish  colony,  and  in  1837-8
he  established  an  academy  at  Ellioott's  Mills,  Md.
Subsequently  he  resided  in  Washington,  and  in
1841-'2  was  principal  of  the  state  academv  of
Maryland,  Charlotte's  hall.  From  1842  till  1844
he  delivered  lectures  in  Boston  on  philology,  and
established  a  school  there.  In  1848  he  went  to
Europe,  but  afterward  returned  to  Boston,  and  in
1851  came  to  New  York  and  passed  his  last  years
in  Morrisania,  engaged  in  literary  pursuits.  He
is  the  author  of  "  The  Poles  in  the  United  States  "
(Philadelphia,  1836-7) :  "  First  Book  of  English  "
and  "  Significance  of  the  Alphabet "  (Boston,
1846) ;  and  "  Glossology,  being  a  Treatise  on  the
Nature  of  Language  and  on  the  Language  of  Na-
ture "  (New  York,  1852).

KRAUTBAUER,  Francis  Xavier,  R.  C.  bish-
op, b.  near  Bruck,  Bavaria,  12  Jan.,  1824.  He  re-
ceived his  early  education  in  Regensburg,  and
afterward  studied  theology  in  the  Georgianum  in
Munich.  He  was  ordained  priest,  16  July,  1850,
and  arrived  in  the  United  States  in  October  of  the
same  year,  intending  to  devote  himself  to  the
spiritual  welfare  of  his  countrymen.  After  a  short
residence  in  Buffalo  he  was  appointed  in  1851  pas-
tor of  St.  Peter's  church,  Rochester,  where  he  also
erected  schools  for  boys  and  girls.  In  1859  he  went
to  Milwaukee  to  become  spiritual  director  of  the
school  sisters  of  Notre  Dame  in  that  city,  at  the
same  time  attending  the  church  of  Our  Lady  of
the  Angels.  He  remained  in  this  post  for  over  ten
years,  and  the  mother  house  of  the  sisterhood  was
built  under  his  direction.  In  1873  Father  Kraut-
bauer  was  shipwrecked  on  Lake  Michigan  and  nar-
rowly escaped  drowning.  In  1875  he  was  nomi-
nated bishop  of  Green  Bay  and  consecrated  on  29
June  of  that  year.  He  found  the  administration
of  his  diocese  a  work  of  great  difficulty,  as  his
flock  embraced  people  from  every  country  in  Eu-
rope. Some  congregations  were  made  up  of  Eng-
lish-speaking Roman  Catholics,  Germans,  French-
men, Hollanders,  Bohemians,  Walloons,  Poles,  and
Indians. He  devoted  special  attention  to  the  work


KRAUTH


KREBS


575


of  education,  and  in  1884  had  forty-four  parochial
schools,  attended  by  5.292  children.  The  number
of  churches  increased  from  92  to  126,  and  the  num-
ber of  priests  from  63  to  96.

KRAUTH,  Charles  Philip,  clergyman,  b.  in
Montgomery  county,  Pa..  7  May,  1797;  d.  in  Get-
tysburg, Pa.,  30  May,  1867.  At  the  age  of  eighteen
he  began  the  study  of  medicine,  but  abandoned  it
for  theology,  and  in  1819  the  ministerium  of  Penn-
sylvania licensed  him  to  preach.  After  holding  a
Eastorate  at  Martinsburg  and  Shepherdstown,  Va.,
e  was  called  in  1827  to  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  to  take
charge  of  the  recently  organized  English  congre-
gation. In  1833  he  was  elected  professor  of  bibli-
cal and  oriental  literature  in  the  theological  semi-
nary at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  and  the  following  year  he
was  unanimously  elected  president  of  Pennsylvania
college,  at  the  same  place.  In  1850  he  resigned  his
post  as  president  of  the  college,  in  order  to  devote
his  time  exclusively  to  duties  in  the  theological
seminary,  where  he  continued  to  labor  until  his
death.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1837.  Dr.  Krauth
edited  the  "  Evangelical  Review "  from  1850  till
1861.  and,  besides  articles  in  its  pages,  published
various  discourses,  including  his  inaugural  address
as  president  of  Pennsylvania  college  (Gettysburg.
Pa.,  1834),  and  "  Discourse  on  the  Life  and  Character
of  Henry  Clay"  (1852).  He  was  co-editor  of  the
general  synod's  hymn-book  (1828),  and  edited  the
"Lutheran  Sunday-School  Hymn-Book"  (Phila-
delphia, 1843).-^His  eldest  son,  Charles  Porter-
field,  clergvman,  b.  in  Martinsburg.  Va.,  17  March,
1823;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Jan.,  1883,  was
graduated  at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in

1839,  and  at  the
theological  semi-
nary at  the  same
place,  and  entered
the  Lutheran  min-
istry in  1841.  He
was  pastor  succes-
sively of  Luther-
an congregations
at  Baltimore,  Md.,
in  1841-7;  Shep-
herdstown, Va..  in
1847-8 ;  Win-
chester, Va.,  in
1848-55 ;  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  in  1855-
'9 :  of  St.  Mark's,
,tf S? //  Philadelphia, in

LV'(/'  Sf->-iX^&L  ' 1859-'61 :  and  lat-
i-  er  of  other  con-

gregations in  the  same  city.  He  was  editor  of
the  "  Lutheran  and  Missionary  "  in  Philadelphia
in  1861-7;  professor  of  systematic  theology  in  the
Lutheran  theological  seminary,  Philadelphia,  in
1864-'83 ;  of  mental  and  moral  science  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1868-'83 ;  vice-provost
of  the  same  institution  in  1873-83 ;  and  after  the
retirement  of  Provost  Stille  declined  to  be  his  suc-
cessor. The  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettys-
burg, in  1856,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  the  same  in-
stitution in  1874.  In  1852-'3,  on  account  of  his
wife's  illness,  he  visited  with  her  the  Danish  West
Indies,  and  for  three  months  of  that  time  preached
in  the  Dutch  Reformed  church  at  St.  Thomas.  He
subsequently  published  a  sketch  of  this  visit  under
the  title  "  A  Winter  and  Spring  in  the  Danish
West  Indies."  In  1880  he  went  to  Europe  to  visit
the  scenes  of  the  life  and  labors  of  Luther,'  in  or-
der to  complete  a  life  of  the  great  reformer,  for


which  he  had  made  extensive  preparations ;  but  his
death  prevented  its  completion.  Dr.  Krauth  was
by  universal  consent  the  most  accomplished  scholar
and  theologian  of  the  Lutheran  church  in  Ameri-
ca. He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment company  of  the  American  Bible  revision
committee,  and  its  chairman.  Dr.  Philip  Schaff
said  of  him :  "  Our  country  has  produced  few  men
who  united  in  their  persons  so  many  excellences
which  distinguish  the  scholar,  the  theologian,  the
exegete.  the  debater,  and  the  leader  of  his  breth-
ren, as  did  our  accomplished  associate.  His  learn-
ing did  not  smother  his  genius,  nor  did  his  philo-
sophical attainments  impair  the  simplicity  of  his
faith."  When,  in  1864,  the  ministerium  of  Penn-
sylvania determined  to  establish  the  theological
seminary  at  Philadelphia,  he  was  unanimously
chosen  one  of  the  professors.  His  system  of  the-
ology, as  he  gave  it  in  outline  to  his  classes,  is  a
marvel  of  scientific  arrangement.  In  the  contro-
versy in  the  Lutheran  church,  which  resulted  in
the  division  in  1866  and  in  the  establishment  of
the  general  council  in  1867,  he  was  the  acknowl-
edged leader.  He  wrote  the  '•Fundamental  Prin-
ciples of  Faith  and  Church  Polity,"  to  which  the
council  has  ever  since  adhered  ;  he  prepared,  very
largely,  the  constitution  of  the  general  councii,
and  the  constitution  for  congregations,  and  at
his  death  was  engaged  in  the  preparation  of  a  con-
stitution for  synods.  His  extensive  researches  in
liturgies  qualified  him  to  take  an  active  part  in  the
preparation  of  the  church-book  at  present  in  use  in
the  general  council  churches,  and  the  principles
underlying  the  order  of  worship,  adopted  in  1865.
have  been  made  the  basis  of  a  common  order  of
worship  for  all  English-speaking  Lutherans  in  the
United  States.  Dr.  Krauth's  publications  num-
ber more  than  one  hundred.  His  greatest  work  is
entitled  "The  Conservative  Reformation  and  its
Theology"  (Philadelphia,  1872).  His  other  writ-
ings include  "  Tholuck's  Commentary  on  the  Gos-
pel of  John,"  translated  (1859) ;  "  Christian  Liberty
in  Relation  to  the  Usages  of  the  Evangelical  Lu-
theran Church  Maintained  and  Defended  "  (1860) ;
'•  Fleming's  Vocabulary  of  Philosophy,"  edited,
with  introduction  and  additions  (1860;  2d  ed.,
enlarged,  New  York,  1877):  "The  Augsburg  Con-
fession," translated,  with  historical  introduction,
notes,  and  index  (Philadelphia,  1868);  "Infant
Baptism  and  Infant  Salvation  in  the  Calvinistic
System,"  a  review  of  Dr.  Hodge's  "Systematic
Theology"  (1874);  "  Ulrici's  Review  of  Strauss"
(1874) ;  "  Berkeley's  Principles,  Prolegomena,  Notes
of  Ueberweg,  and  Original  Annotations"  (1874);
and  "Chronicle  of  the  Augsburg  Confession"
(1878).  Dr.  Krauth  also  wrote  poems,  translated
hymns  from  the  Latin  and  German,  and  was  a
frequent  contributor  to  religious  periodicals.  A
memoir  of  him  is  now  (1887)  in  preparation  by
his  son-in-law.  Rev.  Adolph  Spaeth.  D.  D.

KREBS,  John  Michael,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ha-
gerstown,  Md.,  6  May.  1804 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
30  Sept.,  1867.  He  became  a  clerk  in  the  employ
of  his  father,  the  postmaster  of  Hagerstown,  but
spent  his  leisure  in  study,  and  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  in  1827,  and  at  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1829.  From  that  year  till  his  death
he  was  pastor  of  the  Rutgers  street  Presbyterian
church  in  New  York  city.  He  held  many  offices
in  the  old-school  branch  of  his  church,  and  was
a  member  of  the  board  of  foreign  missions  from  its
organization,  and  several  years  its  president.  In
1842  he  became  a  director  of  Princeton  seminary,
and  its  president  in  1865,  which  offices  he  held  till
his  death. Dickinson  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.


576


KREHBIEL


KRUMMACHER


in  1841.  He  published  sermons  and  religious
works,  "  The  Private,  Domestic,  and  Social  Life  of
Jesus  Christ :  a  Model  for  Youth "  (Philadelphia,
1849),  and  the  "Presbyterian  Psalmist  "  (1852).

KREHBIEL,  Henry  Edward,  musical  critic,
b.  in  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  10  March,  1854.  He  re-
ceived a  general  education  from  his  father,  a  Ger-
man clergyman  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
and  began  in  1872  the  study  of  law  in  Cincinnati.
In  June,  1874.  he  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  the
"  Cincinnati  Gazette  "  as  musical  critic,  which  post
he  held  until  November,  1880.  He  then  came  to
New  York,  where  he  is  now  (1887)  musical  critic
of  the  "Tribune."  Among  his  published  works
are  "  The  Technics  of  Violin  Playing  "  (Cincinnati,
1880) ;  "  Review  of  the  New  York  Musical  Season
1885-'6  "  (New  York  and  London,  1886) ;  and  the
same  for  the  season  of  1886-7  (1887).

KRIMMEL,  John  Lewis,  artist,  b.  in  Ebingen,
Wurtemberg,  Germany,  in  1787;  d.  near  German-
town,  Pa.,  15  July,  1821.  He  came  to  Philadelphia
in  1810  to  engage  in  business  with  his  brother,  but
soon  abandoned  this  occupation  for  art.  He  began
by  painting  portraits,  but,  a  copy  of  Wilkie's  "  Blind
Fiddler"  falling  in  his  way,  his  attention  was
turned  to  humorous  subjects.  He  also  painted
historical  pictures,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death — by
drowning — he  had  received  a  commission  to  paint
a  large  canvas  on  the  landing  of  William  Penn.
Mr.  Krimmel  was  president  of  the  Society  of
American  artists.  Among  his  works  are  "  The
Pepper-Pot  Woman,"  "  The  Cut  Finger,"  "  Blind-
man's  Bluff,"  "  Election  Day,"  "  The  Fourth  of
July  at  Old  Centre  Square,"  "  Going  to  and  Re-
turning from  Boarding-School,"  "  The  Country
Wedding,"  and  "  Perry's  Victory."

KROEGER,  Adolph  Ernst,  author,  b.  in
Schwabstedt,  duchy  of  Schleswig,  28  Dec,  1837 ;
d.  in  St.  Louis,  8  March,  1882.  He  was  the  son  of
a  clergyman  who  came  to  this  country  with  his
family  in  1848  and  settled  at  Davenport,  Iowa.
Young  Kroeger  first  went  into  a  banking-house,
but  in  1857  removed  to  New  York  city  and  was
connected  with  one  of  the  daily  papers  as  trans-
lator for  three  years.  During  the  civil  war  he
served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Fremont,  and  at  its
close  settled  in  St.  Louis.  Both  by  translations
of  the  works  of  Fichte,  Kant,  and  Leibnitz,  and  by
numerous  essays  in  different  periodicals,  he  largely
contributed  to  a  better  understanding  of  German
literature  in  this  country,  and  increased  the  num-
ber of  those  that  are  interested  in  it.  He  wrote
regularly  for  the  St.  Louis  "  Journal  of  Speculative
Philosophy."  He  published  Fichte's  "  Science  of
Knowledge "  (Philadelphia,  1868),  the  same  au-
thor's "  Science  of  Rights  "  (1869),  and  translated
his  "  Science  of  Morals,"  but  his  translation  still
remains  in  manuscript.  He  also  issued  "The
Minnesingers  of  Germany,"  containing  translations
of  Walter  von  der  Vogelweide  and  others  (New
York,  1873),  and  "  Our  Forms  of  Government  and
the  Problems  of  the  Future  "  (1862).

KROGSTRUPP,  Otto  Christian,  clergyman,
b.  on  the  island  of  Fuhnen,  Denmark,  18  Aug.,
1714;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  10  Oct.,  1785.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Copenhagen,  and
was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Lutheran
church  by  the  Danish  Bishop  Brodersen.  In  1748
he  united  with  the  Moravian  church,  and  in  1753
came  to  this  country,  where  he  labored  for  many
years  in  Philadelphia,  at  Graceham,  Md.,  and  at
Lititz,  York,  and  Lancaster,  Pa.  Krogstrupp  was
distinguished  for  his  power  and  eloquence  as  a
preacher.  An  old  record  says :  "  He  was  a  vessel
of  grace,  filled  with  simplicity  and  love  to  God


and  man — a  diadem  among  the  faithful  ministers
whom  God  has  given  to  the  Moravian  church."

KROHN,  Joseph  Hyacinthe,  French  mariner,
b.  in  Neuville,  France,  16  Aug.,  1766 ;  d.  in  Saint
Jean  d'Angely,  21  March,  1823.  He  entered  the
navy  in  1782,  was  wounded  in  an  engagement  with
the  English  in  the  waters  of  St.  Croix,  and  served
in  Santo  Domingo  from  1789  till  1795,  where  he
won  the  commission  of  frigate-captain.  He  com-
manded the  French  navy  in  Guadeloupe  under
Hugues  from  1795  till  1799,  and  fought  several
successful  engagements  with  the  English  fleet,
which  enabled  the  captain-general  to  reconquer  all
the  French  colonies  in  the  West  Indies.  Krohn
would  have  risen  to  the  highest  ranks  had  not  his
education  been  neglected.  In  1801 -'2  he  com-
manded a  division  of  the  expedition  to  Santo  Do-
mingo, but  he  lost  all  his  crew  from  yellow  fever
in  Havana.  The  admiral  gave  him  orders  to  burn
his  ship,  but  Krohn  opened  the  prisons  in  Havana,
and  recruiting  500  outlaws,  maintained  such  strict
discipline  that  he  captured  three  English  men-of-
war.  From  1804  till  1808  he  commanded  the  sta-
tion of  Santo  Domingo,  and  inflicted  great  damage
on  English  commerce.  He  resigned  in  1814,  when
he  received  the  rank  of  commodore.

KROTEL,  Gottlob  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.
in  Ilsfeld,  Wurtemberg,  Germany,  4  Feb.,  1826.  He
came  to  the  United  States  when  quite  young,  set-
tled in  Philadelphia,  and  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1846.  He  then
studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1848,
and  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  in  the  Lutheran
church  in  1850.  He  has  been  pastor,  successively,
of  Lutheran  congregations  at  Lebanon,  Pa.,  in
1849-'53 ;  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1853-'62  ;  and  in  Phila-
delphia in  1862-'8  ;  and  since  1868  has  had  charge
of  the  English  Evangelical  Lutheran  church  of  the
Holy  Trinity,  New  York  city,  which  he  organized.
At  the  establishment  of  the  Lutheran  theological
seminary  at  Philadelphia,  in  1864,  he  was  elected
one  of  the  professors,  a  post  which  he  filled  un-
til his  removal  to  New  York.  He  has  held  many
offices  in  his  church,  and  was  president  of  its  gen-
eral council  in  1870.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1865.
Dr.  Krotel  was  for  several  years  editor  of  the  "  Lu-
therische  Herald,"  New  York,  and  for  many  years
of  "  The  Lutheran,"  Philadelphia.  Among  his  pub-
lished works  are  "  Life  of  Melanchthon,"  by  Led-
derhose,  translated  from  the  German  (Philadelphia,
1854) ;  "  Who  are  the  Blessed  1  A  Meditation  on  the
Beatitudes  "  (1855) ;  "  Memorial  Volume  of  Trinity
Church,  Lancaster "  (Lancaster,  Pa.,  1861);  "Ex-
planations of  Luther's  Small  Catechism,"  with  Rev.
William  J.  Mann,  D.  D.  (Philadelphia,  1863) ;  and
"  Luther  and  the  Swiss,"  a  lecture  by  Dr.  Gerhard
Uhlhorn,  translated  from  the  German  (1878).

KRUMMACHER,  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Duisburg,  Prussia,  in  1796 ;  d.  in
Potsdam,  Prussia,  10  Dec,  1868.  His  father,  Fried-
rich  Adolph  Krummacher,  was  an  eminent  German
theologian  and  writer.  •  The  son  held  a  pastorate
in  Germany,  and,  although  a  minister  of  the  Re-
formed church,  was  a  zealous  advocate  of  the  older
Lutheranism,  and  gave  great  offence  by  his  denun-
ciation of  rationalists.  He  came  to  New  York  in
1843,  declined  a  theological  professorship  in  Mer-
cersburg.  Pa.,  and  afterward  returned  to  Germany,
settling  in  Berlin  in  1847.  Among  his  numerous
works,  many  of  which  have  been  translated  into
English,  are  "  Flying  Roll  of  Free  Grace  Dis-
played "  (New  York,  1841) ;  "  Elijah  the  Tishbite  "
(1847) ;  "  The  Martyr  Lamb  "  (1849) ;  "  The  Last
Days  of  Elisha  "  (1852) ;  "  The  Risen  Redeemer ''"


KRUSENSTERN


KUNTH


577


(1863) ;  and  "  Bunsen  and  Stahl r'  (Berlin,  1856).
Among  his  later  devotional  works  are  "Gottes
Wort "  (Berlin,  1865),  and  "  David,  der  KOnig  von
Israel "  (1866  ;  English  translation,  1870).  His  ser-
mons were  published  (Berlin,  1868),  and  his  auto-
biography edited  by  his  daughter,  which  was  trans-
lated into  English  (London,  1871).

KRUSENSTERN,  Adam  Johann  ron,  Rus-
sian navigator,  b.  in  Haggud,  Esthonia,  19  Nov.,
1770 ;  d.  in  Esthonia,  24  Aug.,  1846.  He  was  in
the  English  service  in  1793-9,  and  afterward,  hav-
ing been  made  a  captain  in  the  Russian  navy,  com-
manded in  1803  an  expedition  that  he  had  planned
for  the  exploration  of  the  north  Pacific  coasts  of
America  and  Asia.  He  described  this  in  his  "  Reise
urn  die  Welt  in  den  Jahren  1803-r6"  (3  vols.,  St.
Petersburg,  1810-'12  ;  English  translation,  Lon-
don, 1813). Krusenstern  became  an  admiral  in  1841.

KRYN,  called  "  The  Great  Mohawk,"  Indian
chief,  d.  in  Salmon  River,  near  Lake  Champlain,
N.  Y.,  4  June,  1690.  In  1674  his  wife  became  a
convert  to  Christianity,  and  the  chief  abandoned
her.  In  his  wanderings  he  reached  the  new  vil-
lage of  La  Prairie,  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  which  had
been  founded  by  Catherine  Ganneaktena  (q.  r.)  in
1670.  He  was  struck  by  the  peace  and  order  that
prevailed,  and  after  some  months  became  a  Chris-
tian. On  his  return  to  his  tribe  in  Caughnawaga,
he  related  what  he  had  seen,  and  urged  all  who
shared  his  ideas  te  follow  him  to  La  Prairie.  Forty
at  once  joined  him,  and  reached  the  mission  on
Easter  Sunday,  1676.  In  1687.  during  a  war  be-
tween the  Iroquois  and  the  Indians  that  were
friendly  to  the  French,  Kryn  made  an  offer  to
Denonville,  the  French  governor,  to  go.  with  five
others,  and  find  out  the  real  intentions  of  the  Mo-
hawk tribe.  His  offer  was  accepted,  and  as  he  was
crossing  Lake  Champlain  he  met  a  body  of  sixty
Mohawks  who  had  been  sent  by  Gov.  Dongan  to
make  a  raid  on  the  French  settlements.  Kryn
persuaded  them  to  return,  and  even  preached  to
them  with  such  success  that  four  were  converted.
The  Oneidas  and  Onondagas  were  also  influenced
by  him,  aided  by  Garaeonthie  (q.  v.)  to  keep  peace
with  the  French.  In  February,  1690,  under  orders
from  the  new  governor,  Frontenac  (q.  v.),  a  force
of  a  hundred  Frenchmen  and  eighty  Indians,  the
latter  commanded  by  Kryn,  marched  on  Schenec-
tady. Kryn  encouraged  his  followers  to  avenge  on
the  English  the  massacre  of  200  Canadians  by  the
Iroquois  six  months  before.  Schenectady  was  taken
by  surprise,  and  sixty-three  of  the  inhabitants  butch-
ered. Later  in  the  same  year  the  great  Mohawk  sot
out  with  Lieut.  Beauvais  on  a  war-party.  While
halting  at  Salmon  river,  for  the  purpose  of  erect-
ing a  stockade,  the  party  was  attacked  by  the  Ab-
nalkis,  who  mistook  them  for  English,  and  Kryn
fell  dead  at  the  first  fire.

KUHN,  Adam,  botanist,  b.  in  Germantown,
Pa.,  28  Nov.,  1741  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  5  July.
1817.  He  studied  medicine  under  his  father,  and
at  the  University  of  Upsal  in  1862.  also  studying  |
botany  under  Linna?us.  He  took  the  degree  of
M.  D.  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh  in  June.
1767.  and  published  his  thesis.  "  De  Lavatione  j
frigida."  On  his  return  he  settled  at  Philadel-  |
phia  and  practised  medicine.  He  was  appointed
professor  of  materia  medica  in  the  College  of  Phila-
delphia in  January,  1768.  became  professor  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  November,  1789.  and  held  the
chair  of  the  practice  of  physic  from  the  union  of
the  college  and  the  university  in  January,  1792,  till
1797.  He  was  a  physician  of  the  Pennsylvania
hospital  from  May,  1775,  till  January,  1798,  and
vol.  in. — 37


was  president  of  the  College  of  physicians  from
July,.  1808,  till  his  death.

KUHN,  or  KINO,  Eusebins  Francis,  mission-
ary, b.  in  Trent,  Austria,  about  1650;  d.  in  Mag-
dalena,  Sonora,  in  1711.  He  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus  at  an  early  period,  and  after  completing  his
studies  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics
in  the  University  of  Ingoldstadt,  but  resigned  and
went  to  Mexico  as  a  missionary.  He  not  only  de-
voted himself  to  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,
but  to  bettering  their  social  condition.  Receiving
permission  to  preach  in  Sonora,  he  set  out  from
Mexico,  20  Oct.,  1686.  and  met  on  the  way  Father
Salva  Tierra.  Together  they  formed  the  project  of
converting  and  subjecting  to  Spain  all  the  inhabi-
tants from  Mexico  to  Oregon.  Father  Kiihn  was
to  undertake  the  territory  of  Sonora  and  the  Pima
country,  which  embraced  most  of  the  present  terri-
tory of  Arizona.  After  entering  Sonora  he  learned
the  different  dialects  of  the  inhabitants,  and  formed
vocabularies  and  elementary  works  for  the  use  of
his  assistants  and  successors.  He  is  said  to  have
baptized  with  his  own  hand  over  48.000  of  the  na-
tives, and  caused  them  to  adopt  civilized  life.  He
was  constantly  thwarted  in  his  efforts  by  the
cruelty  of  the  Spaniards,  and  his  denunciations  of
the  violence  and  oppression  with  which  the  Indians
were  treated  at  length  moved  the  Mexican  coun-
cil. Regulations  were  made  for  the  protection  of
the  Indians;  but  they  were  never  observed,  and
he  often  saw  his  converts  dragged  from  their
homes  and  compelled  to  work  in  the  mines.  He
entered  Arizona,  13  March,  1687,  built  chapels
everywhere,  made  peace  between  hostile  tribes,
"and,"  says Clavigero  in  the  "Storia  della  Califor-
nia," "  if  he  could  have  obtained  additional  mis-
sionaries and  not  been  hampered  by  constant  im-
pediments, calumnies,  and  false  reports,  he  would
then  have  easily  converted  all  the  tribes  between
Sonora  and  the  rivers  Gila  and  Colorado."  In
1698  he  set  out  on  a  tour  of  inspection  of  his  mis-
sion stations,  and  travelled  on  foot  a  thousand
miles  through  a  rugged  country  inhabited  only  by
savages.  lie  made  several  such  journeys  during
the  subsequent  years  of  his  ministry,  and  between
1693  and  1697  founded  the  missions  of  Santa
Maria  Somanca,  Gueravi,  Cocospera,  San  Cayetano,
and  San  Xavier  del  Bac.  The  last  was  the  largest
rancheria  in  Arizona,  having  176  houses  and  808
Indians.  He  founded  fourteen  missions,  most  of
which  were  abandoned  after  his  death.  He  wrote
"  Explicacion  astronomica  del  Cometa  que  se  vio  en
todo  el  orbe  en  1G80  y  1681"  (Mexico,  1681);
"  Mapa  del  paso  nor  tierra  ii  la  California,"  pub-
lished by  Rev.  L.  Gobicu  (1706);  and  several  manu-
script works,  which  he  deposited  with  the  Jesuits
in  Mexico,  and  which  were  used  by  Rev.  Miguel
Yenegas  in  his  "  Historia  de  California."

KUNKEL,  John  Christian,  lawver,  b.  in  Har-
risburg.  Pa..  18  Sept.,  1816;  d.  there,  14  Oct.,  1870.
He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  subse-
quently studied  law  at  the  Carlisle  law-school,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Dauphin  county,  and  soon
gained  a  reputation  as  a  lawyer  and  a  public
speaker.  During  the  presidential  campaign  of
1844  he  spoke  much  in  favor  of  Henry  Clay,  and
the  same  year  was  elected  to  the  legislature  and
served  for  three  consecutive  terms.  In  1851  he
was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  at  the  close  of
the  first  session  was  chosen  speaker.  In  1854,  and
again  in  1856,  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Whig,  and  served  from  1855  till  1859.

KUNTH,  Charles  Sigismnnd  (koont).  Ger-
man botanist,  b.  in  Leipsic,  18  June,  1788;  d.
there,  22  March,  1850. He  became  a  merchant's


578


KUNTZE


KUNZE


clerk  in  Berlin  in  180(5,  but  made  the  acquaintance
of  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  who  furnished  him
with  means  to  attend  lectures  at  the  university,
and  afterward  took  him  to  Paris  in  1813.  From
1813  till  1819Kunth  devoted  his  time  to  classifying
the  plants  that  had  been  collected  by  Humboldt
and  Bonpland  during  their  journey  through
America.  Returning  to  Berlin  in  1820,  he  became
professor  of  botany  at  the  university,  and  vice-
president  of  the  botanical  garden,  and  in  1829  was
elected  member  of  the  Academy  of  sciences  of  Ber-
lin. In  the  samevyear  he  sailed  for  South  America
and  visited,  during  a  sojourn  of  three  years,  Chili,
Peru,  Brazil,  Venezuela,  Central  America,  and  the
West  Indies.  His  collections  were  bought  after
his  death  by  the  Prussian  government,  and  form  a
part  of  the  royal  herbarium  in  Berlin.  Among
his  works  are  "  Nova  genera  et  species  plantarum
quas  in  peregrinatione  ad  plagam  aequinoctialem
orbis  novi  collegerunt  Bonpland  et  Humboldt  "  (7
vols.,  Paris,  1815-25) ;  "  Les  mimosees  et  autres
plantes  legumineuses  du  nouveau  continent "
(1819) ;  "  Synopsis  plantarum  quas  in  itinere  ad  pla-
gam aequinoctialem  orbis  novi  collegerunt  Hum-
boldt et  Bonpland  "  (1822-'3) ;  "  Les  graminees  de
l'Amerique  du  Sud "  (2  vols.,  1825-'33).  These
four  works  form  parts  iii.  and  iv.  of  Humboldt  and
Bonpland's  "  Voyage  dans  l'interieur  de  l'Ame-
rique." He  was  the  author  also  of  "  Handbuch  der
Botanik"  (Berlin,  1831) ;  "Enumeratio  plantarum
omnium  hucusque  cognitarum,  secundum  familias
naturales  disposita,  adjectis  characteribus,  differ-
entiis,  et  synonymis  "  (Stuttgart,  1833-'50) ;  "  Lehr-
buch  der  Botanik  "  (1847) ;  and  "  Les  melastomees
et  autres  plantes  legumineuses  de  l'Amerique  du
Sud,"  being  a  continuation  of  Bonpland's  work  (3
vols.,  Paris.  1847-'52).

KUNTZE,  Edward  J.,  sculptor,  b.  in  Pom-
crania,  Prussia,  in  1826;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10
April,  1870.  He  received  his  artistic  education
mostly  in  Stockholm,  Sweden,  gained  the  Roman
prize  in  the  academy  of  fine  arts  there,  and  subse-
quently lived  for  many  years  in  London,  England.
In  1852  he  came  to  this  country  and,  devoting
himself  to  his  art,  achieved  a  reputation,  and  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in
1869.  Among  his  works  are  statuettes  of  Shake-
speare, Goethe,  Irving,  Tennyson,  and  Lincoln :  a
statue  of  "  Psyche,"  one  of  "  Columbia,*'  "  Puck,"
"  Puck  on  Horseback,"  and  "  Puck  on  the  War-
path " ;  a  bust  of  "  Mirth  " ;  "  Merlin  and  Vivien,"
in  bas-relief;  and  many  medallion  portraits  and
busts.  His  principal  work,  a  statue  of  the  "  Indian
Minstrel  Chiabobos"  in  Longfellow's  "  Hiawatha,"
was  left  unfinished.  He  exhibited  three  etchings
at  the  National  academy  in  1868,  and  published  a
juvenile  book,  "Mystic  Bells"  (New  York,  1869).

K  I'NZ,  George  Frederick  (koonts),  mineralo-
gist, b.  in  New  York  city,  29  Sept.,  1856.  He  was
educated  at  public  schools  and  at  the  Cooper  insti-
tute in  New  York.  His  fondness  for  mineralogy
early  asserted  itself,  and  he  was  led  to  make  expe-
ditions in  search  of  specimens.  When  a  sufficient
variety  was  accumulated,  he  would  dispose  of
them  as  collections  to  colleges  and  other  institu-
tions of  learning.  In  connection  with  this  work
he  became  familiar  with  gems,  and  was  invited  to
fill  the  office  of  gem  expert  to  the  firm  of  Tiffany
and  Co.,  New  York.  At  present  (1887)  he  is  the
best-known  specialist  on  this  subject  in  the  United
States,  and  matters  of  importance  are  submitted
to  his  judgment  from  all  parts  of  the  country.
He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  and  a  member  of  the  New
York  academy  of  science,  and  other  scientific  bod-


ies. Mr.  Kunz  has  contributed  papers  to  scientific
journals  and  to  the  popular  magazines.  He  is  a
specialist  on  the  staff  of  the  "  Century  Dictionary,"
and  is  the  author  of  "  Reports  on  Gems  "  in  the
annual  volumes  of  "  Mineral  Resources  of  the
United  States  "  (Washington,  1884-'7).  He  has  now
in  preparation  books  on  "  Gems  "  and  "  Pearls."

KUNZE,  John  Christopher  (koon'-tseh),  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Artern,  Saxony,  4  Aug.,  1744 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  24  July,  1807.  He  received  his  classi-
cal training  at  Rossleben  and  Merseburg,  and  his
theological  education  at  Leipsic.  He  was  for  three
years  engaged  as  teacher  of  the  higher  branches  in
the  school  at  Closter-Bergen,  near  Magdeburg,  and
for  one  year  as  inspector  of  the  orphans'  home  at
Gratz.  While  engaged  at  the  latter  place  he  was
selected  by  the  theological  faculty  at  Halle  to  go
to  America  in  response  to  an  application  for  a
minister  from  St.  Michael's  and  Zion  Lutheran  con-
gregations at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  was  ordained  by
the  Lutheran  consistory  at  Wernigerode,  and  ar-
rived in  Philadelphia  in  September,  1770.  During
his  residence  in  Philadelphia  he  opened  a  theologi-
cal seminary,  which  the  Revolutionary  war  brought
to  an  end.  During  the  British  occupation  Zion
church  was  converted  into  a  hospital,  and  St.
Michael's  was  used  half  the  day  as  a  garrison
church.  For  several  years  he  also  occupied  the
post  of  professor  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
to  which  he  was  appointed  in  1780,  giving  instruc-
tion in  German  and  the  oriental  languages  and  lit-
erature. The  university  conferred  on  him  the  de-
gree of  M,  A.  in  1780,  and  that  of  D.  D.  in  1783.
In  1784  he  accepted  a  call  to  New  York,  where  he
labored  until  his  death.  He  also  occupied  the  pro-
fessorship of  oriental  languages  and  literature  in
Columbia  in  1784-'7,  and  again  in  1792-'9.  Dr.
Kunze's  ability  as  a  Hebrew  and  Arabic  scholar
was  recognized  outside  of  his  church,  and  even  by
Jewish  rabbis,  who  came  to  him  for  information.
He  was  the  leading  spirit  in  the  organization,  in
1786,  of  the  New  York  ministeriura,  the  second
Lutheran  synod  in  the  United  States,  and  was  its
first  presiding  officer.  Dr.  Kunze  was  one  of  the
earliest  of  the  educated  Germans  in  America  who
urged  the  expediency  of  giving  the  German  youth
an  education  in  the  English  language.  Through
his  influence  and  that  of  other  progressive  clergy-
men English  came  to  be  used  in  the  pulpits  of  the
German  and  Dutch  churches,  and  the  congrega-
tions which  adhered  to  the  old  languages  lost  many
of  their  members.  His  published  works  include  a
"Concise  History  of  the  Lutheran  Church";  a
small  volume  of  poetry  entitled  "Something  for
the  Understanding  and  the  Heart " ;  "A  Table  of
a  New  Construction  for  Calculating  the  Great
Eclipse,  expected  to  happen  June  16,  1806";
"  Hymn  and  Prayer  Book,  for  the  Use  of  such
Lutheran  Churches  as  use  the  English  Language,"
the  first  English  Lutheran  hymn-book  ever  pub-
lished in  the  United  States,  containing  hymns
translated  from  the  German  collection,  in  the  same
metre  as  the  originals  (New  York,  1795);  and  a
"Catechism  and  Liturgy"  (1795).  He  also  pub-
lished historical  essays,  sermons,  and  addresses.

KUNZE,  Richard  Ernest,  physician,  b.  in  Al-
tenburg,  Germany,  7  April,  1838.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1854,  and  was  graduated  at  the
Eclectic  medical  college  of  New  York  in  1868,  sub-
sequently becoming  a  member  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees of  this  institution,  was  president  of  the  New
York  therapeutical  association  in  1880,  introduced
to  the  medical  profession  the  various  cactean
drugs,  and  has  added  greatly  to  the  previous
knowledge  of  medical  botany. He  published  a


KURTZ


KYAN


579


series  of  monographs  on  "  Cactus  "  (Albany,  1875) ;
"Cereus  Grandiflorus  and  Cereus  Bonplandi"
(1876):  "Cereus  Triangularis  and  Phyllocactus
Grandis"  (1876);  "Cardinal  Points  in  the  Study
of  Medical  Botany  "  (New  York,  1881) ;  and  "  The
Germination  and  Vitality  of  Seeds"  (1881).

KURTZ,  John  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  the  District  of
Columbia  about  1822 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  16
Oct.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  from  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy,  1  July,  1842,  and  entered  the  corps
of  engineers.  He  was  employed  in  repairing  forti-
fications in  North  Carolina  and  the  forts  in  Charles-
ton harbor,  served  on  a  commission  to  devise  a
project  for  the  improvement  of  the  harbor  in  1852,
and  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  March,  1853,
and  captain,  1  July,  1856,  serving  from  1852  till
1856  as  assistant  to  the  chief  engineer  in  Washing-
ton, and  then  on  harbor  works  in  New  England
till  the  civil  war.  He  was  promoted  major,  3  March,
1863,  brevet  lieutenant-colonel  and  brevet  colonel,
13  March,  1865,  and  lieutenant-colonel,  8  Aug.,  1866.
He  served  during  the  civil  war  as  chief  engineer  of
the  Department  of  Annapolis  from  June  till  July,
1861,  and  of  the  Shenandoah  in  August,  1861.  and
then  as  assistant  to  the  chief  of  engineers  at  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  till  1869,  having  charge  of  the  bureau
during  the  absence  of  the  chief  engineer.  After-
ward he  was  employed  as  superintending  engineer
of  various  works,' including  the  defences  of  Dela-
ware bay  and  river  in  1870-'7,  the  Delaware  break-
water in  1871-'2,  and  the  foundation  of  the  Wash-
ington monument  from  26  Sept.,  1876,  till  his  death.

KURTZ,  John  Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lutzelinden,  Nassau -Weilburg,  Germany,  about
1720;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  12  May,  1794.  He  was
educated  in  the  University  of  Halle,  selected  as  a
missionary  to  Pennsylvania,  and  came  to  this
country,  15  Jan.,  1745.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he
settled  at  New  Hanover,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,
where  he  labored  for  two  years,  teaching  and
preaching.  In  1748,  at  the  first  meeting  of  the
first  Lutheran  synod  in  this  country,  he  was  or-
dained to  the  ministry,  and  became  pastor  at  Tul-
pehocken,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  for  twenty-three
years.  In  1771  he  removed  to  York,  Pa.,  where  he
continued  his  pastoral  labors  until  1789,  when  he
retired  from  the  active  duties  of  the  ministry  and
removed  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  to  spend  his  last  days
with  one  of  his  sons.  By  his  learning  and  indefati-
gable activity  Dr.  Kurtz  acquired  great  influence
in  the  church,  and  received  various  marks  of  con-
fidence and  honor,  especially  in  being  selected
senior  of  the  synod. — His  son,  John  Daniel,  b.  in
Germantown,  Pa.,  in  1763;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
30  June,  1856,  studied  theology  under  the  direction
of  his  father,  and  afterward  with  Rev.  Dr.  Gotthilf
Henry  E.  Muhlenberg  at  Lancaster,  Pa.  He  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  synod  of  Pennsylvania  in
1784,  and  for  some  time  assisted  his  father  in  pas-
toral work.  He  afterward  took  charge  of  a  con-
gregation near  York,  Pa.,  and  in  1786  was  installed
as  pastor  of  the  principal  Lutheran  church  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  with  which  he  remained  till  1832.
when  physical  infirmities  compelled  him  to  resign.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  General  synod,
a  director  in  the  Theological  seminary,  and  promi-
nently connected  with  all  the  benevolent  institu-
tions of  the  Lutheran  church. — His  grandson,  Ben-
jamin, b.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  28  Feb.,  1795;  d.  in
Baltimore,  Md..  29  Dec,  1865,  began  his  studies  in
Harrisburg  academy,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  was
an  assistant  teacher  there.  At  the  age  of  eighteen
he  began  the  study  of  theology  at  Lebanon,  Pa.,  in
1815  he  was  licensed  to  preach!  and  immediately  re-
ceived a  call  as  assistant  to  his  uncle,  the  Rev.  John


Daniel  Kurtz,  D.  D.,  who  was  then  pastor  at  Balti-
more. He  was  then  pastor  at  Hagerstown  for
sixteen  years,  and  in  1831-3  at  Chambersburg,  Pa.
Retiring  from  the  active  duties  of  the  ministry  in
1833,  owing  to  failing  health,  he  took  charge  of
the  "  Lutheran  Observer,"  a  post  which  he  held  for
nearly  thirty  years.  In  1838  he  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Washington  college,  Pa.,  and  in  1858
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Wittenberg  college,  Spring-
field, Ohio.  Dr.  Kurtz  was  regarded  as  one  of  the
most  eloquent  men  of  his  time.  Be  was  a  zealous
advocate  of  revivals,  and  had  very  little  sympathy
with  the  confessional  writings  of  the  Lutheran
church.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  general
synod  and  of  the  theological  seminary  at  Gettys-
burg, and  was  for  more  than  thirty  years  one  of
the  trustees  of  Pennsylvania  college"  and  of  the
board  of  directors  of  the  seminary.  He  was  also
the  founder  of  Missionary  institute  at  Selinsgrove,
Pa.  During  his  two  European  tours,  in  1825  and
1846,  he  contributed  interesting  incidents  and
reminiscences  to  the  "Lutheran  Intelligencer"
and  to  the  "  Lutheran  Observer,"  of  which  he  was
editor  at  the  time.  Among  his  other  publications
are  "  First  Principles  of  Religion  for  Children  "
(Hagerstown,  1821) ; "  Sermons  on  Sabbath-Schools  "
(1822);  "Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity"  (1823);  "In-
fant Baptism  and  Affusion,  with  Essays  on  Related
Subjects  "  (Baltimore,  1840) ;  "  Theological  Sketch-
Book,  or  Skeletons  of  Sermons,  Carefully  arranged
in  Systematic  Order,"  partly  original,  partly  se-
lected (2  vols.,  1844) ;  "  Whv  are  You  a  Lutheran  f  "
(1847);  "Lutheran  Prayer-Book"  (1856).  etc.

KUYPERS,  Warmuldus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Holland  in  1732 :  d.  in  Schralenburg,  N.  J.,  in  1797.
He  studied  in  the  University  of  Groningen,  and
was  a  pastor  at  Curacoa  for  some  time  before  1769,
when  he  settled  in  New  York,  preached  for  two
years  at  Rhinebeck  Flats,  Upper  Red  Hook,  and
the  Landing,  and  in  1771  took  charge  of  that  part
of  the  church  in  Hackensack,  N.  J.,  which  belonged
to  the  Conference  party  and  had  no  representation
in  the  classis. — His  son,  Gerard us  Arentse,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Curacoa,  W.  I.,  16  Dec,  1766 ;  d.  in  New
York,  28  June,  1833,  came  to  the  United  States  in
his  early  childhood,  and  was  educated  at  Hacken-
sack. He  studied  theology  first  under  the  direction
of  his  father,  and  subsequently  under  the  Rev.  Her-
manns Meyer  and  the  Rev.  Dirck  Romeyn.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1787,  and  was  ordained,
15  June,  1788,  by  the  classis  of  Hackensack,  as  col-
league pastor  at  Paramus,  N.  J.  In  1789  he  took
charge  of  a  church  in  New  York  city,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death.  Until  1803  his  preaching
was  exclusively  in  Dutch  ;  but  after  that  time  he
preached  in  English.  He  was  appointed  a  teacher
of  Hebrew  in  1799,  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.
from  Princeton  in  1791,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from
Rutgers  in  1810.  He  left  unfinished  "  Discourses
on  the  Heidelberg  Catechism."

KYAN,  John  H.,  inventor,  b.  in  England  in
1775 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  9  Jan.,  1850.  He  was
the  first  to  introduce  a  chemical  process  for  the
preservation  of  wood,  finding  that,  where  timber
was  steeped  in  a  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate
or  placed  in  an  exhausting-cylinder  and  the  solu-
tion forced  in  under  atmospheric  pressure,  the
wood  was  rendered  capable  of  resisting  decay  for
a  great  length  of  time.  This  process  he  patented
in  England  in  1832,  and  subsequently  introduced  it
into  the  United  States.  This  method  was  named
kyanizing,  after  its  inventor.  Its  expense  and  the
difficulty  of  manipulation  at  first  largely  prevented
its  use,  but  with  improved  means  it  now  finds
wide  application.


680


LABAGH


LABASTIDA  Y DAVALOS


LABAGH,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1773 ;  d.  there  in  1858.  He  studied  classics
under  Dr.  Peter  Wilson,  of  Hackensack,  N.  J.,  and
theology  under  Dr.  Solomon  Froeligh  and  Dr.  John
H.  Livingston.  He  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  in
1796,  and  after  a  missionary  tour  in  western  New
York  went  to  Kentucky,  where  he  organized  the
church  of  Salt  River,  in  Mercer  county.  On  re-
turning to  New  York,  he  was  pastor  in  Greenbush,
Rensselaer  county,  till  1809,  and  afterward  of  the
united  churches  of  Shannock  and  Harlingen  till
1844.  He  was  elected  a  trustee  of  Queens  (now
Rutgers)  college  in  1811,  and  had  the  degree  of
D.  D.  conferred  on  him  by  that  institution  in  the
same  year.  He  contributed  largely  to  securing  the
endowment  of  the  theological  seminary  at  New
Brunswick,  was  active  in  the  councils  of  his  church,
and  a  powerful  preacher.  A  memoir  of  him  was
published  by  the  Rev.  John  A.  Todd,  D.  D.  (1860).
— His  son,  Isaac  P.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Leeds,  Greene
co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Aug.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Fairfield,  Iowa,  29
Dec,  1879,  studied  at  Dickinson  college,  and  at
the  New  Brunswick  theological  seminary,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1826,  and  licensed  to  preach.  He
was  successively  pastor  of  Dutch  Reformed  churches
at  Rochester  and  Gravesend,  N.  Y.,  till  1842.  was
subsequently  suspended  for  his  opinions  concerning
the  second  advent  and  the  Christian  Sabbath,  and
in  1846  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church.  He  was  for  some  years  mission-
ary to  the  Jews  in  New  York  city,  and  organized
and  built  St.  Paul's  church,  Haddonfield,  N.  J.,  and
also  St.  Paul's  church,  South  Brooklyn.  In  1860
he  removed  to  Illinois,  and  established  a  female
seminary,  Euphemia  Hall,  and  after  its  destruc-
tion by  fire  in  1863  he  organized  and  built  St.
Peter's  church  at  Cairo.  He  next  removed  to  Fair-
field, Iowa,  and  was  pastor  of  St.  Peter's  church
there  till  his  death.  He  published  "A  Sermon  on
the  Personal  Reign  of  Christ "  (1846) ;  "  Twelve
Lectures  on  Great  Events  of  Unfulfilled  Prophecy"
(1859) ;  and  "  Theoklesia,  or  the  Organization,  Per-
petuity. Conflicts,  and  Triumphs  of  the  One  Holy,
Catholic  Apostolic  Church"  (1868).

LABARBINAIS  LE  GENTIL,  Etienne  Mar-
cel (lah'-bar'-be'-nay'),  French  explorer,  b.  in  Di-
nan  in  1685 ;  d.  in  Brest  in  1731.  He  was  a  mer-
chant of  Saint  Malo,  trading  with  South  America,
and  in  1715— '18  travelled  in  that  country.  He
published  "  Nouveau  voyage  autour  du  monde "
(3  vols.,  Paris,  1827) ;  "  Description  de  l'Amerique
du  Sud  "  (3  vols.,  1829) ;  and  "  Des  meilleurs  moy-
ens  de  faire  avantageusement  le  commerce  avec
l'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (2  vols.,  1830).

LABAREE,  Benjamin,  educator,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  N.  H.,  3  June,  1801 ;  d.  in  Walpole,  N.  H.,
15  Nov.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1828,  and  at  Andover  seminary  in  1831,  and  was
ordained  a  minister  of  the  Congregational  church
at  Bradford,  Mass.,  26  Sept.,  1831.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  Latin  and  Greek  in  Jackson  college,
Columbia,  Tenn.,  in  1832-'6,  and  its  president  from
1836  till  April,  1837.  He  was  subsequently  secre-
tary of  the  Education  society,  New  York  city,  and
was  president  of  Middlebury  college,  Vt.,  from  1840
till  1866.  He  was  pastor  at  Hyde  Park,  Mass.,  in
1869-71,  and  lecturer  on  moral  philosophy  and  in-
ternational law  at  Dartmouth  in  1871-6.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of
Vermont  in  1841,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Dart-
mouth in  1864.


LABASTIDA  Y  DAYALOS,  Pelagio  Antonio

de  (lah-bas-te'-dah),  Mexican  archbishop,  b.  in
Morelia,  Mexico,  in  October,  1815.  He  entered  the
seminary  of  Morelia  in  1830,  and  in  1839  received
ordination  to  the  priesthood.  He  was  parish  priest
in  different  cities  until  1850,  when  he  was  nomi-
nated by  Bishop  Munguia  to  the  parish  of  "  La
Merced  at  Morelia.  He  was  already  known  as  an
orthodox  pulpit  orator,  preaching  against  all
liberal  and  democratic  ideas,  and  against  the  Free-
masons, who  at  that  time  had  begun  to  organize
in  Mexico.  Owing  to  his  preachings,  the  state  of
Michoacan  was  for  many  years  a  bulwark  of  the
Conservative  party,  and  as  a  reward  he  was  ap-
pointed a  canon  in  March,  1854.  At  that  time  the
conflict  between  the  Liberal  and  Conservative  par-
ties in  Mexico  had  reached  its  highest  point  in
the  "three  years' war."  Labastida  anathematized
from  the  pulpit  as  heretical  the  doctrines  of  Mel-
chor  Ocampo  and  Miguel  Lerdo,  and  after  the
triumph  of  the  Conservatives  he  was  consecrated
in  1855  bishop  of  Michoacan  in  the  cathedral  of
the  city  of  Mexico.  (See  accompanying  illustration.)


After  the  Liberal  success  in  1857,  Bishop  Labastida
went  to  Rome,  but  the  Liberals  were  thrown  out  of
power  in  1859  by  Gen.  Miramon,  and  his  first  action
was  to  recall  the  exiled  prelate,  who  returned  in
June,  having  been  already  consecrated  by  the  pope
archbishop  of  Mexico.  In  the  following  years,
until  1863,  Liberals  and  Conservatives  alternately
obtained  power,  and  the  government  policy  changed
accordingly,  but  the  archbishop  was  not  disturbed.
But  when  the  French  invasion  occurred  in  1862,
Archbishop  Labastida  secretly  convoked  at  Mexico
a  "  Junta  de  Notables  "  for  the  purpose  of  discuss-
ing the  plan  of  founding  an  empire.  This  idea
was  long  discussed  on  account  of  doubt  as  to  the
nationality  of  the  prince  to  whom  the  crown
should  be  offered.  Here  the  archbishop  indicated
the  name  of  the  Archduke  Ferdinand  Maximilian
of  Austria,  whose  candidacy  was  accepted  by  accla-
mation. He  was  a  member  of  the  council  of  re-
gency that  was  formed  for  the  purpose  of  govern-
ing the  country  till  Maximilian  should  arrive,  but,
not  being  in  accord  with  the  measures  of  his  col-
leagues, resigned  in  favor  of  his  substitute,  Bishop
Ormachea.  The  archbishop  officiated  at  the  corona-
tion of  Maximilian  in  the  cathedral  of  the  city  of
Mexico,  and  exercised  much  influence  in  govern-
ment affairs  during  the  empire.  Juarez  exiled  him
from  the  country  in  1867,  and  he  lived  abroad,
chiefly  at  Rome,  until,  in  1871,  he  was  allowed  to
return  to  Mexico.  He  has  not  lost  his  influence  in
polities,  and  is  the  intimate  friend  of  President
Diaz. At  the  conclave  of  cardinals  in  Rome,  in


LABAT


LABOULAYE


581


1885,  it  was  proposed  to  invest  Archbishop  Labas-
tida  with  the  cardinal's  hat.

LABAT,  John  Baptist,  clergyman,  b.  in  Paris
in  1663;  d.  there,  6  Jan.,  1738.  He  entered  the
Dominican  order  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  and  taught
philosophy  and  mathematics  at  Nancy  as  well  as
exercising  the  functions  of  a  preacher.  In  1693  he
was  in  the  convent  of  the  Rue  St.  Honore.  Paris,
when  he  determined  to  devote  himself  to  foreign
missions.  He  landed  in  Martinique,  29  Jan.,  1694,
and  was  intrusted  with  the  care  of  the  parish  of
Macouba,  where  he  remained  two  years.  In  1696
he  went  to  Guadeloupe,  and  on  his  return  was  ap-
pointed procurator-general  of  all  the  Dominican
convents  in  the  Antilles.  Owing  to  his  scientific
knowledge,  the  French  government  appointed  him
engineer,  and  in  this  capacity  he  visited  the  whole
chain  of  the  French,  Dutch,  and  English  Antilles
from  Grenada  to  Santo  Domingo.  He  served  for
two  years  as  engineer  in  Guadeloupe,  and  when  the
English  attacked  the  island  in  1704  took  an  active
part  in  the  defence,  firing  several  cannon  with  his
own  hand.  He  also  invented  new  methods  for  the
manufacture  of  sugar,  which  are  still  in  use  in  the
colony.  In  1705  Labat  was  sent  to  Europe  as
deputy  of  his  order,  and  after  spending  several
years  in  Italy  he  went  to  Paris  in  1715  and  occu-
pied himself  with  the  publication  of  his  travels  and
other  literary  works.  Although  Labat  did  not
consider  himself  a  botanist,  his  description  of  the
flora  of  the  Antilles  is  very  complete.  The  genus
Labatia,  of  the  family  of  Ebenaceae,  was  named  in
his  honor.  His  books  that  deal  with  America  are
"  Nouveau  vovage  aux  iles  de  l'Amerique  "  (6  vols.,
Paris,  1722;  2d  ed.,  8  vols.,  1742;  Dutch  transla-
tion, 4  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1725 ;  German,  6  vols.,
Nuremberg,  1783-'7);  and  "Voyage  du  Chevalier
Demarchais  en  Guinee,  iles  voisines,  et  a  Cavenne,
fait  en  1725,  1726,  et  1727  "  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1730).

LABAT,  L6on  (lah-baf),  French  physician,  b.
in  Agde,  Herault,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Nice,  16  Jan.,
1847.  He  visited  both  Americas  from  1824  till  1828,
and  afterward  went  to  Algiers,  Tunis,  Turkey,
Palestine,  and  Egypt,  where  he  was  appointed  sur-
geon to  the  khedive,  returning  to  France  in  1832.
Two  years  later  he  travelled  again  through  Europe
and  Persia,  returning  to  Paris  in  1839,  and  in
1844-'6  he  went  again  to  South  America,  visiting
Chili,  Peru,  and  Brazil.  He  published  "Voyages
en  Amerique  "  (Paris.  1834) ;  "  Traite  sur  la  fievre
jaune  et  les  maladies  pestiientielles  propres  a  l'Ame-
rique "  (1839) ;  "  Influence  du  climat  des  tropiques
sur  les  Europeens  vivant  dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud  "
(1840) ;  "  Histoire  medico-chirurgicale  de  la  maladie
produite  par  la  chique,  insecte  parasite  tres  com-
mun  dans  l'Amerique  meridionale  "  (1843) ;  "  Rou-
tier  de  l'Amerique  "  (1844) :  and  surgical  works.

LA  BERG E.  Charles  Joseph,  Canadian  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Montreal  in  1827 ;  d.  in  August,  1874.
He  was  educated  at  the  College  of  St.  Hyacinthe,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848.  In  1854  he
entered  the  Canadian  parliament  as  a  Liberal,  and
in  1858  he  was  solicitor-general  for  Canada  East.
He  was  an  editor  of  the  "  Franco  Canadian,"  was
at  a  later  date  chief  editor  of  "  Le  National,"  Mon-
treal, and  lieutenant-colonel  of  volunteers.

LABEZARES,  Guido  de  (lah-bay-thah'-rets),
Spanish  adventurer,  b.  in  Bilboa  in  1510 ;  d.  in
Manila  in  1580.  He  went  in  early  life  to  New
Spain,  and  accompanied  Ruy  Lopez  de  Villalobos
in  1542  in  his  unfortunate  expedition  to  the  Spice
islands,  which  he  was  not  able  to  leave  till  1549.
He  returned  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  when  the
viceroy,  Luis  de  Velasco,  was  preparing  an  expe-
dition'to  conquer  and  explore  Florida,  was  given


command  of  a  vessel  with  several  pilots,  which
was  sent  in  advance  to  explore  the  coast  for  the
most  favorable  landing-points.  He  sailed  on  3
Sept.,  1558,  from  San  Juan  de  Ulua,  and  discov-
ered in  latitude  29°  30'  N.  a  favorable  bay,  which
he  named  Filipina;  but  sailing  for  some  distance
along  the  coast  and  not  finding  a  better  port,  he
returned  on  14  Dec.  He  wrote  a  narrative  of  his
voyage,  which  greatly  aided  Luna  de  Arellano
(q.  v.)  in  his  expedition  of  the  next  year,  in  which
he  was  accompanied  by  Labezares.  The  latter  re-
turned to  Mexico  when  Legaspi  (q.  v.)  and  Andres
de  Urdaneta  were  preparing  their  expedition  for
the  conquest  of  the  Philippine  islands.  He  ob-
tained the  post  of  treasurer  of  the  expedition,  and
sailed  with  the  same,  21  Nov.,  1564,  from  the  port
of  Navidad.  He  accompanied  Legaspi  during  the
conquest,  and  after  the  latter's  death  was  called
to  the  chief  command  of  the  Philippines.  Not-
withstanding his  advanced  age,  he  governed  the
islands  wisely,  conquered  the  provinces  of  Pan-
gasinan  and  I  locos,  and  forced  the  Chinese  general
of  the  corsair  "  Li-Ma-Hon  "  to  surrender  Manila,
which  he  fortified.  In  August,  1575,  the  newly
appointed  governor-general,  Dr.  Francisco  de
Saude,  arrived,  and  Labezares  surrendered  the
government.  His  official  acts  were  approved,  and
till  his  death  he  retained  the  honorary  title  and
salary  of  lieutenant-governor.  He  wrote  a  narra-
tive of  his  two  voyages  to  Florida,  and  one  of  the
conquest  of  the  Philippines,  published  by  order
of  the  Spanish  government  (Madrid,  1578).

LA  BORDE,  French  traveller.  He  was  em-
ployed in  the  Jesuit  missions  in  the  Antilles  to-
ward the  middle  of  the  17th  century,  and  was
probably  a  member  of  the  Jesuit  order.  Nothing
is  known  of  his  life.  He  wrote  "Relation  de
l'origine,  mceurs,  coutumes,  guerres  et  voyages  des
Caraibes,  sauvages  des  iles  Antilles  de  l'Amerique  "
(Paris,  1674 ;  German  translation, Nuremberg,  1783).
The  account  which  this  author  gives  of  the  man-
ners and  customs  of  the  Caribs  is  among  the  most
interesting  in  existence.

LA  BORDE,  Maximilian,  educator,  b.  in  Edge-
field, S.  C,  5  June,  1804;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  6
Nov.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina  in  1821,  and  after  studying  law  for
two  years  entered  the  Medical  college  of  Charles-
ton, where  he  received  his  degree  in  1826.  He
practised  medicine  in  Edgefield,  was  editor  of  the
"Edgefield  Advertiser"  in  1836-'8,  a  member  of
the  state  legislature,  and  in  1839  became  secretary
of  the  state,  and  removed  to  Columbia.  He  was
elected  a  trustee  of  South  Carolina  college  in  1841,
in  1842  became  professor  of  logic  and  English  lit-
erature in  that  institution,  and  in  1845  was  trans-
ferred to  the  chair  of  metaphysics.  In  1865  South
Carolina  college  became  the  University  of  South
Carolina,  and  in  this  reorganization  Dr.  La  Borde
was  put  in  charge  of  the  school  of  rhetoric,  criti-
cism, elocution,  and  the  English  language  and  lit-
erature. His  connection  with  the  university  lasted
till  his  death.  During  the  civil  war  the  central
organization  was  established  under  his  auspices,
for  receiving  supplies  for  the  state  troops.  He
was  for  a  time  one  of  the  regents  of  the  state  luna-
tic asylum,  and  subsequently  president  of  the
board.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Introduction  to
Physiology  "  (New  York,  1855) ;  "  History  of  South
Carolina  College"  (Charleston,  S.  G,  1859);  and
"  Story  of  Lethea  and  Verona "  (1860) ;  and  con-
tributed to  various  magazines.

LA  BOLL  A  YE,  Edouard  Ren6  LeTevre,
French  author,  b.  in  Paris,  18  Jan.,  1811 :  d.  there,
25  May,  1883. He  studied  law  while  following  a


582


LABRA


laclede


mechanical  trade,  and  in  1842  was  admitted  to  prac-
tice at  Paris.  In  1849  he  was  chosen  professor  of
comparative  legislation  in  the  College  of  France.
In  1871  he  was  elected  to  the  national  assembly
for  the  department  of  the  Seine,  and  as  secretary
of  the  committee  of  thirty  on  the  constitution  he
combated  the  Monarchists  effectually.  In  1875
he  was  elected  a  life  senator,  and  in  1876  he  was
appointed  administrator  of  the  College  of  France,
resuming  his  lectures  on  comparative  legislation  in
1877.  He  was  a  careful  observer  of  the  politics  of
the  United  States,  and  an  admirer  of  its  constitu-
tion, and  during  the  civil  war  was  a  zealous  advo-
cate of  the  National  cause.  Among  other  works,
he  wrote  "  Political  History  of  the  United  States  "
(3  vols.,  Paris,  1855-'66) ;  "  The  United  States  and
France  "  (1862) ;  "  Paris  en  Amerique  "  (1863 ;  Eng-
lish translation,  New  York,  1863) ;  and  "  Memoirs
of  Franklin"  (1866-'7).  He  also  translated  into
French  the  works  of  William  Ellery  Channing.

LA  BRA,  Rafael  M.de(lah'-brah),  Cuban  author,
b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1841.  When  he  was  ten  years
old  his  parents  took  him  to  Madrid,  Spain,  where
he  was  educated  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1860.
He  took  an  active  part  in  the  movement  for  the
abolition  of  slavery  in  the  Spanish  colonies,  and
in  1869  was  made  president  of  the  first  anti-slavery
society  that  was  ever  established  in  Spain.  In
1871  he  was  elected  a  member  to  the  Spanish
cortes,  representing  Porto  Rico,  and  since  then  he
has  constantly  represented  either  Cuba  or  Porto
Rico,  in  that  body  always  advocating  a  liberal
policy  toward  the  colonies.  Labra  is  a  professor
in  the  University  of  Madrid,  and  a  member  of
many  literary  and  scientific  institutions.  He  has
written  much  and  on  many  subjects.  His  princi-
pal works  are  "  La  Cuestion  Colonial  "  (1868) ;  "  La
Perdida  de  las  Americas "  (1869) ;  "  Las  Colonias
de  Inglaterra  en  America"  (1874);  "La  Colonisa-
tion en  la  Historia  "  (2  vols.,  1877) ;  "  La  Aboli-
tion de  la  Esclavitud  "  (1882) ;  "  Hombres  y  Cosas
de  Espafia";  "La  Emancipation  de  America";
"  Portugal  y  sus  Codigos  "  (1878) ;  "  Inglaterra  y
los  Codigos  negros  "  (1879) :  "  La  Revolution  Norte-
Americana  en  el  Siglo  XVIII." ;  "  La  Democra-
cia  " ;  and  "  El  Derecho  Ingles."

LABRIE,  James,  Canadian  historian,  b.  in
Canada  in  1783 ;  d.  there,  26  Oct.,  1831.  He  stud-
ied at  the  College  of  Quebec,  and  afterward  was
graduated  in  medicine  in  Edinburgh.  He  was  one
of  the  first  to  give  a  stimulus  to  education  in  Cana-
da, founding  model  schools  on  a  large  scale,  and
academies  for  both  sexes.  He  became  editor  of  the
"  Courrier  de  Quebec  "  in  1807. He  took  an  active

?art  in  Canadian  politics,  and  separated  from  Louis
apineau  on  the  question  of  subsidies.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Premiers  rudiments  de  la  constitu-
tion Britannique,"  translated  from  the  English
of  Brooks,  with  an  historical  analysis,  and  obser-
vations on  the  constitution  of  Lower  Canada  (1827),
and  also  the  first  history  of  Canada  that  had  ap-
peared since  that  of  Charlevoix,  but  his  death  pre-
vented its  publication.  Shortly  afterward  the
legislature  appropriated  £500  for  the  purpose  of
publishing  this  work  in  four  volumes,  but  the
manuscript  was  destroyed  in  the  burning  of  St.
Benoit  in  1837.  Some  fragments  survived,  which
were  published  in  the  "  Bibliotheque  Canadienne."
LA  BRU^RE,  Pierre  Boucher  de,  Canadian
journalist,  b.  in  St.  Hyacinthe,  5  July,  1837.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  town,  and  became  pro-
thonotary  of  the  superior  court  for  the  district  of
St.  Hyacinthe,  but  resigned  in  1875  to  become  edi-
tor of  the  "  Courrier  de  St.  Hyacinthe."  He  was
afterward  a  member  of  the  executive  council,  and


speaker  of  the  legislative  council  of  Quebec,  4
March.  1882.  He  is  the  author  of  the  pamphlets
"Le  Canada  sous  la  domination  Anglaise  and
"  Historv  of  St.  Hvacinthe."

LACERDA  Y  ALMEIDA,  Francisco  Jos6  de
(lah-ther'-dah),  Brazilian  scholar,  b.  in  S.  Paulo
about  1750;  d.  in  Lunda,  Africa,  about  1798.  He
was  graduated  in  mathematics  in  Coimbra  in  1777,
and  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  commission
to  settle  the  question  of  boundaries  with  Spain  in
America.  He  ascended  the  Rio  Negro  to  Mai-abi-
tanas,  and  afterward  Amazon  and  Madeira  rivers,
struggling  with  many  difficulties,  and  being  at-
tacked by  the  Muros  Indians,  by  whom  he  was
dangerously  wounded.  He  reached  Matto-Grosso
on  28  Feb.,  1782,  and  immediately  began  the  ex-
plorations of  the  Guapore  and  other  rivers  which
are  its  tributaries.  In  1786,  accompanied  by  other
scientific  men.  he  explored  Paraguay  river  and  all
its  lakes  and  tributaries,  reaching  Albuquerque
on  19  July.  He  returned  to  S.  Paulo,  10  Jan.,
1789,  after  other  explorations,  and  while  he  was
there  preparing  for  the  publication  of  his  "  Dia-
rio  "  an  order  came  from  Lisbon  calling  him  to
that  city,  where  he  landed,  21  Sept.,  1790.  He  pre-
sented to  the  academy  his  journal  and  several
maps  and  was  elected  a  member.  He  afterward
continued  his  work,  which  was  highly  praised,  and
the  minister  of  the  colonies  sent  him  in  1797  to
Mozambique  on  an  exploring  expedition  across
the  continent  of  Africa,  where  he  fell  a  victim  to
the  climate.  His  assistant  saved  his  notes  and
papers,  which  were  published  by  his  nephew.

LACEY,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Bucks  county,  Pa.,
4  Feb.,  1755 ;  d.  in  New  Mills,  N.  J.,  17  Feb.,  1814.
He  took  command  of  a  volunteer  company,  and  on
6  Jan.,  1776,  was  made  a  captain  in  Anthony
Wayne's  regiment,  and  served  in  the  Canadian  expe-
dition. In  1777  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel
of  militia,  and  had  many  skirmishes  with  the  enemy
around  Whitemarsh,  Pa.  He  was  made  a  brigadier-
general  of  militia  on  9  Jan.,  1778,  and  performed
arduous  services  during  the  British  occupation  of
Philadelphia.  Lacey  was  a  member  of  the  Penn-
sylvania assembly  in  1778,  and  in  1779-'81  of  the
council.  In  August,  1780,  he  took  the  field  with  a
brigade  of  militia,  and  continued  in  active  service
till  October,  1781.  He  afterward  removed  to  New
Mills,  N.  J.,  engaged  in  iron-manufacturing,  and
was  a  judge  and  a  member  of  the  legislature.

LACEY,  William  Brittainham,  clergyman,
b.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  in  1781 ;  d.  in  Okolona,
Miss.,  31  Oct.,  1866.  He  entered  the  ministry  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1813,  and  in
1818  became  rector  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Albany,
N.  Y„  where  he  remained  thirteen  years.  He
subsequently  became  a  teacher,  and  was  the  au-
thor of  text-books  for  schools  and  colleges,  among
them  a  "  Rhetoric "  and  a  "  Moral  Philosophy."
During  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  he  was  en-
gaged on  a  work  on  the  history  of  the  English
church  prior  to  St.  Austin.

LACLEDE,  Pierre  Ligueste,  pioneer,  b.  in
Bion,  France,  in  1724;  d.  on  Mississippi  river,  near
the  mouth  of  the  Arkansas,  20  June,  1778.  He
was  the  head  of  a  company  that  obtained  from
Gov.  D'Abbadie  in  1762  the  exclusive  right  to  trade
with  the  Indians  on  Missouri  river.  Auguste
Chouteau,  who  was  second  in  authority,  selected
the  site  of  the  city  of  St.  Louis  for  a  fortified  trad-
ing-post, and  removed  the  company's  stores  thither
from  Fort  de  Chartres  on  15  Feb.,  1764.  Laclede
came  a  month  later,  approved  of  the  spot  for  a  per-
manent station,  and  named  it  after  Louis  XV.  He
acquired  a  large  fortune  by  trade  with  the  Indians.


LACOCK


LACROIX


683


LACOCK,  Abner,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1770:  d.  in  Freedom,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1837.  He  set-
tled in  Beaver  county,  Pa.,  sat  for  many  years  in
the  state  house  of  representatives  and  senate,  and
from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,  1813,  in  the  nation-
al house  of  representatives,  where  he  opposed  Gen.
Jackson,  although  a  Democrat  and  an  upholder  of
the  war  against  Great  Britain.  At  the  conclusion
of  his  term  in  the  lower  house  he  was  sent  to  the
senate,  serving  from  24  May.  1813,  till  3  March,
1819.  He  was  president  of  the  Pennsylvania  and
Ohio  canal  company.

LACORDAIRE,  Jean  Theodore  (lah-cor-
dare'),  French  explorer,  b.  in  Recey-sur-Ource,  Bur-
gundy, 1  Feb.,  1801;  d.  in  Liege,  18  July,  1870.
He  studied  in  Dijon,  and  was  graduated  at  Paris.
In  1825  he  went  to  South  America,  where  he  re-
mained seven  years,  returning  to  Paris  in  1832  and
becoming  an  editorial  writer  on  the  journal  "  Le
Temps."  In  1835  he  was  offered  the  newly  found-
ed chair  of  zoology  at  the  University  of  Liege,
which  he  held  till  his  death.  Most  of  Lacordaire's
works  are  about  South  America.  They  include
"Faune  entomologique  des  environs  de  Rio  de
Janeiro  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1832) ;  "  La  bataille  de  la
Tablada"  (1832);  "  Un  souvenir  du  Bresil"  (1832);
"  Revue  de  voyage  "'(1832) ;  "  Mceurs  des  jaguars  de
l'Amerique  du  Sud "  (2  vols.,  1833) ;  "  Excursion
dans  l'Oyapock  "  (1833) ;  "Uneestancia  de  l'Ame-
rique du  Sud "  (1834) ;  "  Une  revolution  dans  la
Republique  Argentine  "  (2  vols.,  1835) ;  "  L'or  des
Pinheiros  "  (1835) ;  "  Memoires  sur  les  habitudes  des
coleopteres  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (3  vols.,  Liege,
1837);  "Essai  sur  les  coleopteres  de  la  Guyane
Francaise  "  (2  vols.,  1838) ;  "  Essai  sur  les  coleop-
teres de  la  Guyane  Hollandaise "  (2  vols.,  1839);
"  Notice  sur  les  lepidopteres  de  la  Guyane  Fran-
caise" (2  vols.,  1843);  "Monographic  des  eroty-
liens"(3  vols.,  1849);  "Histoire  naturelle  des  in-
sectes:  genera  des  coleopteres"  (4  vols.,  Paris.
1857) ;  "  Impressions  de  voyage "  (Liege,  1859) ;
"De  Pernambuco  a  la  Guyane"  (2  vols.,  1861);
"Le  Nord  et  le  Sud,  ou  situation  politique  des
Etats-Unis,  question  du  moment"  (Paris,  1863);
"  De  l'avenir  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (Liege,  1864) ;
"  La  guerre  de  secession  et  de  son  influence  sur
l'Amerique  en  general "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1866) ;  and
"Comment  se  fait  une  revolution  dans  l'Amerique
du  Sud"  (1867).

LA  CORNE,  Pierre,  Chevalier  de.  French-Cana-
dian soldier.  He  was  with  Sieur  Joncaire  on  an
embassy  to  the  Indians  of  Niagara  in  1720.  In
1747,  with  M.  de  St.  Pierre,  he  defeated  the  Indians
at  Lachine  Rapids,  went  to  Acadia  with  De  Ra-
mezay,  and  succeeded  to  the  command  when  that
officer  was  wounded  at  Grand  Pre.  In  1749  he
was  sent,  with  Father  La  Loutre,  to  seduce  the
Acadians  from  their  allegiance  to  Great  Britain,
and  to  induce  them  to  remove  north  of  the  Bay  of
Fundv,  but  failed  in  the  attempt.  At  this  time  he
is  said  to  have  commanded  about  2,500  men.  For
the  ten  years  succeeding  he  was  actively  employed
in  Canada.  He  was  wounded  in  the  action  at  the
Rapids,  Lake  Ontario,  in  1759,  was  in  command
of  colonial  troops,  and  was  again  wounded  at  the
capture  of  Quebec.  His  knowledge  of  Indian  lan-
guages made  him  of  great  service  to  the  government.

LACOSTE,  Alexander,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Boucherville,  Canada,  12  Jan.,  1842.  He  was  edu-
cated at  St.  Hyacinthe  college  and  at  Laval  uni-
versity, admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in
1863,  and  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  October,
1880.  He  was  batonnier  of  the  bar  of  Montreal
from  1  May,  1879,  till  1  May,  1881,  and  was  a
member  of  the  legislative  council  of  the  province


of  Quebec  from  4  March,  1882,  until  he  was  called
to  the  senate,  12  Jan.,  1884.  He  was  at  one  time
professor  of  civil  law  in  Laval  university.

LACOSTE,  Etienne  Philippe,  Baron  de  (lah-
coast),  French  administrator,  b.  in  Dax  in  October.
1730 ;  d.  in  Bordeaux  in  January,  1820.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  Bordeaux  in  1757,  removed
to  Paris  in  1760,  and  in  1767  became  director  of
the  law  division  in  the  department  of  the  colonies,
and  in  1774  chairman  of  the  same  department.
Lacoste  travelled  through  the  French  West  In-
dies, ascertaining  their  wants  and  investigating  the
local  administrations.  In  January,  1783,  he  was
elected  by  the  colonial  assembly  of  Santo  Domingo
its  representative  before  the  king's  privy  council,
and  in  November,  1790,  he  was  appointed  special
commissary  to  the  West  Indies.  He  restored  or-
der in  Guadeloupe  and  partially  in  Santo  Domin-
go; but  in  Martinique  he  was  opposed  by  the
Count  de  Bihague,  the  governor-general.  He  re-
turned to  France  in  February,  1792,  was  secretary
for  the  navy  and  colonies  from  16  March  till  10
July,  and  in  1800  became  president  of  the  marine
court  for  the  privateers  navigating  in  the  WTest  In-
dies and  South  America  and  state  councillor  for
the  colonies.  He  held  those  posts  during  the  whole
of  Napoleon's  reign,  retiring  in  1815.  He  pub-
lished several  works  on  the  administration  of  the
colonies,  including  "  Memoire  au  roi  sur  le  regime
interieur  des  colonies  des  Antilles"  (Paris,  1792).

LACOUR,  Anguste  (lah'-koor).  West  Indian
magistrate,  b.  in  Basse  Terre,  Guadeloupe,  in  1795;
d.  there  in  1866.  He  received  his  early  education
in  Basse  Terre,  but  finished  his  studies  in  Paris,
where  he  was  graduated  in  law,  and  soon  afterward
entered  the  colonial  magistracy.  He  held  several
offices  in  Martinique  and  in  Guadeloupe,  and  in  1840
became  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Basse  Terre.
He  served  for  several  terms  as  a  member  of  the
"conseil  general  "  of  the  island,  was  created  knight
of  the  Legion  of  honor,  and  received  the  badge  of
commander  in  1854.  The  supreme  court  of  Guade-
loupe before  the  third  empire  enjoyed  the  privileges
of  a  court  of  appeal,  and  in  1849  Lacour  was  con-
spicuous among  the  judges  of  the  court  that  took
up  the  case  of  Beauvallon,  who  had  been  unjustly
condemned  in  1836  by  the  court  of  Paris  for  kill-
ing in  a  duel  the  journalist  Dujarrier.  The  verdict
was  set  aside,  and  the  accused  granted  a  new  trial,
which  resulted  in  his  acquittal.  This  event  caused
a  profound  sensation  in  the  West  Indies,  as  Beau-
vallon was  at  that  time  a  prominent  citizen  of
Guadeloupe.  Lacour  also  devoted  his  leisure  time
to  historical  researches,  and  published  "Histoire
de  la  Guadeloupe."  which  is  a  standard  work  on
that  colony  (6  vols.,  Basse  Terre.  1850).

LACROIX,  Joseph  Francois  Pamphile,  Vis-
count de  (lah-crwah),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Aymar-
ques,  Gard,  1  June.  1774 ;  d.  in  Versailles,  16  Oct.,
1841.  He  had  scarcely  finished  his  studies  in  Mont-
pellier  when  he  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  his
cousin,  Gen.  d*Harville.  and  served  afterward  under
Custine,  Dumouriez,  and  Pichegru.  When  twenty-
two  years  old  he  was  made  brigadier-general,  de-
feated the  Austriansat  Freiberg,  22  July,  1796,  and
served  in  Italy  under  Moreau  and  Macdonald  in
1799.  He  enjoyed  the  reputation  of  a  good  soldier,
but  as  he  was  disliked  by  Bonaparte  he  could
neither  obtain  advancement  nor  important  com-
mands. He  went  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1802,  and
directed  the  landing  of  the  French  at  Cape  Francais,
6  Feb.,  defeating  Christophe,  who  had  tried  to  op-
pose the  landing.  He  was  rewarded  with  the  com-
mission of  major-general,  and  given  charge  of  the
negotiations  with  Toussaint  l'Ouverture  and  Chris-


584


LACROSSE


LADD


tophe,  which  were  terminated  by  the  treaty  of
peace  of  9  May.  On  the  resumption  of  hostilities
with  Christophe,  Lacroix,  who  had  won  the  affec-
tion of  the  negroes  through  his  humanity,  owed  his
life  to  them  several  times,  and  was  once  rescued
by  the  insurgents  themselves  from  a  party  of  Chris-
tophe's  soldiers,  who  had  surprised  him.  He  was
subsequently  lieutenant  to  Gen.  Rochambeau,  but
a  few  weeks  later  was  sent  back  to  France  on  ac-
count of  the  latter's  jealousy  of  his  popularity
among  the  colored  population,  who  used  to  call  him
their  king.  Lacroix  served  under  Murat  from
1805  till  1809,  fought  at  Waterloo  in  1815,  and  in
1820  checked  at  Grenoble  and  Befort  the  insurrec-
tions that  were  promoted  by  Lafayette.  He  retired
in  1824.  Gen.  Lacroix  published  "  Memoires  pour
servir  a  l'histoire  de  la  revolution  de  Saint  Do-
mingue"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1819;  revised  ed.,  1820).
This  work  is  the  only  impartial  account  by  a  wit-
ness of  that  disastrous  campaign  of  1802  and  1803.
— His  brother,  Etienne  Joseph  Francois,  French
soldier,  b.  in  Aymarques,  Gard,  21  July,  1776 ;  d.  in
Jeremie,  Santo  Domingo,  in  April,  1803,  enlisted
in  1794,  and  served  in  Italy.  He  was  a  colonel
when  he  went  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1802,  and  was
sent  to  subdue  Tortugas  and  the  other  neighboring
islands.  He  also  took  Jeremie,  and  inflicted  two
severe  defeats  on  Christophe,  on  7  Aug.  and  1 1  Oct..
near  Port  au  Prince.  He  afterward  recaptured
Fort  Dauphin,  and  defeated  the  negroes  who  be-
sieged him  there.  After  the  departure  of  his
brother  for  France,  some  colored  citizens  entered
into  negotiations  with  him  to  drive  the  French
from  the  colonies,  promising  to  elect  him  king  in-
stead of  his  brother.  Lacroix  was  unwilling  to  ac-
cept, but  Christophe  nevertheless  took  alarm  and
caused  him  to  be  killed  in  Jeremie  during  a  riot.

LACROSSE,  Jean  Baptiste  Raymond,  Baron.
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Meilhan,  5  Sept.,  1765;
d.  there,  9  Sept.,  1829.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman  in  1780,  fought  in  the  West  Indies  in
1781,  and  from  1784  till  1789  was  successively  at-
tached to  the  stations  of  Chili,  Brazil,  and  Marti-
nique. Toward  the  end  of  1790  he  was  sent  on  a
cruise  around  Santo  Domingo,  and  in  1792  was
commissioned  to  reorganize  the  administration  in
the  French  West  Indies.  He  performed  his  mis-
sion so  well  that  the  citizens  of  Guadeloupe  elected
him  their  governor  in  January,  1793.  But  the  reign
of  terror  had  already  begun,  and  Lacrosse  was  dis-
missed in  September  of  that  year.  In  March,
1801,  he  was  appointed  governor-general  of  Guade-
loupe, which  was  then  in  open  revolt.  Lacrosse
dealt  severely  with  the  two  parties,  and  restored
order,  but  fell  into  an  ambuscade  and  was  carried
to  Dominique  in  November,  1801.  After  receiving
re-enforcements  from  France,  he  landed  again  at
Pointe  a  Pitre  in  May,  1802,  in  less  than  a  month
had  subdued  the  whole  island,  and  soon  restored
it  to  its  former  prosperity.  His  health  compelled
him  to  return  to  France  in  1803.  He  defeated  Nel-
son at  Boulogne,  1  Oct.,  1804,  and  afterward  com-
manded at  Rochefort ;  but  his  failing  health  com-
pelled him  to  retire  in  1812.  He  published  "  Me-
moire  sur  les  moyens  de  miner  les  etablissements
de  TAmerique  qu'alimente  le  commerce  de  l'An-
gleterre  et  en  particulier  Rio  de  Janeiro  "  (Paris,
1795);  "Memoire  sur  les  etablissements  Francais
et  Anglais  dans  les  Antilles  "  (1800) ;  "  Memoires
pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de  la  revolte  des  noirs  a  la
Guadeloupe "  (2  vols.,  1822) ;  "  Deux  annees  de
gouvernement  a  la  Guadeloupe "  (1824) ;  "  De
l'avenir  des  colonies  Francaises  dans  les  Antilles
et  en  particulier  de  la  Guadeloupe  "  (2  vols.,  1826) ;
and  several  technical  works  on  naval  matters.


LACUNZA,  Jose"  Maria  (lah-koon'-thah),  Mexi-
can statesman,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1809 :  d.
in  Havana,  Cuba,  19  June,  1869.  He  received  an
excellent  education,  studied  law  in  the  university
of  his  native  city,  and  in  1833  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  where  he  soon  attained  reputation.  At  the
same  time  he  cultivated  poetry,  and  many  of  his
compositions  appeared  in  the  journals  of  the  capi-
tal. In  May,  1849,  he  was  called  by  Gen.  Hen-era
to  the  portfolio  of  foreign  relations,  which  he  held
till  the  end  of  Herrera's  presidential  term  in  Janu-
ary, 1851,  showing  himself  to  be  well  meaning  and
progressive,  but  weak.  During  Juarez's  adminis-
tration Lacunza  was  elected  a  member  of  the  su-
preme court  of  justice ;  but  on  the  arrival  of  Maxi-
milian he  recognized  the  imperial  government.
He  was  appointed,  in  April,  1866,  secretary  of  the
imperial  treasury,  which  place  he  occupied  till
July,  when  Maximilian  made  him  president  of  the
council  of  state.  As  such  he  voted  in  the  council
of  25  Nov.,  1866,  against  the  abdication  of  Maxi-
milian. Afterward  Lacunza  resigned  the  presi-
dency of  the  council  of  state,  and,  on  the  departure
of  Maximilian  to  take  command  of  the  army  at
Queretaro,  he  was  civil  governor  of  the  capital  un-
der Gen.  Marquez ;  but  after  the  occupation  of  the
city  by  the  republican  forces,  21  June,  1867,  he  was
obliged  to  hide  himself,  and  a  few  days  later  left
secretly  for  Havana,  where  he  died.  He  was  the
founder  of  the  literary  academy  of  Letran,  and
several  editions  of  his  poems  have  been  published.
— His  brother,  Juan  N.,  Mexican  poet,  b.  in  the
city  of  Mexico,  22  Nov.,  1812 ;  d.  there,  13  July,
1843,  was  graduated  in  philosophy  in  the  College
of  San  Juan  de  Letran  of  his  native  city,  and  be-
gan to  studv  civil  and  canonical  law  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Mexico  in  1833,  being  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1837.  He  soon  obtained  an  extensive  practice,
but  devoted  his  leisure  to  writing  poetry,  and  some
of  his  first  compositions  appeared  in  the  "  Alio
nuevo,"  the  official  journal  of  the  literary  academy
of  Letran.  The  magazine  "  Recreo  de  las  Fami-
lias  "  (1838)  also  published  many  of  his  best  poems.

LACUNZA,  Manuel  (la  -  koon' -  thah),  South
American  clergyman,  b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  19
July,  1731 ;  d.  in  Imola,  Italy,  17  June,  1801.  He
studied  in  Santiago,  and  became  a  Jesuit  on  7  Sept.,
1747.  In  1767,  on  the  suppression  of  his  order,  he
was  expelled  by  the  Spanish  government,  and
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  Imola,  Italy,
where  he  lived  in  seclusion  and  passed  the  nights
in  observing  the  stars.  In  cloudy  nights  he  took
long  solitary  walks  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town,
where  he  was  found  one  morning  drowned  in  a
pool.  He  wrote  a  work  that  attracted  much  atten-
tion both  in  Europe  and  America,  entitled  "  La
venida  del  Mesias  en  gloria  y  majestad :  Observa-
ciones  de  Juan  Josafat  Ben-Ezra,  Hebreo  Cristiano,
dirigidas  al  sacerdote  Cristofilo  Atico  Romano,"
which  was  edited  after  Lacunza's  death  at  the  ex-
pense of  Gen.  Belgrano,  the  envoy  of  the  republic
of  Buenos  Ayres  (4  vols.,  London,  1816;  3  vols.,
Paris,  1826  ;  Latin  translation,  5  vols.,  Mexico,
1825) ;  an  imperfect  edition  has  already  been  pub-
lished (2  vols.,  Cadiz,  1813).  The  author  attempts
to  prove  from  the  Bible  that  the  second  advent  of
Christ  will  take  place  before  the  final  judgment.
His  book  was  placed  on  the  Index  Expurgatorius
by  a  decree  of  6  Sept.,  1824.  Father  Lacunza  was
also  the  author  of  some  poems  and  orations.

LADD,  Catherine,  educator,  b.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  28  Oct.,  1809.  Her  maiden  name  was  Stratton.
At  the  age  of  nineteen  she  married  G.  W.  Ladd,  a
portrait  and  miniature  painter,  and  began  contrib-
uting poems,  news-letters,  and  articles  on  education


LADD


LAET


585


and  art  to  southern  journals  and  magazines.  In
1841  she  settled  in  Winnsborough,  S.  C,  where  she
successfully  conducted  a  large  boarding-school  un-
til the  civil  war  began.  She  also  published  in  the
"  Floral  Wreath  "  and  other  periodicals  tales,  essays,
and  poems  under  the  pen-names  "  Minnie  Mayflow-
er," "Arcturus,"  "  Alida,"  and  "Morna."  In  1851
she  began  advocating  in  the  press  the  encourage-
ment of  manufacturing  industries  and  white  labor
in  South  Carolina,  believing  that  cotton-growing
could  not  much  longer  be  carried  on  with  profit
in  competition  with  the  Gulf  states.  During  the
war  she  ceased  teaching  in  order  to  care  for  sick
and  wounded  soldiers,  and  she  is  said  to  have
originated  the  design  of  the  first  Confederate  flag.
Her  property  having  been  destroyed  by  fire  during
the  occupation  of  Winnsborough  by  Gen.  Sher-
man's army,  she  resumed  teaching.  In  1880  she
retired  to  a  farm  near  Buckhead,  S.  C.

LAUD,  George  Trumbull,  educator,  b.  in
Painesville,  Ohio,  19  Jan.,  1842.  He  was  graduated
at  Western  Reserve  college  in  1864,  and  at  Ando-
ver  seminary  in  1869.  He  preached  in  Edinburgh,
Ohio,  for  two  years,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Spring
street  Congregational  church  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,
from  1871  till  1879,  when  he  was  called  to  the  pro-
fessorship of  intellectual  and  moral  philosophy  in
Bowdoin. While  there  he  also  lectured  on  church

})olity  in  the  Andover  seminary,  and  during  the
ast  year  to  graduates  on  systematic  theology.  In
1881  he  assumed  the  chair  of  philosophy  in  Yale
college.  The  degree  of  D.  1).  was  conferred  on  him
by  Western  Reserve  in  1881.  He  is  the  author  of
"'Principles  of  Church  Polity"  (New  York,  1881);
•'Doctrine  of  Sacred  Scripture"  (New  York  and
Edinburgh,  1883) ;  and  "  Elements  of  Physiological
Psychology  "  (New  York  and  London,  1887).  He
also  published  a  translation  of  Lotze's  "Philo-
sophical Outlines"  (6  vols.,  Boston,  1884-'7).

LADD,  Joseph  Brown,  poet.  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  in  1764 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  2  Nov.,  1786.
His  father,  William,  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution
and  member  of  the  Rhode  Island  legislature,  cul-
tivated a  farm  at  Little  Compton.  Joseph  began
to  write  verses  at  the  age  of  ten.  His  father
placed  him  in  a  printing-office  in  Newport,  but
took  him  away  when  he  offended  Dr.  Samuel
Hopkins  by  publishing  a  poem  satirizing  that  di-
vine. He  wished  to  become  a  physician,  and  was
fdaced  with  Dr.  Isaac  Senter,  who  encouraged  his
iterary  tastes,  and,  besides  directing  his  medical
studies,  gave  him  instruction  in  the  classics.  His
professional  studies  lasted  four  years,  and  during
that  time  he  composed  most  of  his  poetry.  A
large  part  of  it  consists  of  amatory  verses,  signed
"  Arouet,"  and  addressed  to  "  Amanda."  They
were  intended  for  an  orphan  heiress,  to  whom  he
was  devoted,  and  who  was  attached  to  him,  though
obstacles  were  placed  in  the  way  of  their  marriage
by  her  guardians.  By  the  advice  of  Gen.  Na-
thanael  Greene,  he  began  practice  in  Charleston
in  1784,  and  met  with  success.  In  1785  he  deliv-
ered, at  the  request  of  Gov.  William  Moultrie,  an
oration  at  the  second  celebration  ever  held  of  the
anniversary  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.
He  also  contributed  articles  on  literary  and  political
subjects  to  the  press  of  Charleston.  Becoming  in-
volved in  a  newspaper  controversy,  he  was  chal-
lenged to  fight  a  duel,  and,  firing  his  own  shot  in
the  air,  received  the  ball  of  his  antagonist  in  a  vital
part.  He  published"  Poems  of  Arouet "  (Charleston,
1786),  and  his  poetry,  with  some  of  his  prose  writ-
ings, was  collected  into  a  volume,  containing  also  a
memoir  of  the  author,  bv  his  sister,  Mrs.  Elizabeth
Haskins  (New  York,  1832).


LADD,  William,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Exeter,
N.  H.,  10  May,  1778 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  9
April,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1797,  and  on  leaving  college  embarked  as  a  sailor
on  one  of  his  father's  vessels,  became  a  skilful
navigator,  and  was  captain  of  some  of  the  finest
ships  that  sailed  from  New  England  ports  until  he
left  the  ocean  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812.
He  resided  at  Minot,  Me.,  and  took  an  active  part
in  organizing  the  American  peace  society,  of  which
he  was  for  many  years  president.  The  society  was
founded  in  1828,  and  for  a  long  period  he  was  the
only  active  and  responsible  officer.  He  gave  his
main  attention  to  this  society  and  the  object  it  rep-
resented until  the  end  of  his  life.  In  its  interests
he  edited  the  "  Friend  of  Peace,"  established  by
Dr.  Noah  Worcester,  and  the  "  Harbinger  of  Peace,"
which  succeeded  it  as  the  organ  of  the  society,  and
published  a  number  of  essays  and  occasional  ad-
dresses on  the  subject  of  peace,  including  an  "  Ad-
dress to  the  Peace  Society  of  Maine"  (1824),  one  to
that  of  Massachusetts  (1825),  and  "  An  Essay  on
the  Congress  of  Nations  "  (Boston,  1840).  He"  car-
ried his  views  to  the  extent  of  denying  the  right  of
defensive  war,  and  caused  this  principle  to  be  incor-
porated into  the  constitution  of  his  society.  See  his
"  Memoir,"  by  John  Hemmenway  (Boston,  1872).

LADREYT,  Casimir,  educator,  b.  in  France  in
1797;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  4  July,  1877.  He  came
to  the  United  States  about  1836,  taught  the  French
language,  and  published  "  French  Pronunciation  "
(Philadelphia);  "The  Study  of  French  Simplified"
(New  York) ;  and  other  text-books.

LADRILLEROS,  Juan  (lah-dreel-yair'-oth).
Spanish  navigator.  He  lived  in  the  16th  century,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  civil  wars  of  Peru.
He  was  ordered  by  Garcia  Hurtado  de  Mendoza
(q.  v.)  to  examine  the  southern  coast  of  that  coun-
try and  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  and  left  Valdivia
in  November,  1557.  with  two  vessels.  After  many
adventures,  and  an  attempt  at  a  mutiny  by  the
crew,  he  succeeded  finally  in  entering  the  strait,
minutely  examined  the  neighboring  coast,  and  re-
turned to  Valdivia  with  a  single  sailor  and  a  negro.
The  result  of  his  voyage  was  a  more  exact  knowl-
edge of  the  island  of  Chiloe  and  the  neighboring
groups.  There  are  two  manuscript  copies  of  his
journal  preserved  in  the  general  archives  of  the
Indies.  Navarrete  has  inserted  the  narrative  of  La-
drilleros  in  the  introduction  to  his  "  Relacion  del
ultimo  viage  al  estrecho  de  Magallanes  en  los  ailos
de  1785  y  1786"  (Madrid.  1788).  The  voyage  of
Ladrilleros  was  the  first  to  overturn  the  opinion
that  it  was  impossible  to  return  by  the  Strait  of
Magellan  from  the  Pacific  to  the  Atlantic.

LAET,  Jan,  Flemish  geographer,  b.  in  Ant-
werp ;  d.  late  in  1649.  He  was  the  author  of
treatises  describing  Italy.  Spain.  France.  Belgium,
India,  Persia,  Turkey,  and  Portugal,  which  were
published  in  the  Elzevir  series  of  "  Les  petites  re-
publiques."  He  also  published  "  Novus  orbis,  seu
descriptionis  occidentalis,  libri  xviii.,  cum  tabulis"
(Levden,  1633;  French  translation,  1633;  Dutch
translation,  1640).  This  account  of  America  was
much  used  bv  later  geographers.  In  "  Notae  ad
Dissertationem  H.  Grotii  de  origine  gentium  arae-
ricanarura  "  (Paris,  1643)  he  controverted  the  theory
of  Grotius  respecting  the  origin  of  the  American
Indians.  The  latter  replied  somewhat  acrimoni-
ously, and  drew  from  Laet  a  "  Responsio  ad  Dis-
sertationem secundam  H.  Grotii  de  origine  gen-
tium americanarum"(  Amsterdam.  1644).  He  edited
"  Historia  naturalis  Brasilia?,"  containing  a  treatise
on  medicine  by  G.  Pison,  and  one  on  the  natural  his-
tory of  Brazil'  by  Georg  Markgraff  (Levden,  1648).


586


LA  FARGE


LAFAYETTE


LA  FARGE,  John,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
31  March,  1835.  He  was  a  pupil  of  William  M.
Hunt,  and  has  been  an  earnest  student  of  Euro-
pean art  during  the  numerous  trips  he  has  taken
to  Europe.  Mr.  La  Farge  was  first  a  draughtsman
on  wood,  then  a  painter  of  flowers,  landscapes,  and
portraits,  and  then  a  decorator  of  church  interiors
and  a  mural  painter  on  biblical  themes.  As  a
draughtsman  the  illustrations  that  he  contributed
to  an  edition  of  "Enoch  Arden,"  to  "Songs  from
the  Old  Dramatists,"  and  those  published  in  the
"  Riverside  Magazine,"  are  remarkable  for  their
beauty,  and  show  the  close  sympathy  of  the  artist
with  his  subject.  He  established  his  reputation  as
a  brilliant  colorist  and  idealist  by  superb  composi-
tions of  flowers  and  ideal  groups  as  well  as  illus-
trations. Mr.  La  Farge  was  one  of  the  first  to  ad-
mire Japanese  art,  and  to  call  public  attention  to
it  by  his  writings.  In  1886  he  visited  that  empire.
His  most  important  recent  work  has  been  in  the
direction  of  decorative  art  and  glass-painting.  In
the  latter  he  has  not  only  rivalled  the  colors  of
the  finest  mediaeval  stained-glass  windows,  but  he
has  been  able  to  perfect  an  unsurpassed  method  of
leading,  in  which  the  mechanical  means  are  made
to  contribute  to  the  rendering  of  details  and  the
general  effect.  He  was  elected  a  National  academi-
cian in  1869,  and  is  also  a  member  of  the  Society  of
American  artists.  Among  his  leading  decorative
works,  the  interior  of  Trinity  church  in  Boston,
perhaps,  takes  precedence,  although  the  painting
and  other  decoration  of  the  chancel  of  St.  Thomas's
in  New  York  have  a  high  value  artistically.  His
other  church  work  includes  "  The  Adoration  of  the
Wise  Men  "  in  the  Church  of  the  incarnation,  and
"  The  Ascension  "  in  the  chancel  of  the  church  of
that  name  in  New  York  city :  also  the  chancel  of
Trinity  church  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  Much  of  the  in-
terior decorations,  notably  the  staircase  windows
and  ceilings  of  the  Vanderbilt  mansion,  and  also
the  paintings  for  the  music-room  in  the  residence
of  Whitelaw  Reid,  are  by  Mr.  La  Farge.  The  "  Bat-
tle Window,"  in  the  Memorial  hall  at  Harvard
(1880),  is  one  of  his  most  brilliant  successes  in  col-
ored glass.  His  latest  and  most  elaborate  achieve-
ment in  this  material  is  the  Ames  memorial  window
at  Easton,  Mass.  (1887).  His  paintings  include
"  New  England  Pasture-Land,"  "  View  over  New-
port," "  A  Gray  Day,"  "  A  Snowy  Day,"  "  The  Tri-
umph of  Love,"  "The  Last  Valley,"  "St.  Paul,"
"  The  Wolf-Charmer,"  and  "  Sleeping  Beauty."

LAFAYETTE,  Marie  Jean  Paul  Joseph
Roche  Yves  Gilbert  du  Motier,  Marquis  de,
French  soldier,  b.  at  the  castle  of  Chavagnac,  in
Auvergne,  6  Sept.,  1757 ;  d.  in  Paris,  20  May,
1834.  The  family  has  been  for  more  than  three
centuries  distinguished  in  French  history.  The
subject  of  this  article  was  son  of  Michel  Roche
Gilbert  du  Motier,  Marquis  de  Lafayette,  colonel
of  grenadiers,  who  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Min-
den,  1  Aug.,  1759,  and  Marie  Louise,  daughter  of
Joseph  Yves  Hyacinthe,  Marquis  de  la  Riviere.
In  1768  he  was  taken  by  his  mother  to  Paris,  and
entered  the  College  of  Louis-le-Grand.  In  1770
the  death  of  his  mother  and  grandfather  left  him
with  a  very  large  fortune.  He  became  a  page  to
the  queen  Marie  Leczinska,  and  through  her  influ-
ence received  a  lieutenant's  commission  in  the
royal  musketeers,  a  body  of  soldiers  charged  with
the  defence  of  the  king's  person.  He  married,  11
April,  1774.  Anastasie  Adrienne  de  Noailles.  sec-
ond daughter  of  the  Duke  d'Ayen,  afterward  Duke
de  Noailles.  Having  been  commissioned  a  captain
of  artillery  in  a  regiment  stationed  at  Metz,  toward
the  end  of  1776  he  happened  to  meet  at  dinner  the


Duke  of  Gloucester,  brother  of  George  III.,  and
heard  .of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  and  other
events  that  had  lately  occurred  in  the  United
States.  An  enthusiastic  sentiment  of  devotion  to
"liberty"  and  the  "rights  of  man"  was  then
growing  up  among  youthful  Frenchmen  in  all
classes  of  society.  Many  young  officers  were  eager
to  go  to  America,  some  from  an  intelligent  interest
in  the  cause  at  stake  there,  others  from  a  love  of
romantic  adventure  or  a  desire  to  strike  a  blow  at
the  English  in  revenge  for  the '  disasters  of  the
Seven  years'  war.  This  last  motive  was  strongly
operative  at  court,  though  opinion  was  far  from
unanimous  there.  Louis  XVI.  had  no  sympathy
with  Americans  or  with  rebels,  and  was  fond  of
repeating  the  humorous  remark  of  his  brother-in-
law,  Joseph  II. :  "  1  am  a  royalist  by  my  trade,
you  know."  The  policy  of  Choiseul,  however,
which  would  leave  no  stone  unturned  to  undo  the
work  of  the  Seven  years'  war  and  weaken  the  colo-
nial empire  of  England,  found  favor  with  Mario
Antoinette,  as  well  as  with  Count  Vergennes,  the
able  minister  of  foreign  affairs.  Caution  was
needed,  however.  It  was  no  part  of  the  policy  of
Vergennes  to  run  the  risk  of  a  quarrel  with  Great
Britain  until  it  should  become  quite  clear  that  the
American  alliance  was,  from  a  military  point  of
view,  worth  having.  For  the  present,  accordingly,
he  contented  himself  with  sending  secret  aid  to
the  Americans  in  the  shape  of  money,  arms,  and
ammunition.  This  aid  was  furnished  through  the
agency  of  the  famous  author,  Beaumarchais  (q.  v.),
and  in  such  a  manner  that  the  government  might
officially  pretend  to  be  ignorant  of  what  was  going
on.  In  this  surreptitious  way  as  early  as  the  spring
of  1777  a  large  quantity  of  military  stores  had  been
conveyed  to  America,  and  had  been  followed  by
such  officers  as  Pulaski,  La  Rouerie,  and  some  fifty
others.  The  Duke  of  Montmorency-Laval  and
other  young  nobles  asked  the  king's  permission  to
go  to  America ;  but  it  was  refused,  and  for  the  sake
of  keeping  up  appearances  the  refusal  had  some-
thing of  the  air  of  a  reprimand.  It  was  necessary,
therefore,  for  Lafayette  to  proceed  with  caution
when  he  made  up  his  mind,  as  the  result  of  the  con-
versation at  Metz,  to  cross  the  ocean  and  offer  his
services  to  congress.  He  consulted  with  the  Baron
de  Kalb,  who  was  cherishing  a  similar  intention.
De  Kalb  introduced  him  to  Silas  Deane,  who  gave
him,  7  Dec,  1776,  a  letter  of  introduction  to  con-
gress, in  which  he  alluded  to  the  great  dignity  and
influence  of  Lafayette's  family,  and  asked  for  him
a  major-general's  commission.  Lafayette  now  pro-
ceeded secretly  and  at  his  own  expense  to  fit  out
a  vessel  at  Bordeaux,  but  his  pieparations  were
somewhat  delayed  by  the  necessity  of  making  a
journey  to  London  in  company  with  the  Prince  do
Poix.  He  did  not  think  it  best  to  decline  the  in-
vitation to  this  journey  for  fear  of  exciting  suspi-
cion as  to  his  real  plans.  While  at  London,  hear-
ing of  Washington's  victories  at  Trenton  and
Princeton,  he  expressed  such  keen  pleasure  as  to
attract  the  notice  of  Lord  Shelburne,  the  warm
friend  of  the  Americans.  Madame  de  Lafayette's
uncle,  the  Marquis  de  Noailles,  was  then  the
French  ambassador  at  the  court  of  St.  James,  and
every  word  and  action  of  his  young  visitor  was
sure  to  be  carefully  watched  and  weighed.  After
three  weeks  he  returned  secretly  to  Paris,  leaving
it  to  be  supposed  that  he  was  still  in  England,
while,  to  keep  up  the  concealment  as  long  as  pos-
sible, the  Marquis  de  Noailles  explained  his  non-
appearance in  society  by  spreading  a  report  that
he  was  slightly  ill.
After  three  days  at  De  Kalb's  house  in  Paris,


LAFAYETTE

Lafayette  went  on  to  Bordeaux.  There  he  learned
that  the  court  had  information  of  his  movements
and  had  issued  an  order  for  his  arrest.  To  avoid
this  he  sailed  with  his  ship  to  Pasage,  a  Span-
ish port,  where  his  preparations  were  completed.
Here  he  received  letters  from  his  family  and  the
ministry  which  led  him  to  return  for  a  short  time
to  Bordeaux.  A  letter  which  he  now  wrote  to
the  government,  begging  permission  to  proceed
with  his  enterprise,  remained  unanswered. In  a

{>rivate  letter  to  Maurepas,  he  observed  that  "  si-
ence  gives  consent,"  and  he  should  go  on.  There
was  more  than  mere  pleasantry  in  this.  He  doubt-
less understood  well  enough  that  the  royal  dis-
approval of  his  movements  was  in  great  part  as-
sumed for  the  sake  of  appearances.  He  set  sail
from  Pasage,  26  April,
1777,  taking  with  him
De  Kalb  and  eleven
other  officers,' and  land-
ed, 14  June,  at  George-
town, S.  C,  whence  he
proceeded  to  Charles-
ton. After  a  journey
of  more  than  a  month
on  horseback  he  ar-
rived in  Philadelphia,
where  congress  was  in
session.  Congress  was
at  that  time  beset  with
so  many  applications
from  foreign  officers  in
quest  of  adventure,  and
in  some  instances,  as
in  that  of  Du  Coudray
{q.  v.),  these  applica-
tions led  to  so  much
jealousy  and  discon-
tent that  Lafayette  at
first  met  with  a  rather  cold  reception ;  but,  after  he
had  declared  his  wish  to  serve  as  a  volunteer  and
at  his  own  expense,  congress  (31  July,  1777)  ap-
pointed him  major-general.  The  next  day  he  was
introduced  to  Washington,  and  the  life-long  friend-
ship between  the  two  was  at  once  begun.  As  it
appeared  that  his  appointment  was  for  the  present
merely  honorary,  Lafayette  served  for  a  time  as  a
sort  of  volunteer  aide  upon  Washington's  staff.  At
the  battle  of  Brandywine,  11  Sept.,  he  behaved  very
gallantly  and  received  a  wound  in  the  leg,  which
laid  him  up  for  two  months.  During  this  time  he
remained  under  the  care  of  the  Moravian  Brethren
at  Bethlehem.  On  25  Nov.,  in  a  reconnaissance  of
Gen.  Greene  against  Cornwallis's  position  at  Glou-
cester Point,  Lafayette  with  300  men  defeated  a  su-
perior force  of  Hessians.  In  recognition  of  this
service  he  was  appointed,  4  Dec,  to  command  the
division  of  Washington's  army  lately  under  Gen.
Stephen,  who  had  been  removed  for  alleged  miscon-
duct in  the  battle  of  Germantown.  The  intrigue
known  as  the  "  Conway  cabal,"  for  removing  Wash-
ington from  the  chief  command  of  the  Continental
army  and  putting  Gates  in  his  place,  seemed  at  this
time  to  be  faring  prosperously.  Among  the  schemes
of  the  intriguers  was  one  for  an  invasion  of  Cana-
da, which  Washington  was  known  to  disapprove.
It  was  thought  that  with  the  aid  of  Stark  enough
Green  Mountain  boys  could  be  enlisted  to  join
with  a  small  force  of  regulars  stationed  at  Albany,
so  as  to  make  up  an  invading  army  of  4,000  men.
The  command  of  this  small  army  was  offered  by
the  board  of  war  to  Lafayette,  and  it  was  hoped
that  on  his  arrival  in  Canada  the  French  popula-
tion of  that  country  would  hail  him  as  their  deliv-
erer, and  would  forthwith  rise  against  the  British.


LAFAYETTE


587


Lafayette's  appointment  was  dated  23  Jan.,  1778,
and  at  the  same  time  Washington's  enemy,  Con-
way, was  made  second  in  command.  His  first  in-
formation of  the  appointment  was  conveyed  in  a
letter  of  24  Jan.  from  Gates,  enclosed  in  one  from
that  officer  to  Washington.  Lafayette  did  not  ac-
cept the  command  until  he  had  first  consulted
with  Washington,  and  he  furthermore  insisted
that  De  Kalb,  who  outranked  Conway,  should  ac-
company the  expedition.  On  arriving  at  Albany
it  appeared  that  the  scheme  was  a  fiasco  quite
worthy  of  the  shallow  intriguers  who  had  con-
ceived it.  The  few  regulars  at  Albanv  were  in  no-
wise equipped  for  a  winter  march,  no  help  could  be
got  from  Stark,  and  not  a  volunteer  could  be  found
in  any  quarter.  The  new  alliance  with  France  (6
Feb.,  1778)  had  put  an  end  to  the  desire  of  the
New  England  people  for  conquering  Canada.
They  feared  that  France  might  insist  upon  retain-
ing it  at  the  end  of  the  war,  and  they  greatly  pre-
ferred Great  Britain  to  France  for  a  neighbor.
The  failure  of  this  scheme  was  a  serious  blow  to
the  enemies  of  Washington,  to  whose  camp  Lafay-
ette joyfully  returned  early  in  April.  Throughout
the  whole  affair  he  showed  much  sagacity  along
with  unswerving  fidelity  to  Washington.

On  19  May  the  British  Gen.  Grant,  with  an  over-
whelming force,  surprised  him  at  Barren  Hill,  near
Philadelphia :  but  Lafayette  succeeded  in  withdraw-
ing his  troops  and  artillery  without  loss.  Here  he
gave  proof  of  the  skill  in  handling  men  which  after-
ward characterized  his  campaign  in  Virginia.  Wash-
ington's confidence  in  him  was  shown  soon  afterward
at  the  battle  of  Monmouth.  28  June.  The  command
of  the  force  entrusted  with  the  attack  upon  Clinton's
rear  division  was  at  first  assigned  to  Lee  as  the
officer  highest  in  rank  next  to  Washington.  When
Lee  expressed  his  unwillingness  to  undertake  the
attack,  Washington  at  once  assigned  this  very  im-
portant operation  to  Lafayette.  On  the  eve  of
the  battle  Lee  changed  his  mind,  and  begged  for
the  command  which  he  had  before  refused.  The
operation  was  accordingly  assigned  to  Lee,  and
Lafayette  commanded  one  of  the  divisions  of  his
force.  When  the  strange  disorder  and  retreat  be-
gan, he  was  one  of  the  first  to  suspect  Lee's  treach-
ery, and  sent  a  messenger  to  Washington  to  hasten
his  arrival  upon  the  field.  During  the  remainder
of  the  battle,  Lafayette  commanded  the  second  line
with  ability.  He  was  sent,  21  July,  with  two  bri-
gades of  infantry,  to  operate  under  Sullivan  in
Rhode  Island.  After  the  destructive  storm  of  19
Aug.,  he  tried  in  vain  to  dissuade  D'Estaing  from
taking  the  fleet  away  to  Boston  ;  and,  29  Aug.,  rode
on  horseback  from  Newport  to  Boston  to  urge  the
admiral's  speedy  return ;  next  day  a  gallop  of
eighty  miles  in  eight  hours  brought  him  back  to
Rhode  Island  just  in  time  to  assist  in  superintend-
ing the  retreat  of  the  American  forces.  For  his
zealous  efforts  in  this  campaign  he  received  from
congress  a  vote  of  thanks.

Having  witnessed  the  ill  success  of  this  impor-
tant enterprise,  due  chiefly  to  the  misunderstand-
ings and  want  of  co-operation  between  the  French
and  American  commanders,  Lafayette  now  thought
that  he  could  for  a  while  be  more  useful  to  the
American  cause  in  France  than  in  the  United
States.  The  alliance  between  the  two  countries
would  now  insure  him  a  favorable  reception  at
court,  in  spite  of  the  technical  irregularity  of  his
first  departure  for  America,  and  the  opportunity
to  visit  wife  and  family  could  not  but  be  grate-
ful to  the  young  soldier.  He  obtained  leave  of
absence  from  congress,  21  Oct.,  but  was  seized
with  a  fever  which  kept  him  for  several  weeks


588


LAFAYETTE


LAFAYETTE


dangerously  ill  at  Fishkill.  He  sailed  from  Bos-
ton, 11  Jan.,  1779,  in  the  new  American  frigate
'•  Alliance."  a  swift  and  well-built  ship,  but  manned
by  a  rough  and  motley  crew,  picked  up  at  short
notice.  A  plot  was  laid  among  these  ruffians  to
seize  the  ship  and  take  her  into  a  British  port,
after  murdering  all  on  board  except  Lafayette,
who  was  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  British  govern-
ment as  a  prisoner  of  suitable  rank  to  be  exchanged
for  Gen.  Burgoyne.  The  plot  was  betrayed  to  the
marquis,  who  caused  thirty  of  the  mutineers  to  be

tiut  in  irons.  Arriving  in
'aris,  12  Feb.,  he  was
forbidden  the  king's  pres-
ence until  he  should  have
passed  a  week  in  confine-
ment at  his  father-in-
law's  palace.  After  puri-
fying himself  by  this  kind
of  "  political  quarantine  "
from  the  stain  of  former
disobedience,  he  was  re-
ceived with  favor  at  court,
and  appointed  colonel  of
dragoons  to  serve  in  the
army  with  which  it  was
designed  to  invade  Eng-
land early  in  the  summer.
The  invasion  depended
upon  the  combined  sup-
port of  the  French  and
Spanish  fleets,  and  owing
to  the  failure  of  this  naval
support  was  abandoned.  Lafayette  took  much
pains  in  laying  before  Vergennes  a  clear  and
correct  statement  of  the  situation  in  the  United
States,  and  on  his  own  responsibility  urged  him  to
send  a  land  force  as  well  as  a  fleet  to  co-operate
with  Washington's  array.  This  was  a  step  in  ad-
vance of  the  policy  of  congress,  which  as  yet
desired  only  naval  assistance,  and  dreaded  the  dis-
sensions likely  to  arise  between  French  and  Amer-
ican soldiers  serving  together.  To  avoid  such
dissensions,  Lafayette  recommended  that  all  dis-
putes about  precedence  should  be  forestalled  by
expressly  placing  the  French  auxiliary  army  under
Washington's  command,  and  ordering  that  in  all
cases  a  French  officer  should  be  regarded  as  junior
to  an  American  officer  of  equal  rank.  These  views
were  supported  by  D'E^taing  upon  his  arrival  in
France  early  in  1780,  and  they  were  adopted  by
the  ministry  in  sending  out  the  auxiliary  force  of
0,000  men,  under  Count  Rochambeau,  which  ar-
rived in  Rhode  Island  10  July  of  that  year.  To
report  these  negotiations  to  congress  and  prepare
for  the  arrival  of  the  troops.  Lafayette  sailed  from
Roehelle  in  the  French  frigate  "Hermione,"  19
March,  1780,  and  arrived,  27  April,  in  Boston  har-
bor. After  transacting  business  at  Philadelphia
and  Newport,  connected  with  these  matters,  Lafay-
ette repaired  to  Washington's  headquarters  at  Tap-
pan  on  the  Hudson,  and  was  appointed,  7  Aug.,
to  command  a  special  corps  of  2,000  light  infantry ;
his  place,  from  first  to  last,  was  with  the  American
army,  not  with  the  French  auxiliaries.  An  inter-
view between  Washington  and  Rochambeau  was
arranged  for  20  Sept.  at  Hartford,  and  Lafayette
and  Knox  accompanied  the  American  commander
thither.  Returning  to  the  Hudson,  they  reached
West  Point,  26  Sept.,  the  day  on  which  Arnold's
treason  was  discovered.  Lafayette  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  fourteen  generals  that  condemned
Andre  to  death.

When  Arnold,  with a British  force,  invaded
Virginia,  early  in  1781,  Lafayette  was  sent  with


1,200  men  from  the  New  England  and  New  Jer-
sey lines  to  assist  in  the  defence  of  that  state.
His  troops  were  ill  equipped  for  a  campaign;  for
want  of  tents  they  were  obliged  to  pass  the  frosty
nights  in  the  open  air,  and  many  of  them  were
without  hats  or  shoes.  At  Baltimore  he  pur-
chased the  necessary  clothes  and  equipments  for
the  troops,  paying  for  them  in  drafts  on  the
French  treasury,  which  he  endorsed  for  greater
security  in  case  the  French  government  should
not  see  fit  to  add  the  amount  to  the  loans  already
appropriated  for  the  United  States.  The  military
stores  of  Virginia  were  in  great  part  concentrated
at  Richmond,  and  the  British  commanders  Arnold
and  Phillips  had  planned  the  destruction  of  that
town  ;  but  Lafayette  arrived  there,  29  April,  in  time
to  foil  the  designs  of  the  enemy.  For  some  days
skirmishing  went  on  between  Lafayette  and  Phil-
lips, who  was  suddenly  seized  with  fever,  and  died
13  May,  leaving  Arnold  in  sole  command.  Lord
Cornwallis,  retreating  from  North  Carolina  after
the  battle  of  Guilford,  arrived  20  May  at  Peters-
burg, where  he  effected  a  junction  with  Arnold.
The  British  force  now  numbered  5.000  men,  and
Lafayette  did  not  feel  strong  enough  to  oppose  it
until  he  should  have  been  re-enforced  by  Wayne,
who  was  moving  southward  with  1,000  infantry  of
the  Pennsylvania  line.  He  accordingly  retreated
northward  from  Richmond  toward  Fredericks-
burg, with  Cornwallis  in  full  pursuit.  "  The  boy
cannot  escape  me,"  wrote  the  British  general  in  a
letter  which  was  intercepted :  but  the  young
Frenchman's  retreat  was  admirably  conducted.  He
crossed  the  Rapidan  at  Ely's  Ford,  4  June,  and
secured  a  strong  position,  while  Cornwallis  paused
for  a  moment  and  detached  Tarleton  on  a  raid  to
Charlottesville,  to  break  up  the  legislature  which
was  in  session  there,  and  to  Albemarle,  where  a
quantity  of  military  stores  had  been  collected.
The  first  part  of  the  raid  was  partially  successful,
but  Lafayette  effected  his  junction  with  Wayne,  7
June,  and  prevented  Tarleton  from  approaching
Albemarle.  Cornwallis  now,  when  rejoined  by
Tarleton,  abandoned  as  imprudent  the  idea  of  an
offensive  campaign  in  the  interior  of  the  country,
so  far  from  his  base  of  operations  on  the  sea-coast,
and  accordingly  retreated  to  Richmond.  Lafay-
ette was  presently  re-enforced  by  Steuben,  so  that
he  outnumbered  Cornwallis,  who  accordingly,  20
June,  continued  his  retreat,  crossing  the  Chicka-
hominy  near  White  Oak  Swamp,  and  marching
down  to  the  peninsula  to  Williamsburg.  At  Green
Spring,  near  that  town,  an  indecisive  action  was
fought  between  parts  of  the  two  armies,  6  July,
the  Americans  attacking,  but  unsuccessfully.  Corn-
wallis continued  his  retreat  to  Yorktown,  while
Lafayette  occupied  Malvern  Hill,  and  awaited
further  developments.  Washington  and  Rocham-
beau, with  6,000  men,  started,  19  Aug.,  from  the
Hudson,  and  reached  the  head  of  Chesapeake  bay,
5  Sept.,  the  same  day  on  which  the  French  fleet,
under  De  Grasse,  repulsed  the  British  fleet,  and
obtained  full  possession  of  the  Virginia  waters.
Cornwallis  as  yet  knew  nothing  of  Washington's
approach,  but  there  was  just  a  chance  that  he
might  realize  his  danger,  and,  crossing  the  James
river,  seek  safety  in  a  retreat  upon  North  Carolina.
This  solitary  chance  was  now  forestalled  by  Lafay-
ette. The  troops  of  Saint-Simon,  brought  by  the
fleet,  had  now  increased  his  army  to  8,000,  and
with  his  force  he  took  his  stand,  7  Sept.,  across
the  neck  of  the  peninsula  at  Williamsburg,  thus
cutting  off  Cornwallis's  retreat.  Washington  ar-
rived, 14  Sept.,  at  Lafayette's  headquarters  and  took
command,  and  the  ensuing  concentration  of  all


LAFAYETTE


LAFAYETTE


the  allied  forces  at  Williamsburg  sealed  the  doom
of  Cornwall  is.  During  the  whole  campaign,  from
20  May  to  14  Sept.,  while  Lafayette  was  in  com-
mand "opposed  to  Cornwallis,  his  conduct  was  pru-
dent and  skilful,  and  contributed  in  no  slight
degree  toward  the  grand  result.  On  22  Dec.  he
sailed  again  from  Boston  in  the  "  Alliance,"  and
on  his  arrival  in  France  was  greeted  with  enthu-
siasm. An  army  of  24,000  French  and  Spanish
troops  was  about  to  assemble  at  Cadiz,  and  Lafay-
ette was  appointed  chief-of-staff,  with  a  brevet
of  major-general.  Before  the  preparations  for  this
expedition  were  completed,  the  war  was  at  an  end,
and  Lafayette  sent  from  Cadiz  the  swift  frigate
"Triumph,"  which  arrived,  23  March,  1783,  at  Phil-
adelphia, with  the  first  news  of  peace.  Next  year,
at  Washington's  invitation,  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  after  a  visit  to  Mount  Vernon
made  a  journey  through  the  country  from  Virginia
to  Massachusetts.  On  25  Dec,  1784,  he  sailed
from  New  York  in  the  French  frigate  "  Nymphe."
In  1785  he  travelled  in  Germany.  About  this  time
he  was  deeply  interested  in  the  abolition  of  slav-
ery, and  purchased  a  large  plantation  in  Cayenne,
where  great  numbers  of  slaves  might  be  educated
with  a  view  to  gradual  emancipation.  Washing-
ton, Jefferson,  and  others  were  interested  in  this
experiment,  which  it  was  hoped  might  furnish  an
example  for  imitation  in  the  United  States.

In  1787  Lafayette  was  a  member  of  the  assembly
of  notables,  and  in  the  states-general  of  1789  he  sat
as  representative  of  the  nobility  of  Auvergne.  He
was  chosen,  26  July,  1789.  commander-in-chief  of
the  National  guard,  a  position  which  he  held  till
8  Oct.,  1791.  Part  of  his  difficult  duties  at  this
time  related  to  the  protection  of  the  king  and
queen,  who  distrusted  him,  as  they  distrusted  every
one  who  might  have  been  of  real  service  to  them.
His  moderate  views  made  Lafayette  very  distaste-
ful to  the  Jacobins,  and  with  their  rise  to  power
his  influence  and  popularity  diminished.  Having
been  promoted  lieutenant-general,  30  June.  1791.
he  was  appointed,  on  the  declaration  of  war  against
Austria,  20  April,  1792.  to  command  the  army  of
the  centre,  52.000  strong,  between  Philippeville
and  Lauterbourg.  From  his  camp  at  Maubeuge,
16  June,  he  wrote  the  famous  letter  to  the  Na-
tional assembly,  in  which  he  denounced  the  dan-
gerous policy  of  the  Jacobins.  The  insurrection  of
20  June  followed.  On  the  28th  Lafayette  came
to  Paris,  and  appeared  before  the  assembly  to  de-
fend his  course.  After  two  days,  finding  the  Jaco-
bins all-powerful  in  the  city,  he  returned  to  camp,
and  formed  a  plan  for  removing  the  king  from
Paris.  Before  the  plan  was  fully  matured,  and
while  his  army  was  at  Sedan,  only  four  days'  inarch
from  the  capital,  there  came  the  news  of  the  revo-
lution of  10  Aug.  and  the  imprisonment  of  the
king.  Lafayette  now  refused  to  obey  the  orders  of
the  assembly,  and  arrested  the  three  commission-
ers sent  by  that  body  to  his  camp.  In  return  the
assembly  removed  him  from  command  and  ap-
pointed Dumouriez  in  his  place,  19  Aug.;  his  im-
peachment was  also  decided  upon,  and  it  became
evident  that  his  soldiers  were  in  sympathy  with
the  Jacobins.  He  fled  into  Belgium  with  half  a
dozen  companions,  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Aus-
trians,  and  handed  over  by  them  to  the  Prussians,
by  whom  he  was  imprisoned  first  at  Wesel,  after-
ward at  Magdeburg.  He  was  offered  his  liberty
on  condition  of  assisting  the  allies  in  their  invasion
of  France,  but  refused.  After  a  year's  incarcera-
tion at  Magdeburg,  he  was  transferred  to  Austria
for  safe  keeping,  and  passed  the  next  four  years  in
a  loathsome  dungeon  at  Olmutz,  where  he  was


treated  with  barbarous  cruelty.  Much  sympathy
was  felt  for  him  in  the  United' States  and  in  Eng-
land. In  parliament,  Fox,  Wilberforce,  and  Sheri-
dan were  active  in  his  behalf, "and  Washington
wrote  to  the  emperor,  Francis  II..  asking  that  he
might  be  allowed  to  come  on  parole  to  the  United
States.  In  the  autumn  of  1794,  through  the  bold-
ness and  skill  of  Dr.  Bollmann,  a  young  German
physician,  and  Francis  Kinlock  Huger,  of  South
Carolina,  he  was  actually  set  free,  and  had  nearly
got  clear  of  Austrian  territory  when  he  was  cap-
tured, loaded  with  irons,  and  carried  back  to  his
dungeon.  With  much  difficulty,  in  1795,  his  wife
and  two  daughters  got  permission  to  share  his  cap-
tivity. In  these  sufferings  Lafayette  served  as  the
scapegoat  upon  which  the  emperor  could  freely
vent  his  rage  at  the  revolutionary  party  in  general
for  the  indignities  heaped  upon  his  kinswoman
Marie  Antoinette.  The  unfortunate  victim  was  at
length  set  free.  23  Sept.,  1797,  by  the  victories  of
Bonaparte.  After  a  sojourn  in  flolstein  and  then
in  Holland,  he  returned  to  France  in  March.  1800,
after  the  overthrow  of  the  Directory,  and  retired  to
his  castle  of  La  Grange,  in  Brie,  about  forty-three
miles  from  Paris.  Napoleon  sought  to  gain  his  ad-
herence by  offering  him  a  senatorship,  the  cross  of
the  Legion  of  honor,  and  the  position  of  minister
to  the  United  States;  but  he  declined  these  offers.
He  also  declined  President  Jefferson's  offer  in  1805
to  appoint  him  governor  of  Louisiana.  During
Napoleon's  ride  he  remained  in  the  quiet  of  his
home  at  La  Grange,  where  his  wife  died,  24  Dec,


1807.  (See  illustration.)  On  Napoleon's  return
from  Elba,  it  seemed  desirable  to  secure  the  sup-
port of  that  moderate  liberal  sentiment  which  La-
fayette had  always  consistently  represented,  and
Joseph  Bonaparte  was  accordingly  sent  to  La
Grange  to  sound  Lafayette  and  secure  his  alle-
giance. Lafayette  refused  to  accept  a  place  in  the
hereditary  peerage  which  the  Corsican  proposed  to
re-establish,  or  to  attach  himself  in  any  way  to  his
fortunes.  "  If  I  should  ever  again  appear  in  public
life,"  said  he,  "  it  can  only  be  as  a  representative  of
the  people."  When  a  chamber  of  representatives
was  established  he  was  chosen  meml>er  for  the  De-
partment of  Seine-et-Marne.  but  took  little  or  no
part  in  the  proceedings  until  after  Waterloo.  On  21
June,  1815.  he  insisted  that  Napoleon's  abdication
should  be  demanded,  while  at  the  same  time  his  life
and  liberty  should  be  guaranteed  by  the  nation.  He
endeavored  unsuccessfully  to  procure  for  Napoleon
the  means  of  escaping  to  the  United  States.  In
1818,  after  three  years  of  seclusion  at  home,  he  was
elected  to  the  chamber  of  deputies,  where  he  sat
till  1824.  as  a  leader  of  the  opposition,  opposing
the  censorship  of  the  press,  and  voting  for  all  truly
liberal  measures.  In  1824  congress  passed  unani-
mously a  resolution  requesting  President  Monroe
to  invite  Lafayette  to  visit  the  United  States.  He
sailed  from  Havre,  12  July,  in  an  American  mer-


590


LAFAYETTE


LAFITTE


chantman,  and  arrived  15  Aug.  in  New  York.  In
the  course  of  the  next  fourteen  months  he  trav-
elled through  the  whole  country,  visiting  each  of
the  twenty-four  states  and  all  the  principal  cities,
and  was  everywhere  received  with  tokens  of  enthu-
siastic reverence  and  affection.  In  consideration
of  his  services  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  congress
voted  him  a  grant  of  $200,000,  besides  a  town-
ship of  24,000  acres,  to  be  assigned  somewhere
among  the  unappropriated  public  lands.  His  sixty-
eighth  birthday,  6  Sept.,  1825,  was  celebrated  at
the  White  House  in  Washington,  on  which  occa-
sion a  noble  farewell  speech  was  pronounced  by
President  Adams,  and  next  day  he  sailed  from  the
Potomac  in  the  frigate  "  Brandy  wine,"  and  arrived
in  Havre,  5  Oct.  The  illustration  on  page  588
represents  a  vase  that  was  presented  to  him  by
the  midshipmen  of  the  frigate  shortly  after  his  ar-
rival. He  was  again,  in  1827,  elected  to  the  cham-
ber of  deputies.  In  the  revolution  of  July,  1830,
he  was  made  commander-in-chief  of  the  National

fuard,  and  was instrumental in placing Louis
hilippe  on  the  throne,  in  the  hope  that France

might  thus  at
length  be  en-
abled to  enter
upon  the  path
of  peaceful
constitutional
progress.  He
remained  a
member  of  the
chamber  of
deputies  un-
til his  death.
He  received
a  magnificent
funeral,  and  his  remains  were  interred  beside  those
of  his  wife  in  the  cemetery  of  Picpus  in  the  fau-
bourg Saint- Antoine.  The  grave  is  shown  in  the
illustration  above.  He  left  one  son,  George  Wash-
ington, and  two  daughters,  Anastasie  and  Vir-
ginie;  the  elder  married  Charles  de  Latour  Mau-
bourg,  and  the  younger  the  Count  de  Lasteyrie.

In  person  Lafayette  was  tall  and  powerfully
built,  with  broad  shoulders,  deep  chest,  and  a  tend-
ency toward  corpulence.  His  features  were  large
and  strongly  marked.  He  had  much  dignity  of
manner,  and  was  ordinarily  quiet  and  self-possessed.
Perhaps  the  best  testimony  to  his  purity  of  char-
acter is  the  fact  that  his  bitterest  detractors,  in  the
absence  of  any  other  available  charge,  are  in  the
habit  of  insisting  upon  his  vanity.  Among  all  the
eminent  Frenchmen  of  the  revolutionary  period,
he  was  perhaps  the  only  one  in  whose  career  there
was  nothing  to  be  really  ashamed  of.  His  traits  of
character  were  solid  rather  than  brilliant ;  and  he
was  too  thoroughly  imbued  with  American  ideas  to
identify  himself  with  any  one  of  the  violent  move-
ments originating  in  the  French  revolution  of  1789.
His  love  of  constitutional  liberty  was  too  strong
for  him  to  co-operate  either  with  Bourbons  or  with
Jacobins  or  with  Bonapartists ;  and  from  all  three
quarters  attempts  have  been  made  to  detract  from
his  rightful  fame.  In  European  history  his  place,
though  not  among  the  foremost,  is  respectable ;  in
American  history  he  is  not  only  a  very  picturesque
and  interesting  figure,  but  his  services  in  our  strug-
gle for  political  independence  were  of  substantial
and  considerable  value.

Lafayette  left  a  journal  of  the  principal  events
in  which  he  took  part,  which  was  published  by
his  son,  and  completed  with  some  supplementary
documents,  letters  of  Washington  and  other
statesmen,  under  the  title  u  Memoires,  manuserits


et  correspondance  du  General  de  Lafayette "
(6  vols.,  Paris,  1837-'8).  See  also  E.  de  "la  Be-
dolliere,  "Vie  politique  du  Marquis  de  Lafayette"
(Paris,  1833) ;  Jules  Cloquet,  "  Souvenirs  de  la  vie
privee  du  General  Lafayette "  (Paris,  1836) ;  E.
Laboulaye,  "Histoire  politique  des  Etats-Unis";
Henri  Martin.  "  Histoire  de  France  "  ;  Duruy,
"  Histoire  de  Prance  " ;  Thiers,  "  Revolution  Fran-
eaise";  Sainte  Beuve,  "Portraits  historiques  et
litteraires "  and  "  Critiques  sur  Memoires  de  La-
fayette "  ("  Revue  des  Deux-Mondes,"  1838) ;  Louis
Blanc,  "  Histoire  de  mon  temps" ;  Napoleon, "  Me-
morial de  Sainte  Helene  " ;  L.  de  Lomenie,  "  Gale-
rie  des  contemporaires  " ;  Chateaubriand,  "  Me-
moires d'outre  tombe  " ;  Louis  Blanc,  "  Histoire  de
10  ans  " ;  Vaulabelle,  "  Les  deux  restaurations  " ;
A.  Nettement,  "  Histoire  de  la  restauration " ;
Villemain,  "  Souvenirs  "  ;  Bourguelat,  "  Etudes
critiques";  Guizot,  "Memoires"  and  "Essai  sur
Washington  " ;  A.  Maurin,  "  Chute  des  Bourbons  " ;
De  Barante,  "  De  la  declaration  des  droits  " ;  Mira-
beau,  "  Correspondance  et  memoires " ;  Mme.  de
Stael  ;  Rivarol,  "  Portrait  de  Lafayette,"  etc.
There  are  also  numerous  biographies  of  him  both
in  French  and  English. — His  son,  George  Wash-
ington, b.  in  Paris  in  1779 ;  d.  in  December,  1849,
entered  the  army  as  a  lieutenant  in  1800  and  served
with  distinction  until  1808,  when  he  resigned  and
retired  with  his  father  to  La  Grange.  During  the
Hundred  Days  he  was  elected  to  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives, and  in  1822  to  the  chamber  of  depu-
ties, voting  constantly  for  all  liberal  measures.  In
1824  he  accompanied  his  father  during  his  visit  to
the  United  States.  He  was  re-elected  to  the  cham-
ber of  deputies  in  1827,  and  at  all  the  subsequent
elections  till  1848.  He  left  two  sons.  Oscar
Thomas  Gilbert  du  Motier,  b.  in  Paris,  20  Aug.,
1815,  served  as  an  artillery  officer  from  1835  till
1842,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  chamber  of  depu-
ties, and  made  himself  conspicuous  for  his  liberal
opinions.  Re-elected  in  1848  and  1849,  he  sent  his
resignation  after  the  coup  d'etat,  2  Dec,  1851,  and
lived  quietly  in  La  Grange  under  the  reign  of  Na-
poleon III.  In  1871  he  was  elected  to  the  national
assembly,  and  in  1875  became  a  life-senator.  His
brother,  Francois  Edmond  Gilbert  du  Motier,
b.  11  July,  1818;  d.  in  Paris,  10  Dec,  1890,  was  in
1848  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly.  After  1876
he  represented  the  department  of  La  Sarthe  in  the
chamber  of  deputies. He  was  a  Radical  in  politics.

LAFITAU,  Joseph  Francis,  French  mission-
ary, b.  in  Bordeaux,  France ;  d.  in  France  in  1740.
He  belonged  to  the  Jesuit  order,  was  for  several
years  a  missionary  in  Canada,  and  after  his  return
to  France  was  a  professor  of  belles-lettres  till  his
death.  He  discovered  in  the  country  of  the  Iro-
quois a  plant  that  he  named  the  Aureliana  Cana-
densis. In  his  opinion  it  was  the  same  as  the  one
which  the  Chinese  call  gin-seng.  He  wrote  "  Me-
moire  concernant  la  precieuse  plante  gin-seng  de
Tartaire"  (Paris,  1718);  "Moeurs  des  sauvages
Americains  compares  aux  moeurs  des  premiers
temps,"  in  which  he  tries  to  show  that  the  Ameri-
can Indians  are  descended  from  the  primitive  in-
habitants of  Greece  (2  vols.,  1723 ;  4  vols.,  Rouen,
1724) ;  and  "  Histoire  des  decouvertes  et  des  con-
quetes  des  Portugais  dans  le  nouveau  monde "  (2
vols.,  Paris,  1733;  4  vols.,  1734).

LAFITTE,  Jean,  adventurer,  b.  in  France
about  1780;  d.  in  Yucatan  in  1826.  He  arrived
in  New  Orleans  about  1809  with  his  elder  broth-
er Pierre.  They  were  men  of  limited  education,
but  of  attractive  manners  and  enterprising  char-
acters. For  some  time  they  carried  on  a  black-
smith-shop with  slave  labor. Then  engaging  in


LAFITTE


LAFLAMME


591


the  smuggling  traffic  with  the  corsairs  of  the  coast,
they  became  the  leaders  of  the  band,  in  conse-
quence of  which  they  were  outlawed.  Some  of
these  buccaneers  had  received  letters  of  marque
from  the  French  republic,  and,  after  the  close  of
the  Franco-Spanish  war,  from  the  republic  of  Car-
tagena, giving  them  authority  to  seize  Spanish
vessels.  They  are  said  to  have  seized  merchant-
men of  all  nations,  not  excepting  the  United
States,  into  whose  territory  they  brought  their
prizes,  yet  this  charge  has  never  been  proved.
Citizens  of  Louisiana  carried  on  a  contraband
trade  in  captured  goods  and  slaves  with  these
pirates,  who  smuggled  the  wares  into  the  city
through  the  Barataria  lakes  and  Bayou  Lafourche,
or  through  Bayou  Teche,  or  sold  them  at  auction
to  persons  who  went  to  Barataria  to  purchase  the
captured  cargoes.  The  principal  establishment  of
the  privateers  was  on  the  island  of  Grand  Terre,  in
front  of  the  pass  of  Barataria.  Gov.  Claiborne
issued  a  proclamation  against  the  buccaneers  on
15  March.  1812.  Several  expeditions  were  under-
taken against  them,  but  the  outlaws  were  fore-
warned by  their  friends,  and  escaped  to  some  other
part  of  the  coast.  On  24  Nov.,  1813,  after  a  rev-
enue officer  had  been  fired  upon,  Gov.  Claiborne
issued  a  second  proclamation,  offering  a  reward  of
$500  for  the  capture  of  Jean  Lafitte.  In  January,
1814,  the  Lafittes  offered  for  sale  a  consignment  of
415  negroes.  An  inspector  of  revenue  that  was
sent  to  their  settlement  was  killed,  and  the  col-
lector urged  Gov.  Claiborne  to  drive  the  contra-
bandists out  of  Louisiana.  He  laid  the  matter  be-
fore the  legislature,  but  nothing  was  done,  and
Lafitte  continued  to  send  his  goods  to  Donaldson-
ville  and  other  points  on  the  river,  under  the
guard  of  bodies  of  armed  men.  An  indictment
was  then  presented  against  the  Lafittes  in  the  U.  S.
court.  John  ft.  Grymes,  who  resigned  the  U.  S.
district  attorneyship  in  order  to  defend  them,  and
his  associate,  Edward  Livingston,  procured  the
cessation  of  the  proceedings.

When  the  British  planned  their  descent  upon  New
Orleans  they  expected  the  buccaneers  to  join  them.
Pierre  Lafitte  had  recently  been  made  a  prisoner
by  the  U.  S.  authorities,  and  was  confined  in  the
jail  of  New  Orleans.  Capt.  Lockyer,  of  the  royal
navy,  arrived  at  Lafitte's  headquarters  on  3  Sept.,
1814,  and  delivered  a  letter  from  Col.  Nichols,  of-
fering him  a  captain's  commission  in  the  British
naval  service  and  $30,000,  and  to  his  followers  im-
munity from  punishment  for  past  actions,  the  in-
demnification of  any  losses,  and  rewards  in  money
and  lands.  In  an  accompanying  document  the  in-
habitants of  Barataria  were  threatened  with  ex-
termination in  case  they  rejected  these  proposals.
Capt.  Lockyer  and  the  other  British  officers  that
landed  in  Barataria  were  seized  by  the  bucca-
neers, who  purposed  sending  them  to  New  Or-
leans as  prisoners  of  war,  but  Lafitte  dissuaded  his
subordinates  from  this  course,  and  pretended  to
treat  with  Lockyer  in  order  to  learn  the  details  of
the  projected  expedition.  He  told  Lockyer  to  re-
turn in  ten  days  for  a  final  answer,  and  after  the
British  officers  "had  departed  wrote  to  a  member  of
the  legislature  an  account  of  what  had  happened,
and  forwarded  the  papers  that  contained  the  offers
to  himself.  Gov.  Claiborne  called  a  council  of
officers  of  the  army,  militia,  and  navy,  and  sub-
mitted the  intelligence  that  he  had  received  from
Lafitte,  who  had  sent  a  second  letter  on  7  Sept.,
inclosing  information  from  Havana  of  the  intend-
ed operations  of  the  enemy,  and  offering  the  serv-
ices of  himself  and  his  followers  on  the  condi-
tion of  an  act  of  oblivion  for  their  past  offences.


Pierre  had  meanwhile  escaped  from  jail,  and  ap-
proved his  brother's  course.  Preparations  were  in
progress  for  an  expedition  to  Barataria  to  break
up  the  organization  and  destroy  the  privateers.
The  majority  of  the  officers  who  were  called  in
council  were  of  the  opinion  that  the  documents
that  had  been  sent  by  Jean  Lafitte  were  forgeries,
and  that  his  story  was  a  fabrication  intended  to  pre-
vent the  destruction  of  his  outlawed  colony.  Gen.
Jacquez  Villere  alone  dissented.  Gov.  Claiborne
also  believed  in  the  sincerity  of  Lafitte,  but  acqui-
esced in  the  decision  of  the  officers.  The  expedi-
tion was  organized  under  the  command  of  Com.
Daniel  T.  Patterson,  of  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  Col.
George  T.  Ross,  of  the  army.  Lafitte  supposed
that  the  preparations  were  against  the  British.
The  naval  and  military  forces  made  a  sudden  de-
scent on  Barataria,  and  broke  up  the  establishment
completely,  capturing  many,  and  carrying  off  to
New  Orleans  most  of  their  vessels  and  a  rich  booty,
which  was  claimed  as  a  lawful  prize.  Among  those
who  escaped  were  Jean  and  Pierre  Lafitte,  who
found  aid  and  shelter  on  the  banks  of  the  Missis-
sippi. They  collected  their  adherents  again  at
Last  island,  near  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Lafourche.
When  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  came  to  take  com-
mand at  New  Orleans  he  issued  a  proclamation  de-
claring that  he  called  not  upon  "  either  pirates  or
robbers  to  join  him  in  the  glorious  cause " ;  yet,
when  Lafitte  repeated  his  offer  of  military  service,
Jackson,  after  an  interview,  accepted  the  much-
needed  addition  to  his  force,  and  from  that  time
confided  in  the  men  whom  he  had  denounced  as
•'  hellish  banditti."  A  part  were  sent  to  man  the
redoubts  on  the  river,  and  the  rest  formed  a  corps,
and  served  the  batteries  at  New  Orleans  with  great
skill.  President  Madison  issued  a  proclamation
declaring  a  full  pardon  for  privateering  and  smug-
gling prior  to  8  Jan.,  1815.  Soon  after  the  war
both  the  Lafittes  left  New  Orleans.  One  of  the
Lafittes  settled  in  Galveston,  Tex.,  in  1816,  but  in
1820  was  expelled  by  the  American  authorities.
After  embarking  his  treasure  and  followers  on
board  his  six  vessels,  he  burnt  his  establishments,
and  on  12  May,  1820,  left  the  bay  of  Galveston  for
the  coast  of  Yucatan,  where  he  continued  for  some
time  his  depredations  against  Spanish  commerce,
and  died  in  182b'  either  in  Cozumel  or  Isla  de  Mu-

feres.  Lafitte's  adventures  form  the  subject  of
oseph  H.  Ingraham's  romance  of  "  The  Pirate  of
the  Gulf,"  and  of  other  similar  works.  See  a  "  His-
torical Sketch  of  Pierre  and  Jean  Lafitte,"  by
Charles  Gayarre,  in  "  Magazine  of  American  His-
tory," October  and  November,  1883 ;  the  same  au-
thor's *'Historv  of  Louisiana";  and  James  Par-
ton's  "  Life  of  Jackson."

LAFLAMME,  Toussaint  Antoine  Radolphe,
Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Montreal,  15  May,  1827.
He  was  educated  at  St.  Sulpice  college,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1849.  He
was  one  of  the  earliest  members  of  the  Lower
Canada  "  Rouge  "  party,  was  chief  editor  of  the
party  organ,  "L'Avenir,"  and  identified  himself
with  the  extreme  views  of  the  most  radical  of  his
countrymen.  When  only  nineteen  years  of  age  he
was  elected  president  of  the  Institute  Canadien  of
Montreal,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  founders.
He  was  counsel  for  the  seigneurs  who  claimed
their  indemnity  in  virtue  of  the  seignorial  act  of
1857-8,  was  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  1863,
and  has  been  professor  of  the  law  of  real  property
in  McGill  umversitv,  from  which  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  C.  L.  in  1873.  In  1872  Mr.  Laflamme
was  elected  for  Jacques  Cartier  to  the  Canadian
parliament,  and  he  represented  that  constituency


592


LAFLECHE


LAFRAGUA


till  1878.  In  November,  1876,  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  privy  council  as  minister  of  inland  reve-
nue, and  on  8  June,  1877,  he  was  made  minister
of  justice,  which  office  he  held  until  the  resignation
of  the  government  in  September,  1878.  While
holding  this  office  Mr.  Laflamme  introduced  a  bill
for  further  securing  the  independence  of  parlia-
ment, a  bill  giving  to  the  decrees  of  the  Ontario
maritime  court  the  same  meaning  and  weight  as
are  attached  to  those  of  the  court  of  chancery,  and
one  providing  for  the  abolition  of  the  office  of  re-
ceiver-general. He  declined  a  puisne  judgeship  in
the  supreme  court  in  1875.

LAFLECHE,  Louis  Francois  Richer,  Cana-
dian R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Sainte  Anne  de  la  Perade,
Quebec,  4  Sept.,  1818.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet
college,  ordained  priest  in  1844,  and  was  a  mission-
ary near  Red  river  from  1844  till  1856.  He  was
appointed  a  professor  at  Nicolet  college  in  1856,
vicar-general  of  Three  Rivers  in  1859,  bishop  of
Anthedon  in  partibus  infidelium  in  1866,  and  was
consecrated  second  R.  C.  bishop  of  Three  Rivers  in
1870.  He  is  the  author  of  a  series  of  articles  on
the  relation  of  religion  in  the  family  to  society,
first  published  in  the  Three  Rivers  "  Journal "
(Three  Rivers,  1866),  and  "  Mandements  et  autres
actes  Episcopaux  "  (3  vols.,  1880).

LAFOND  DE  LURCY,  Gabriel,  French  ex-
plorer, b.  in  Lurcy  Levy,  Allier,  25  March,  1802 ;
d.  in  Paris,  11  April,  1876.  He  studied  in  Moulins,
entered  the  merchant  marine  in  1818,  and  four
years  later  had  command  of  a  ship.  For  several
years  he  traded  with  both  Americas,  but,  after  in-
heriting a  large  estate,  he  travelled  more  for  pleas-
ure than  for  mercantile  purposes,  visiting  Chili,
Brazil,  and  Central  America  in  1831-6.  In  1849
he  became  Costa  Rican  consul  in  Paris,  and  in  the
following  year  minister  of  the  same  republic,  which
post  he  held  for  twenty  years.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  the  Geographical  society  of  Paris  in
1851,  and  corresponding  member  of  the  Ameri-
can geographical  society  in  1857.  He  published
"  Des  lies  Marquises  et  des  colonies  de  la  France
dans  l'Amerique  et  l'Oceanie  "  (Paris,  1842) :  "  Voy-
ages autour  du  monde  et  nauf rages  celebres"
(8  vols.,  1843) ;  "  De  l'emancipation  de  l'esclavage
dans  les  colonies  Franchises  de  l'Amerique  "  (1844) ;
"  Etudes  surl'AmeriqueEspagnole"  (1848)  ;"Quinze
ans  de  voyage  autour  du  monde"  (2  vols.,  1849);
and  "  Cartes  de  l'Amerique  Central  "  (1853).

LAFONTAINE,  Sir  Louis  Hypolite,  bart,
Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Boucherville,  Lower
Canada,  in  October,  1807;  d.  in  Montreal,  26  Feb.,
1864.  He  studied  and  practised  law,  and  when  he
had  gained  a  competence  became  a  follower,  and
afterward  a  rival,  of  Louis  J.  Papineau  (q.  v.),  act-
ing with  the  party  of  "La  Jeune  France."  On  4
Nov.,  1838,  a  warrant  was  issued  for  the  arrest  of
Mr.  Lafontaine  on  the  charge  of  high  treason.  At
that  time  he  was  about  to  proceed  to  England  as
the  agent  of  his  compatriots,  and  before  his  depar-
ture underwent  an  examination  beCore  a  special
tribunal  on  the  charge  that  had  been  preferred
against  him.  On  arriving  in  England  he  did  not
regard  himself  as  safe,  and,  with  the  assistance  of
Edward  Ell  ice,  a  wealthy  Canadian,  escaped  into
France.  As  no  evidence  incriminating  him  had
been  adduced,  he  returned  to  Canada.  In  1841  he
became  a  candidate  for  the  representation  of  Terre-
bonne, but  withdrew  from  the  contest  before  its
close,  and  was  afterward  elected  for  North  York,
Upper  Canada.  Under  Sir  Charles  Bagot,  Mr.  La-
fontaine in  1842  became  a  member  of  the  adminis-
tration. This  was  about  the  time  of  the  inaugura-
tion of  responsible  government  in  Canada. On  28


Nov.,  1844,  he  and  his  colleagues  in  office  were
compelled  to  resign,  but  in  1848  he  again  became
a  member  of  the  government,  and  remained  in
office  until  October,  1851,  when  the  Hincks-Tuche
administration  was  formed.  On  13  Aug.,  1853,  lie
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  queen's
bench,  and  on  28  Aug.,  1854,  was  created  a  baronet.

LAFONTE,  Aunet,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ambert,
Auvergne,  France,  2  Oct.,  1812 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  7  Jan.,  1875.  He  studied  theology  in  the
Seminary  of  Clermont-Ferrand,  and  became  pro-
fessor of  philosophy,  and  afterward  of  theology,  in
that  institution.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1837,
entered  the  Society  of  the  fathers  of  mercy  in  1839,
and  was  among  the  first  missionaries  of  his  order
sent  to  the  United  States.  He  founded  the  French
congregation  in  Canal  street,  New  York,  in  1842,
introduced  into  this  country  the  order  of  Christian
brothers,  and  harbored  the  first  Jesuits  that  came
to  the  United  States.  He  established  the  school  of
St.  Vincent  de  Paul  in  New  York  city,  founded  the
orphan  asylum  of  the  same  name  there  in  1860,
and  was  active  in  the  erection  of  its  fine  building.

LA  FOREST,  Antoine  Ren6  Charles  Mathu-
rin,  Comte  de,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Aire,  France,  8
Aug.,  1756;  d.  2  Aug.,  1846.  Retiring  from  the
army,  he  entered  the  diplomatic  service  in  1774,
and  in  November,  1778,  was  attached  to  the  French
legation  in  the  United  States.  He  was  successive-
ly vice-consul  at  Savannah,  Philadelphia,  and  New
York,  and  in  1785  became  consul-general.  He  re-
turned to  France  in  1792,  and  was  again  consul-
general  to  the  United  States  in  1794-'5.  He  was
placed  at  the  head  of  the  French  post-office  depart-
ment after  the  18th  Brumaire,  in  1800  was  minister
to  the  congress  of  Luneville,  minister  to  Berlin
in  1803-6,  and  to  Spain  in  1808-'13.  He  was
made  a  peer  of  France  in  1819,  and  minister  of
state  and  member  of  the  privy  council  in  1825.

LAFOREY,  Sir  Francis,"  bart.,  British  naval
officer,  b.  in  Virginia  about  1760;  d.  in  England  in
1835.  His  great-grandfather  was  of  a  noble  fami-
ly in  Poitou,  France,  and  went  to  England  with
William  III.  During  the  American  Revolution  Sir
Francis  entered  the  British  navy.  In  1791  he  at-
tained the  rank  of  commander,  and  in  1793  that
of  captain.  He  was  nominated  a  K.  C.  B.  in  1815,
promoted  vice-admiral  in  1819,  and  admiral  in
1832.  He  commanded  the  "  Spartiate,"  of  74  guns,
at  the  battle  of  Trafalgar,  and  at  one  time  captured
two  French  frigates.  His  last  duty  seems  to  have
been  on  the  Barbadoes  station  as  commander-in-
chief. He  left  no  heir,  having  never  married.

LAFRAGUA,  Jose"  Maria  (lah-frah'-guah),
Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  Puebla,  2  April,  1813;  d.
in  the  city  of  Mexico.  15  Nov.,  1875.  He  entered
Caroline  college  in  1824,  and  in  1835  was  admitted
to  the  bar  and  appointed  professor  of  civil  law  and
secretary  of  the  academy  of  jurisprudence.  He
also  devoted  himself  to  politics  and  literature,  con-
tributing to  various  journals.  In  1837  he  was
elected  by  the  Federal  party  of  Puebla  representa-
tive to  Mexico,  took  part  in  the  direction  of  sev-
eral political  papers,  and  in  1842  he  was  chosen  a
deputy  to  the  constituent  congress.  In  conse-
quence of  his  opposition  to  Santa- Anna  he  was  ar-
rested, with  others,  on  2  May,  1843,  but,  after  six
weeks'  imprisonment,  set  at  liberty  in  consequence
of  an  amnesty.  He  continued  his  opposition  to
the  dictator,  and  in  consequence  of  a  political
speech  was  imprisoned  again  ;  but,  to  avoid  public
indignation,  Santa-Anna  released  him  on  the  fol-
lowing day,  and  even  offered  him  as  satisfaction
the  place  of  minister  to  Spain,  which  Lafragua  re-
fused. He  was  secretary  of  the  chamber  of  depu-


LA  FUENTE  Y  ALCANTARA


LAGOS


593


ties  when  congress  was  dissolved  by  Gen.  Paredes ;
but  after  the  triumph  of  the  revolution  of  the
"  Ciudadela,"'  in  August,  1846,  he  was  appointed  by
Gen.  Salas  councillor  of  state,  and  in  October  sec-
retary of  foreign  relations,  which  place  he  occupied
until  Gomez  Farias  assumed  the  executive  in  De-
cember. Santa- Anna  offered  him  a  seat  in  the
cabinet  in  1847 ;  but  he  refused.  After  the  conclu-
sion of  peace  with  the  United  States  he  was  elected
senator,  and,  declining  the  appointment  of  minis-
ter to  Paris  and  Rome,  continued  in  the  senate  till
the  dissolution  of  congress  in  1853  by  Vice-Presi-
dent Ceballos.  Foreseeing  the  consequences  of
Santa-Anna's  return  to  power,  Lafragua  retired
from  public  life  and  favored  the  plan  of  Ayutla.
Gen.  Alvarez  offered  him  the  government  of  Pue-
bla  and  the  Spanish  mission ;  but  he  refused,  and
on  the  accession  of  Gen.  Comonfort  the  latter  ap-
pointed Lafragua,  in  December,  1855,  secretary  of
the  interior,  and  he  was  one  of  Comonfort's  most
faithful  advisers  during  his  administration.  In
February,  1857,  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  Madrid,
and,  after  the  fall  of  Comonfort  in  January.  1858,
he  continued  to  represent  the  Liberal  government
of  Juarez,  protesting  against  the  admission  of  a
minister  from  Miramon  till  he  was  relieved  in  18G0
at  his  own  request.  After  travelling  through  Eu-
rope and  the  United  States,  he  returned  to  Mexico
in  November,  1861,  and  remained  there  during  the
intervention  and  the  empire,  but  firmly  refused  a
seat  in  the  cabinet,  which  was  several  times  tend-
ered him  by  Maximilian.  On  20  June,  1867,  he
was  commissioned  by  Gen.  Marquez  to  treat  with
Diaz  about  the  surrender  of  Mexico ;  but.  before
he  could  leave,  the  city  was  attacked  from  all  sides
and  occupied  next  day.  On  3  Aug..  Lafragua  was
appointed  professor  of  history  and  chronology  and
member  of  the  commission  to  form  the  civil  code,
and  in  1868  he  was  elected  member  of  the  supreme
court  of  justice  and  director  of  the  national  library.
and  commissioned  to  form  the  penal  code.  In
June,  1872,  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  foreign
relations,  resigning  his  seat  on  the  supreme  bench,
and,  after  the  death  of  Juarez  in  July,  he  presented
his  resignation  together  with  the  other  ministers;
but  it  was  not  accepted  by  Lerdo  de  Tejada,  and
when  congress  elected  him  again  to  the  supreme
court.  7  Dec,  1873,  that  body  allowed  him  to  con-
tinue as  secretary  of  foreign  relations,  so  that  he
held  both  posts  till  his  death.

LA  FUENTE  Y  ALCANTARA,  Miguel,  Span-
ish historian,  b.  in  Archidona,  Malaga,  10  July,
1817;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  August,  1850.  lie
studied  law,  devoted  himself  to  historical  investi-
gations, became  secretary  of  the  cortes,  and  was
appointed  fiscal,  or  attorney-general,  in  the  island
of  Cuba.  He  had  barely  arrived  in  Havana  when
he  was  attacked  by  the  local  fever  and  died.  Pie
published  "  Historia  de  Granada"  (4  vols.,  Grana-
da, 1843-8;  2  vols.,  Paris,  1851),  and  also  wrote
works  on  hunting,  and  on  the  characters  and  revo-
lutions of  the  different  races  in  Spain,  especially
of  the  Moors  during  thesmiddle  ages.

LA  UALLISSONNIERE,  Roland  Michael
Barrin,  Count  de,  French  governor  of  Canada,  b.
in  France  early  in  the  18th  centurv;  d.  there,  26
Oct.,  1756.  He  was  a  distinguished  officer  in  the
navy,  and  administered  the  government  of  Canada
from  1747  till  1749,  during  the  imprisonment  in
England  of  the  governor,  Admiral  De  la  Jonquiere.
His  administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  colony  was
marked  by  disputes  with  the  British  and  their
colonists  in  relation  to  their  right  of  way  in  and
about  the  peninsula  of  Nova  Scotia  and  the  Ohio.
He  constructed  forts  throughout  the  province,  and
vol.  m. — 38


projected  the  settling  of  the  French  Canadians,
who  lived  on  the  peninsula,  on  the  north  shore  of
the  Bay  of  Fundy,  a  scheme  that  received  the  ap-
proval of  the  French  ministry,  and  was  carried  into
effect.  On  his  return  to  France,  he  went  into
active  service  and  was  intrusted  with  the  transport
of  land-forces  to  Minorca,  for  the  siege  of  Fort
Mahon.  When  returning  with  the  French  fleet,  he
met  Admiral  Byng's  squadron  (British)  and  de-
feated it,  for  which  Byng  was  tried  by  court-mar-
tial, sentenced,  and  shot.  Count  De  la  Gallisson-
niere  was  of  short  stature,  deformed,  and  scarcely
more  distinguished  for  his  naval  skill  and  admin-
istrative ability  than  for  his  scientific  attainments.

LAGES,  Joao  Vieira  de  Carvalho  (lah  -zhavs),
Marquis  of,  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Olivenca.  Portu-
gal, in  1781 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil,  1  April.  1847.
He  entered  the  army  in  1801.  and  at  the  French
invasion  of  Portugafin  1807  accompanied  the  roval
family  to  Brazil.  As  a  captain  he  fought  in  the
campaigns  against  the  rebels  of  Do  Sul  in  Brazil  in
1811-12  and  1816-'17,  and  in  the  latter  campaign
did  good  work  in  fortifying  important  places.  He
was  appointed  commandant  of  the  colony  of  Nova
Friburgo  in  1821.  and  in  1822  joined  the  party  that
advocated  the  independence  of  Brazil.  The  follow-
ing year  the  emperor.  Pedro  I.,  raised  him  to  the
nobility,  and  promoted  him  to  brigadier.  He  was
appointed  secretary  of  war  and  Baron  of  Lages  in
1824,  in  1826  counsellor  of  state,  and  in  1828  gen-
eral of  the  army.  In  1831  he  was  again  appointed
secretary  of  war.  and,  although  the  country  was  in
a  state  of  revolution,  he  established  the  schools  of
the  arsenal  and  a  powder-factory.  During  the  re-
gency of  1831-'40  Lages  was  twice  called  to  be
secretary  of  war.  in  which  post  he  contributed  in
1840  to  the  declaration  of  Pedro  II. 's  majority.  In
that  year  he  received  the  title  of  Marquis  of  Lages.

LAGOS.  Manoel  Ferreira  (lah'-gos),  Brazilian
writer,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1816;  d.  there,  23  Oct.,
1867.  He  studied  in  his  native  city,  but  refused  to
write  the  required  thesis,  and  could  not  be  gradu-
ated. In  1839  he  began  to  write  for  the  journal  of
the  "  Instituto  geographico  Brazileiro,"  and  in  1845
he  was  appointed  secretary  of  that  body.  In  1852
he  was  elected  vice-president  of  a  scientific  com-
mission to  the  north  of  the  empire,  and  on  his  re-
turn he  gave  lectures,  exposing  the  falsehoods  of
many  that  had  written  about  that  part  of  the
country.  He  was  then  appointed  chief  clerk  of
the  secretary  of  state,  in  1854  became  keeper  of  the
National  library,  and  the  same  year  established  the
sections  of  zoology  and  comparative  anatomy  in
the  National  institute.  He  was  appointed  repre-
sentative of  Brazil  at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867.
Besides  writing  for  the  journal  of  the  "  Instituto
geographico  Brazileiro,"  he  contributed  to  the
official  gazette  and  several  other  papers,  and  wrote
many  important  works,  the  manuscripts  of  which
were  purchased  bv  the  government  of  Brazil.

LAGOS,  Pedro  (lah'-gos),  Chilian  soldier,  b.  in
Chilian  in  December,  1827 ;  d.  in  Santiago  in  Oc-
tober, 1884.  In  his  early  youth  he  entered  the
army  as  a  common  soldier,  and  during  the  civil
war  of  1851  did  good  service  in  the  battle  of  Petor-
ca  on  14  Oct.  and  in  that  of  Longomilla  on  8  Dec.
and  was  promoted  major.  In  the  civil  war  of
1859  he  served  again  under  the  government,  be-
came brevet  colonel,  and,  after  numerous  cam-
paigns against  the  Araticanians,  was  promoted
colonel  by  congress  in  1875.  He  was  for  many-
years  commander  of  the  Chilian  frontier  against
the  Araucanians.  and  in  1878  was  appointed  in-
spector-general of  the  national  guard.  During  the
war  against  Peru  and  Bolivia  he  was  in  command


594


lagrandiere


LA HONTAN


of  a  brigade,  and  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Cala-
ma,  23  March,  Pisagua,  2  Nov.,  Dolores,  19  Nov.,
and  Tarapaca,  2?  Nov.,  1879.  In  1880  he  partici-
pated in  the  expedition  to  the  province  of  Moque-
gua,  and  commanded  in  the  attack  and  capture  of
the  fortress  of  Arica  on  7  June,  for  which  he  was
promoted  brigadier.  In  January,  1881,  he  com-
manded a  division  of  8,500  men  in  the  battle  of
Chovrillos,  and  the  victory  of  Miraflores  was  prin-
cipally due  to  him,  according  to  the  official  report
of  the  commander-in-chief.  After  his  return  to
Chili  he  was  promoted  by  congress  major-general
and  appointed  inspector-general  of  the  army,  which
post  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

LAGRANDIERE,  Charles  Marie  de  (lah-
grond'-yair'),  West  Indian  naval  officer,  b.  in  La
Desirade,  W.  I.,  in  1729;  d.  in  Vannes,  France,  27
April,  1812.  He  entered  the  French  navy  in  1744.
and  served  during  most  of  his  life  in  Canada  and
in  the  West  Indies.  During  the  war  of  American
independence  he  commanded  a  squadron,  and
cruised  from  Charleston  to  Boston.  Joining  Ad-
miral Destouches,  he  defeated,  16  March,  1781,  in
Chesapeake  bay,  the  British  fleet  under  Marriot
Arbuthnot.  He  was  employed  afterward  in  the
West  Indies,  and  made  several  expeditions  against
Dominica,  the  Bahama  islands,  and  British  Guiana.
He  governed  La  Desirade  in  1783-'6,  and  afterward
commanded  Les  Saintes.  During  the  French  revo-
lution he  was  employed  at  Santo  Domingo,  Marti-
nique, and  Guadeloupe.  He  retired  in  1802.  He
published  "  Histoire  de  la  marine  Francaise  durant
les  guerres  d'Amerique"  (2  vols.,  Vannes,  1808).

LAGRAVIERE,  Jurien  Pierre  Roch  de  (lah'-
grav'-yair'),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Gannat,  5
Nov.,  1772;  d.  in  Paris,  14  Jan.,  1849.  He  entered
the  navy  in  1785,  and  in  1796  commanded  a  brig,
with  which  he  cruised  for  eighteen  months  on  the
coast  of  Brazil  and  in  the  West  Indies,  destroying
slave-ships.  In  1798,  as  captain  of  a  frigate,  he
commanded  the  station  of  Paraguay.  In  1802  he
was  attached  to  the  expedition  to  Santo  Domingo,
and  captured  the  fortress  of  Leogane,  4  March,
1803.  During  the  following  years  he  was  employed
to  escort  French  merchant  vessels  from  America
to  Brest.  In  1816  he  was  promoted  rear-admiral,
and  in  1819  bombarded  Algiers.  On  his  return  he
received  orders  to  visit  all  the  harbors  of  Brazil,
West  Indies,  and  South  America,  to  ascertain  the
justice  of  the  claims  of  the  French  residents  in
those  countries,  and  especially  to  study  the  politi-
cal and  commercial  situation  of  South  America,
and  in  eighteen  months  he  accomplished  his  mis-
sion successfully.  In  1824  he  was  instructed  to
force  the  government  of  Hayti  to  settle  the  claims
of  the  French  residents  who  had  been  despoiled
during  the  troubles  of  1790-'84,  and  twenty-four
hours  after  his  arrival  off  Port  au  Prince  a  "treaty
was  signed  with  the  French  minister.  On  1  March,
1831,  he  was  promoted  vice-admiral,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  was  created  a  peer  of  France.  His
publications  include  "  Rapport  a  sa  Majeste  Tres
Chretienne  sur  la  situation  politique  et  coinmer-
ciale  du  Perou  et  du  Chili"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1821);
"  Rapport  sur  la  situation  et  les  reclamations  des
residents  Francais  dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud "  (2
vols.,  1822) ;  "  La  question  Haitienne :  l'indemnite,
et  les  veritables  ressources  du  pays"  (1824);  and
"  Encore  la  question  Haitienne :  Haiti  peut-il  paver
l'indemnite?"  (2  vols.,  1835).

LA  GUERRA,  Pablo  de,  jurist,  b.  in  Califor-
nia; d.  in  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.,  5  Feb.,  1874.  He
was  the  son  of  Don  Jose  Antonio  de  la  Guerra  y
Noriega,  a  native  of  Spain,  who  went  to  Mexico  as
an  officer  of  the  Spanish  army. Don  Jose  was  for


many  years  commandant  at  Santa  Barbara,  and,
at  his  death  in  1858,  left  over  100  descendants.
Three  of  his  daughters  married  Americans.  Pablo,
the  most  eminent  of  his  sons,  studied  law,  was
elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  was  for  a  long  time
judge  of  the  1st  judicial  district  of  California.

LA  HAILANDIERE,  Celestine  Rene  Lau-
rence Guynemer  de,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Com-
bourg,  France,  in  1798;  d.  in  Triandin,  France,  in
1882.  He  finished  his  classical  education  in  the
College  of  Rennes,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and
made  judge  of  the  tribunal  of  Redon  at  the  age  of
twenty-four,  but  soon  resigned  the  office  and  enter™
the  theological  seminary  of  Rennes.  He  was  or-
dained deacon  in  1824,  priest  in  1825,  and  assigned
to  missionary  duty  in  Rennes.  In  1836  he  accom-
panied Bishop  Brute  to  the  United  States  as  his
vicar-general,  labored  among  the  French  Catholics
of  Vincennes,  Ind..  and  also  assisted  in  the  ad-
ministration of  the  diocese.  In  1838  he  went  to
Europe  to  procure  priests  for  German  Catholics
who  were  beginning  to  settle  in  Indiana.  While
engaged  in  this  work  he  heard  of  the  death  of
Bishop  Brute,  and  at  the  same  time  that  he  had
been  appointed  his  coadjutor,  with  right  of  succes-
sion. He  was  consecrated  in  1839,  and  before  he  left
France  he  sent  several  clerical  students  and  priests.
He  persuaded  the  Eudist  fathers  of  Rennes  to
send  a  body  of  priests  to  found  a  college  in  Vin-
cennes at  their  own  expense,  and  induced  the
newly  established  Society  of  the  holy  cross  to  send
some  of  their  brothers,  with  a  priest  at  their  head,
to  found  schools  for  boys  in  his  diocese.  He  also
induced  skilled  workmen,  who  were  not  then  to  be
found  so  far  in  the  western  settlements,  to  follow
him,  by  whose  aid  he  afterward  erected  the  beautiful
cathedral  of  Vincennes.  With  the  money  he  had  ob-
tained in  France  he  built  a  seminary  in  Vincennes,
complete  in  all  details,  after  the  European  plan,
and  founded  a  library.  Through  his  energy  the
little  village  of  Vincennes,  consisting  of  a  few
hundred  families,  was  transformed  into  a  city.
Afterward  he  obtained  leave  to  remove  his  see  to
Indianapolis,  as  Vincennes  was  out  of  the  line  of
travel,  but  he  finally  determined  to  remain.  Mean-
while dissatisfaction  was  springing  up  around
him ;  he  was  accused  of  being  arbitrary,  and  of
not  allowing  his  vicar-general  and  his  other
officials  to  take  any  part  in  the  management  of  the
diocese.  In  1845  he  went  to  Rome,  laid  his  diffi-
culties before  the  pope,  and  offered  his  resignation ;
but  the  pope  refused  to  receive  it,  and  invested
De  la  Hailandiere  with  the  dignity  of  assistant  to
the  pontifical  throne,  and  he  hastened  back,  bring-
ing more  priests  and  students.  During  his  ab-
sence the  discontent  among  the  clergy  and  laity
had  taken  greater  proportions.  He  had,  they  said,
meddled  with  every  institution,  changed  priests
from  one  place  to  another,  and  created  such  a  feel-
ing of  general  uneasiness  that  no  one  knew  what
he  was  to  do  or  not  to  do.  The  bishop  acknowl-
edged that  there  was  some  reason  for  dissatisfac-
tion, and  asked  to  be  relieved,  and  this  time  his
resignation  was  accepted.  His  health  was  some-
what shattered,  and  he  wintered  in  New  Orleans,
and  later  went  to  New  York,  where,  after  making
arrangements  with  Bishop  Hughes  for  the  publica-
tion of  the  life  of  Brute,  he  sailed  for  France,  where
the  rest  of  his  life  was  spent.  His  remains  were
brought  to  the  United  States  in  1882  and  entombed
near  the  three  other  bishops  of  Vincennes.

LA  HONTAN,  de,  Armand  Louis  de  Delon-
darce,  Baron,  French  traveller,  b.  near  Mont  de
Marsan,  Gascony,  France,  about  1667 ;  d.  in  Han-
over in  1715. He  arrived  in  Canada,  probably  as


LAIDLEY


LAIRD


595


a  private  soldier,  in  1683  in  one  of  the  companies
of  marines  that  were  sent  by  Gov.  de  la  Barre
against  the  Iroquois,  and  was  afterward  with
Denonville's  expedition  against  the  Senecas,  being
stationed  successively  at  Chambly  and  at  Fort
Frontenac,  Fort  Niagara,  and  Fort  St.  Joseph's.
He  was  sent  to  Mackinaw  and  Sault  Ste.  Marie
with  a  detachment,  was  at  Green  Bay  the  year  fol-
lowing, and  claimed  to  have  explored  and  discov-
ered Long  river,  a  branch  of  the  Mississippi.  He
returned  to  Quebec,  and  went  to  France  in  1690,
but  came  back  the  following  year,  and  soon  after-
ward was  sent  by  Count  Frontenac  with  despatches
to  the  French  government  announcing  the  failure
of  Sir  William  Phipp's  expedition  against  Quebec.
The  vessel  on  which  he  sailed  put  into  Placentia,
Newfoundland,  and  he  rendered  such  valuable  ser-
vice in  defending  that  port  from  an  attack  by  the
English  that  he  received  a  command  as  king's  lieu-
tenant in  Newfoundland  and  Acadia.  In  1693,  be-
coming involved  in  difficulties  with  De  Brouillon,
the  governor  of  Newfoundland,  he  made  his  escape
to  Portugal,  and  thence  went  to  Spain,  Denmark,
and  England.  He  afterward  solicited  advancement
and  redress  from  the  French  court  in  vain. He

Eiiblished  "  Nouveaux  voyages  de  M.  le  baron  de
ahontan  dans  PArnerique  Septentrionale  "  (2  vols.,
the  Hague,  1703) ;  "  Dialogue  de  M.  le  baron  de
Lahontan  et  d'un  sauvage  dans  l'Amerique,  avec
les  voyages  du  meme  en  Portugal "  (Amsterdam,
1704) ;  and  "  Response  a  la  lettre  d'un  particulier
opposee  au  manifeste  de  S.  M.  le  roi  de  la  Grande
Bretagne  contre  la  Suede,"  published  after  his
death.  Truth  and  fiction  are  so  blended  in  his
works  thev  have  long  ceased  to  have  anv  authority.
LAIDLEY,  Theodore  Thaddeus'  Sobieski,
soldier,  b.  in  Guyandotte,  Va.,  14  April,  1822 :  d.
in  Palatka,  Fla.,  4  April,  1886.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1842,  and  was
appointed  2d  lieutenant  in  the  ordnance  corps.
From  1842  till  1846  he  served  as  assistant  in  vari-
ous arsenals,  and  then  in  the  war  with  Mexico,
where  he  participated  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,
battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and  the  siege  of  Pueblo.
Just  before  the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  Lieut.  Laid-
ley  and  Lieut.  Roswell  S.  Ripley  were  charged  with
the  placing  of  an  eight-inch  howitzer  on  the  sum-
mit of  a  hill  on  the  south  side  of  the  Rio  del  Plan
in  such  a  manner  as  to  enfilade  the  enemy's  line  of
batteries  from  the  right.  The  work  was  accom-
plished at  night,  over  an  almost  impracticable  route
that  was  obstructed  by  rocks  and  tropical  shrub-
bery. The  gun  was  placed,  and  in  the  morning  an
effective  fire  was  at  once  opened,  and  the  enemy
driven  out  of  his  works.  The  appearance  of  a  gun
of  such  calibre,  with  sufficient  supports,  in  such  a
plaoe,  discouraged  the  Mexicans,  and  their  forces
surrendered.  Laidley  received  the  brevets  of  cap-
tain and  major,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  returned
to  Watervliet  arsenal  as  assistant  ordnance  officer.
Subsequently  for  ten  years  he  was  engaged  on  ord-
nance duty  at  various  stations,  becoming  captain
in  July,  1856.  In  1858  he  was  assigned  the  duty
of  compiling  anew  ordnance  manual,  which  became
known  as  the  "  Ordnance  Manual  of  1861 "  and
remained  a  standard  for  many  years.  During  the
civil  svar  he  was  inspector  of  powder  in  1861-'2,  and
then  was  in  command  of  Frankford  arsenal  until
1864,  when  he  became  inspector  of  ordnance,  and
was  given  charge  of  the  Springfield  armory  until
1866.  Afterward  he  had  command  of  the  New
York  arsenal  on  Governor's  island,  and  later  of
that  at  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  becoming  colonel  in
April,  1875.  He  served  on  several  boards  for  mak-
ing scientific  tests  and  experiments,  and  was  presi-


dent of  the  commission  to  test  the  strength  and
value  of  all  kinds  of  iron,  steel,  and  other  metals
at  the  Watertown  arsenal  in  1875-'81.  Col.  Laidley
was  retired,  at  his  own  request,  in  December,  1882,
after  over  forty  years  of  active  service,  being  at  the
time  of  his  retirement  senior  colonel  in  the  ord-
nance department.  He  invented  several  valuable
appliances  that  are  now  used  in  the  department,
including  an  igniter,  a  laboratory  forge,  an  artil-
lery forge,  and  a  cavalry  forge.  Besides  important
government  reports,  he  was  the  author  of  "  Instruc-
tions in  Rifle  Practice  "  (Philadelphia,  1879).

LAIDLIE,  Archibald,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kelso.
Scotland,  4  Dec,  1727 ;  d.  in  Red  Hook,  N.  Y.,  14
Nov.,  1779.  He  was  graduated  at  Edinburgh  uni-
versity, and,  having  been  ordained  in  1759.  became
pastor  of  the  Scotch  church  in  Flushing,  Holland,
where  he  remained  four  years.  He  then  accepted
a  call  to  the  Collegiate  Dutch  Reformed  church  of
New  York,  and  preached  his  first  sermon  there,  15
April,  1764.  He  was  the  first  minister  that  was
called  to  preach  in  English  in  connection  with  the
Reformed  Dutch  church,  and  the  fact  of  his  assum-
ing the  pastorate  of  the  chief  congregation  of  this
body  practically  ended  the  long-continued  contro-
versy over  the  use  of  the  Dutch  language  in  their
churches.  Dr.  Laidlie  was  eminently  successful
as  a  preacher:  but  his  brief  ministry  was  inter-
rupted by  the  Revolutionary  war,  which  forced  him
to  retire  to  Red  Hook,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  D.
in  1770.  He  translated  the  Heidelberg  catechism
into  English  for  the  use  of  his  church  (1770).

LAIGHTON,  Albert,  poet.  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  8  Jan.,  1829 :  d.  there.  6  Feb.,  1887.  He  was
educated  at  private  schools  in  his  native  place,  and
was  for  much  of  his  life  connected  with  a  bank  in
that  town.  He  wrote  much  poetry  for  periodicals,
beginning  in  his  fifteenth  year,  and  published  two
volumes  of  his  collected  verses  (Boston,  1859  and
1878).  His  longest  poem,  "  Beauty,"  was  read  be-
fore the  literary  societies  of  Bowdoin  college  and
elsewhere  in  1858,  and  parts  of  it  are  included  in
his  published  volumes.  He  also  compiled,  with  A.
M.  Payson,  "  Poets  of  Portsmouth."  a  collection  of
poems  bv  natives  of  that  town,  with  a  preface  by
the  Rev."  Andrew  P.  Peabody,  D.  D.  (1865).

LAIRD,  Alexander,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Kilmalcolm,  Renfrewshire.  Scotland,  12  April,  1798;
d.  in  New  Glasgow,  Prince  Edward  island,  15
April,  1873.  He  went  to  Prince  Edward  island  in
1819,  represented  the  first  district  of  Queens  county
for  sixteen  years  in  the  provincial  parliament,  and
served  four  years  as  a  member  of  the  administra-
tion. In  1847  he  promoted  a  petition  on  behalf  of
constitutional  rule,  which  was  granted  in  1851.  He
was  well  known  as  a  scientific  farmer,  and  did
much  to  improve  the  character  of  agriculture  and
stock  in  Canada.— His  son.  David,  statesman,  b.
in  New  Glasgow.  Prince  Edward  island,  12  March,
1833,  was  educated  at  the  Presbyterian  theological
seminary  in  Truro,  Nova  Scotia,  and  established
the  Charlottetown  "  Patriot,"  of  which  he  is  now
(1887)  the  editor.  Like  his  father,  Mr.  Laird  was
an  ardent  Liberal,  but  he  was  for  a  time  at  variance
with  the  leaders  of  his  party  in  consequence  of  their
desire  to  exclude  the  Bible  from  the  public  schools.
He  was  at  first  opposed  to  confederation,  but  when
more  favorable  terms  had  been  granted  to  Prince
Edward  island  he  gave  in  his  adhesion  to  the
scheme.  He  represented  Belfast  in  the  assembly
of  his  native  province  from  1871  until  the  province
entered  the  Dominion  in  1873,  when  he  was  elected
to  the  Dominion  parliament.  He  was  re-elected  by
acclamation  on  his  being  appointed  to  office,  and


596


LAJOIE


LALLEMAND


again  in  1874.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate
in  1882,  and  again  in  February,  1887.  Mr.  Laird
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  Prince
Edward  island  from  November,  1872,  till  April,
1873,  and  while  acting  in  this  capacity  was  a  mem-
ber of  a  delegation  that  was  sent  to  Ottawa  to  ne-
gotiate terms  of  union  with  the  Dominion  govern-
ment. He  became  a  member  of  the  privy  council
and  was  minister  of  the  interior  from  7  Nov.,  1873,
till  1876,  when  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  the  Northwest  territories,  and  held  this
post  for  five  years.  In  1874  he  was  a  commissioner
to  treat  with  Indian  tribes  in  the  northwest,  and
concluded  a  treaty  at  Qu'Appelle  lakes  by  which
they  surrendered  to  the  government  about  75,500
square  miles,  through  the  northern  part  of  which
the  Canada  Pacific  railway  now  passes.

LAJOIE,  Antoine  Gerin  (lah-zhwah'),  Cana-
dian author,  b.  in  Yamachiche,  Lower  Canada,  in
August,  1824;  d.  there  in  December,  1879.  He
was  educated  at  Nicolet,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1848.  He  was  one  of  the  or-
ganizers of  the  Institut  Canadien,  of  which  he  was
several  times  president,  edited  "La  Minerva"  in
Montreal  for  several  years,  and  wrote  also  for  other
periodicals.  In  1852  Mr.  Lajoie  became  connected
with  the  French  translator's  office  of  the  legislative
assembly,  and  he  remained  there  until  1857,  when
he  was  transferred  to  the  parliamentary  library.
He  wrote  "  Le  Jeune  la  Tour,"  a  tragedy  in  three
acts,  in  verse,  which  has  been  reprinted  several
times ;  also  poetry  and  songs,  and  a  pamphlet,
"  Catechisme  politique,"  giving  an  account  of  the
provincial  system  of  government.

LA  JONQUIERE,  Jacques  Pierre  de  Taffa-
nel,  Marquis  de  (lah-zhong'-kyair),  governor  of
Canada,  b.  in  the  Chateau  of  La  Jonquiere,  Lan-
guedoc,  about  1686;  d.  in  Quebec,  17  May,  1752.
He  served  in  the  war  of  the  succession  against  the
Protestants  in  France,  and  in  the  defence  of  Tou-
lon against  the  Savoyards.  When  Duguay  Trouin
went  to  Rio  Janeiro  he  accompanied  him,  fought
against  Admiral  Matthews  in  1744,  and  attained
the  rank  of  admiral  in  the  service.  He  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  Canada  in  1749,  retaining  the
office  till  his  death.  His  administration  of  the  gov-
ernment was  marked  by  great  firmness,  but  stained
by  great  corruption  of  public  officials,  and  by  con-
tinual quarrels  with  the  Jesuits  on  the  subject  of
the  sale  of  liquors  to  the  Indians.  His  reputation
was  tarnished  by  avarice,  which  led  him,  though
possessed  of  millions,  to  deny  himself  the  neces-
saries of  life  even  in  his  last  days.

LAKANAL,  Joseph,  French  educator,  b.  in
Serres,  France.  14  July,  1762 ;  d.  in  Paris,  14  Feb.,
1845.  He  studied  theology,  and  became  a  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  at  Bourges,  and  of  philosophy  at
Moulins.  He  was  a  member  of  the  National  con-
vention in  1792-'5,  and  was  noticeable  there  for
his  solicitude  in  protecting  the  interests  of  litera-
ture, arts,  and  the  sciences.  Prof.  Lakanal  entered
the  Council  of  five  hundred  in  1795.  He  was  pro-
fessor at  the  Lycee  Charlemagne  under  the  consu-
late and  empire,  but  was  compelled  to  leave  the
country  at  the  restoration  in  1814,  and  came  to
the  United  States.  He  was  welcomed  by  Thomas
Jefferson,  and  congress  gave  him  a  grant  of  500
acres  of  cotton-land  in  Alabama.  He  then  became
a  planter,  and  was  afterward  chosen  president  of
the  University  of  Louisiana.  He  returned  to
France  after  the  revolution  of  1830,  and  was  re-
elected to  the  Academy  of  sciences  in  1834.

LAKE,  Gerard,  Viscount,  British  soldier,  b.  in
England,  27  July,  1744;  d.  in  Plymouth,  20  Feb.,
1808. He  entered  the  army  in  1758  as  an  ensign


in  the  foot-guards,  and  served  in  Germany  during
the  Seven  Years'  war.  In  1781  he  was  a  lieutenant-
colonel  under  Cornwallis  in  this  country,  and
conducted  a  successful  sortie  at  the  siege  of  York-
town.  He  served  under  the  Duke  of  York  in  Hol-
land in  1793-'4.  and  attained  the  rank  of  general.
He  was  commander-in-chief  in  Ireland  in  1797-'8,
and  in  India  in  1800,  conducting  the  Mahratta
war  with  brilliant  success.  He  returned  to  Eng-
land in  1807.  and  was  created  a  viscount.

LA  LANDELLE,  Guillaume  Joseph  Gabriel
de  (lah'-lan'-del'),  French  author,  b.  in  Montpelier,
5  March,  1812.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1828,  and
for  twelve  years  was  attached  to  the  station  of
South  America.  He  resigned  in  1839,  after  he  had
reached  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  and  has  since  de-
voted his  time  to  literature.  His  novels,  tales  of
adventure,  and  descriptions  of  South  America  are
well  known  in  that  country,  particularly  in  Chili
and  in  the  Argentine  Republic,  where  they  have
been  translated  into  Spanish.  Among  his  numer-
ous publications  those  that  have  the  widest  circu-
lation in  South  America  are  "  Une  haine  a  bord"
(Paris,  1845) ;  "  La  Couronne  navale."  a  cyclopaedia
of  famous  adventurers  in  the  South  sea  (9  vols.,
1848);  "Les  princes  d'Ebene "  (10  vols.,  1852);
"  Nathan  le  Rouge  "  (8  vols.,  1855) ;  "  Le  dernier
des  filibustiers "  (5  vols.,  1857);  "Le  premier  tour
du  monde "  (1876) ;  and  "  Deux  croisieres  dans
l'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (1877).

LALEMANT,  Jerome,  French  missionary,  b.
in  Paris  in  1593;  d.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  26  Jan.,
1673.  He  belonged  to  the  Jesuit  order,  and  was
sent  in  1638  to  Canada,  where  he  labored  among  the
Hurons  till  1645,  and  was  superior  of  the  missions
from  1644  till  1650.  In  1647  he  was  also  appointed
vicar-general  of  all  the  French  possessions.  In
1650  he  went  to  France  to  consult  the  directors  of
the  Canada  company  on  the  best  means  of  pro-
viding for  the  Hurons  that  had  fled  to  Quebec
from  the  Iroquois.  The  company  paid  no  atten-
tion to  his  suggestions,  and  he  returned  to  Canada  in
1651,  but  went  to  France  again  in  1656.  In  1659
the  Jesuit  general  sent  him  to  Canada  at  the  re-
quest, of  Bishop  Laval,  and  on  his  arrival  he  was
appointed  a  second  time  superior-general  of  the
missions  in  that  country.  He  devoted  himself
earnestly  to  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and
sent  missionaries  to  many  tribes  that  had  recently
been  discovered  on  the  north  and  west  of  Lake
Huron.  He  was  superior-general  till  1665. — His
nephew,  Gabriel,  French  missionary,  b.  in  Paris,
31  Oct.,  1610;  d.  near  Lake  Huron,  17  March,
1649,  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus,  24  March,  1630,
and  followed  his  uncle  to  Canada  in  1646,  arriving
in  Quebec  on  20  Sept.  He  was  on  the  Huron
mission  from  6  Aug.,  1648vup  to  his  death,  and  was
with  Jean  de  Brebeuf  (q.  v.)  in  the  Huron  village
of  St.  Louis  when  it  was  attacked  by  the  Iroquois,
16  March,  1649.  He  was  urged  to  fly,  but  implored
his  superior  for  leave  to  stay  with  him.  and  ob-
tained it.  After  the  capture  of  the  village  the
Iroquois  put  the  missionaries  to  death.

LALLEMAND,  Charles  Francois  Antoine,
Baron,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Metz,  23  June,  1774;
d.  in  Paris,  9  March,  1839.  He  entered  the  army
in  1792,  served  in  the  different  campaigns  under
Napoleon,  became  a  brigadier-general  and  baron
in  1811,  and  was  made  a  lieutenant-general  and  a
member  of  the  Chamber  of  peers  on  Napoleon's
return  from  Elba.  He  was  with  the  emperor
during  the  Waterloo  campaign,  commanded  a
division  at  that  battle,  and  was  sent  by  Napoleon
as  a  commissioner  to  negotiate  for  his  surrender
to  Capt.  Maitland,  of  the  British  navy. He  re-


LALOR


LAMAR


597


ested  to  be  sent  to  join  Napoleon  at  St.  Helena,
iut  instead  was  arrested  and  imprisoned  at  Malta.
He  afterward  came  to  the  United  States,  and  with
his  brother,  Baron  Henry,  planned  a  colony  in  Ala-
bama as  an  asylum  for  European  political  exiles;
but,  it  proving  a  failure,  they  located  a  "champ
d'asile"  on  Trinity  river  in  Texas,  which  then
belonged  to  Mexico.  In  1817  he  assembled  150
lonists  at  this  place,  but  was  driven  out  of
exas  by  the  Mexican  authorities,  and  then  re-
rned  to  the  former  project  of  a  colony  in  Alabama,
ided  by  bountiful  subscriptions  from  Paris,  lands
ere  again  obtained,  and  the  colony  of  Marengo
as  founded  on  the  banks  of  Tombigbee  river,
"lemand.  however,  took  no  part  in  the  Marengo
scheme,  and,  after  originating  many  wild  projects,
he  settled  in  Louisiana  in  1818.  While  there  he
began  a  correspondence  with  Napoleon,  whom  he
proposed  to  liberate  from  St.  Helena.  The  ex-em-
peror, on  his  death  in  1821,  bequeathed  100,000
francs  to  Lallemand ;  but  the  French  government
opposed  his  receiving  the  money  in  consequence
of  his  having  been  condemned  to  death  during  his
absence  from  France.  He  fought  in  the  Spanish  war
in  1823,  went  afterward  to  Brussels,  and  entered
France  without  molestation.  He  then  returned  to
the  United  States  and  established  a  successful
school  in  New  York.  He  returned  to  Paris  in
1830,  was  restored  to  his  military  and  political
honors  under  Louis  Philippe  in  1832,  took  his  seat
in  the  house  of  peers,  and  was  for  two  years  mili-
tary commander  in  Corsica. — His  brother.  Henri
Dominique,  French  soldier,  b.  in  France  in  1777;
d.  in  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  15  Sept.,  1823,  served
with  distinction  under  Napoleon,  who  made  him  a
general  of  division  in  the  "  hundred  days,"  and
fought  at  Waterloo.  In  1815  he  came  to  the  United
States,  married  a  niece  of  Stephen  Girard,  and
settled  at  Bordentown.  N.  J.  He  is  the  author  of
"A  Treatise  on  Artillery  "  (New  York,  1820).

LALOR,  Teresa,  mother  superior,  b.  in  Queens
county,  Ireland,  in  1766;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,
in  1846.  She  came  with  her  parents  to  the  United
States  in  1797,  and  settled  in  Philadelphia.  She
had  desired  to  enter  the  religious  state  before  leav-
ing Ireland,  and  she  now  explained  her  wishes  to
Father  Leonard  Neale,  who  was  anxious  to  found
a  religious  community  in  Philadelphia.  Under
his  direction  she  joined  two  other  young  women,
and  opened  a  house  for  the  education  of  girls.  No
sooner  was  the  new  institution  in  working  order
than  the  yellow  fever  broke  out  in  Philadelphia.
She  was  urged  to  fly,  but  remained  at  her  post
and  saw  her  two  companions  carried  off  by  the
pestilence.  Meanwhile  Father  Neale  had  been  ap-
pointed president  of  Georgetown  college,  and  in
1799  he  invited  Miss  Lalor  to  open  a  school  in
that  town.  This  school  was  the  beginning  of  what
is  to-day  the  oldest  Roman  Catholic  female  acade-
my within  the  limits  of  the  thirteen  original  states.
In  1805  Bishop  Neale  purchased  the  Convent  of
the  Poor  Clares,  who  had  gone  to  Europe,  and  in-
stalled in  it  the  Pious  Ladies  (now  the  Visitation
nuns).  The  property  was  transferred  to  Miss  Lalor
in  1808,  and  shortly  afterward  the  new  community
was  erected  into  a  Convent  of  the  Visitation  by
the  pope,  and  Miss  Lalor  became  first  superior,
under  the  title  of  Mother  Teresa.  She  lived  to  see
five  convents  of  her  order  established  in  different
parts  of  the  United  States.

LA  LOUTRE,  Louis  Joseph  de,  French  ad-
venturer, b.  in  France  about  1690 ;  d.  there  about
1770.  He  was  a  priest  in  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  and  in  1737  was  sent  by  the  French  foreign
missionary  society  to  Nova  Scotia,  settling  near


Messagouche  (now  Fort  Lawrence).  He  headed
the  Acadians  and  Micmacs  in  an  attack  on  An-
napolis in  1744,  and  so  incensed  the  English  by  his
revolutionary  measures  that  in  1745  thev  offered  a
reward  for  his  capture.  He  subsequently  revisited
France,  was  intrusted  with  a  large  sum  of  money
for  the  improvement  of  his  mission,  and  was  ap-
pointed vicar-general  of  Acadia.  But,  after  ruin-
ing the  neutral  French  by  his  unwise  counsels,  he
abandoned  them  in  the  hour  of  their  distress,  fled
in  disguise  before  the  surrender  of  Fort  Beau-
sejour,  and,  arriving  in  Quebec,  was  bitterly  re-
proached for  his  faithlessness  by  his  bishop.  He
embarked  for  France  in  1751,  and,  falling  into
British  hands  on  the  passage,  was  imprisoned  for
eight  years  in  the  island  of  Jersey.

LA  MADRID,  Gregorio  Araos  de  (lah-mah-
drid'),  Argentine  soldier,  b.  in  Tucuman  in  1796;
d.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  15  Oct.,  1870.  When  he  was
fourteen  years  old  he  entered  the  Argentine  army,
and  on  24  Oct.,  1813,  became  a  lieutenant  of  dra-
goons. On  28  Nov.,  1815,  as  a  major,  he  did  good
service  in  the  battle  of  Sipe-Sipe,  and  in  1816-'17
he  took  part  in  numerous  battles  in  the  campaign
of  Alto  Peru.  During  the  civil  war  of  1820-'l  he
fought  against  the  Federals,  in  1822  was  promoted
general,  and  on  25  Nov.,  1825,  took  possession  of
the  government  of  Tucuman.  On  27  Oct.,  1826,
in  command  of  the  forces  of  the  provinces  of  Tu-
cuman and  Catamarca,  he  fought  a  battle  against
the  Federal  governor  of  La  Rioja,  and  when  the
victory  had  almost  been  won  by  his  troops  he  was
wounded  and  left  for  dead  on  the  field.  On  5
Dec.  of  the  same  year  he  again  took  possession  of
the  government  of  Tucuman,  and  continued  the
war  against  the  Federals.  In  June,  1830,  he  was
appointed  governor  of  the  provinces  of  La  Rioja
and  San  Juan,  and  in  1831  he  obtained  the  same
place  in  the  province  of  Cordova.  On  4  Nov.,
1831,  he  was  defeated  by  Gen.  Quiroga  in  the  battle
of  Ciudadela.  On  7  April,  1840,  La  Madrid  headed
in  Tucuman  a  revolution,  called  the  "  Coalicion
del  Norte,"  against  the  government  of  Rosas,  but
met  with  many  reverses  during  that  year.  On  5
Sept.,  1841.  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the
province  of  Mendoza.  and  on  24  Sept.  he  was  de-
feated by  the  Federal  general,  Pacheco,  in  the  bat-
tle of  Rodeo  del  Medio,  near  Mendoza,  and  took
refuge  in  Chili.  Two  years  afterward  he  returned
to  the  Argentine  Republic,  took  part  in  the  cam-
paign against  Rosas,  and  later  was  senator  in
several  legislatures.  La  Madrid  was  a  poet  of
some  merit,  and  his  troops  often  sang  his  verses  as
they  were  going  into  battle.

LAMAR,  Gazaway  B.,  banker,  b.  in  Georgia  in
1798;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  Oct.,  1874.  He  was
engaged  in  business  for  many  years  in  Savannah,
and  was  at  one  time  a  large  slave-holder.  In  1845
he  removed  to  Brooklyn,  was  successful  in  busi-
ness, and  for  several  years  president  of  the  Bank
of  the  Republic,  New  York.  In  anticipation  of
the  civil  war  in  the  winter  of  1860-'l,  he  shipped
large  quantities  of  arms  to  Georgia.  He  also  acted
as  financial  agent  of  the  Confederacy,  and  in  that
capacity  procured  the  printing  of  its  notes  and
bonds  in  New  York.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of
the  war  he  went  to  Georgia,  and  was  largely  con-
cerned in  cotton-speculations  and  blockade-run-
ning. After  the  occupation  of  Savannah  he  was
arrested  by  order  of  the  secretary  of  war  and  con-
fined in  the  old  capital  prison  at  Washington.  A
few  months  after  his  release  he  was  tried  by  a
military  commission  for  attempted  bribery  of  gov-
ernment officers,  and  was  sentenced  to  several
years'  imprisonment  and  a  large  fine,  but  the  sen-


598


LAMAR


LAMAR


tence  was  remitted  by  President  Johnson.  This
prosecution  led  to  counter-suits  by  him  against
the  government  in  the  New  York  district.

LAMAR,  Jos6  (lah-mar'),  South  American  sol-
dier, b.  in  Guayaquil,  Ecuador,  in  1778 ;  d.  in  San
Jose  de  Costa  Rica  in  1830.  When  young  he  went
to  Madrid,  and,  entering  the  Spanish  army  as  a
cadet,  fought  in  the  war  against  Prance  in  1794.
At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  independence  in
Spain  he  was  a  lieutenant-colonel,  and  was  severely
wounded  at  the  defence  of  the  fort  San  Jose  de
Zaragoza.  After  recovering  he  commanded  4,000
men  at  Valencia,  and  on  9  Jan.,  1813,  was  taken
prisoner  and  sent  to  Dijon,  but  escaped  and  re-
turned to  Spain  in  June,  1814.  Soon  afterward
Ferdinand  VII.  appointed  him  a  general  and  sent
him  in  1815  to  Peru,  where  he  joined  the  Independ-
ents. He  assisted  in  all  the  campaigns  and  took
part  in  the  final  victory  of  Ayacucho.  In  1827  he
was  appointed  grand  marshal  of  Peru,  took  posses-
sion of  the  presidency,  and  in  1828  declared  war
against  Colombia.  Being  defeated  in  Tarqui,  27
Feb.,  1829,  he  was  deposed  on  3  June  of  the  same
year  by  the  vice-president,  Gutierrez  de  la  Fuente,
and  his  army  scattered  by  Gen.  Agustin  Gamarra,
who  exiled  him.  Lamar  arrived  at  Punta  Arenas,
24  June,  1829,  and  then  went  to  San  Jose  de  Costa
Rica,  where  he  died.  His  remains  were,  by  order
of  congress,  transported  to  Lima  in  1845.

LAMAR,  Lucius  (}n  i  nl  us  Cincinnatus,  jurist,
b.  near  Eatonton,  Ga.,  15  July,  1797;  d.  in  Mil-
ledgeville,  Ga.,  4  July,  1834.  He  was  of  Huguenot
descent.  An  eccentric  brother  of  his  mother
claimed  the  naming  of  her  children,  and  called
them  after  his  favorite  historical  heroes.  Lucius
studied  law  at  Milledgeville  and  in  the  law-school
at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  was  admitted  to  the  Georgia
bar  in  1819,  practising  in  Milledgeville.  He  revised
Augustine  S.  Clayton's  "Georgia  Justice"  about
1819,  and  was  commissioned  by  the  legislature  to
compile  "  The  Laws  of  Georgia  from  1810  to  1819  "
(Augusta,  1821).  In  1830  he  was  elected  to  succeed
Thomas  W.  Cobb  as  judge  of  the  superior  court.
He  was  esteemed  throughout  the  state  as  a  learned
jurist,  an  eloquent  speaker,  and  a  man  of  fine  per-
sonal qualities.  A  year  or  two  before  his  death  he
had  a  severe  attack  of  dyspepsia,  with  high  cere-
bral fever,  from  which  he  never  entirely  recov-
ered, and  in  a  moment  of  delirium  he  died  by
his  own  hand. — His  son,  Lucius  Quintus  Cin-
cinnatus,  statesman,  b.  in  Putnam  county,  Ga.,

1  Sept.,  1825,  was
taken  after  his  fa-
ther's death  to  Ox-
ford, Miss.,  where
he  received  part  of
his  education.  He
was  graduated  at
Emory  college,  Ga.,
in  1845,  studied
law  in  Macon,  Ga.,
and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1847.
In  1849  he  returned
to  Oxford,  Miss.,
and  held  the  place
of  adjunct  profes-
sor of  mathematics
in  the  University
of  Mississippi  for  a
year,  when  he  re-
signed, and  resumed  the  practice  of  the  law  in  Cov-
ington, Ga.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1853,  and  in  1854  again  returned  to  Mississippi  and
settled  on  his  plantation  in  Lafayette. Lamar  was


shortly  afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
and  served  from  1857  till  1860,  when  he  resigned
to  take  a  seat  in  the  Secession  convention  of  his
state.  He  then  entered  the  Confederate  army
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  19th  Mississippi  regi-
ment, of  which  he  afterward  became  colonel.  Ho
shared  in  many  of  the  engagements  of  the  Army
of  Northern  Virginia,  but  was  compelled  to  leave
active  service  on  account  of  his  health,  and  was
sent  as  commissioner  to  Russia ;  but  when  he  reached
Europe,  in  1863,  circumstances  had  changed,  and  a
successful  mission  was  no  longer  possible.  After
the  close  of  the  war  Col.  Lamar  returned  to  Mis-
sissippi. He  was  elected  professor  of  political
economy  and  social  science  in  the  University  of
Mississippi  in  1866,  and  in  1867  was  transferred  to
the  chair  of  law,  but  afterward  returned  again  to
the  bar.  He  was  elected  again  to  congress  in  1872,
when  for  the  first  time  in  many  years  a  Democratic
house  of  representatives  assembled,  and  he  was
selected  to  preside  over  the  Democratic  caucus,
where  he  made  a  noteworthy  address,  outlining  the
policy  of  his  party.  He  was  re-elected  in  1874,
and  then  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  taking  his
seat,  5  March,  1877.  In  both  the  house  and  senate
Col.  Lamar  spoke  rarely,  and  not  often  at  great
length,  but  when  he  did  it  was  usually  on  critical
occasions,  and  with  much  power  and  effectiveness.
He  has  insisted  that,  as  integral  members  of  the
Federal  Union,  the  southern  states  have  equal
rights  with  the  other  states,  and  hence  that  they
were  bound  both  by  duty  and  interest  to  look  to
the  general  welfare,  and  support  the  honor  and
credit  of  a  common  country.  He  was  also  a  zeal-
ous friend  of  public  improvements,  especially  the
Mississippi  river  improvement  and  the  Texas  Pa-
cific railroad.  He  has  great  independence  of
thought  and  action,  and  at  one  time,  when  he  was
instructed  by  the  legislature  of  his  state  to  vote  on
the  currency  question  against  his  convictions,  he
refused  to  obey,  appealed  to  the  people,  and  was
sustained.  On  5  March,  1885,  Mr.  Lamar  became
secretary  of  the  interior  in  President  Cleveland's
cabinet.  His  course  since  has  been  consistent  with
his  previous  career. — The  elder  Lucius  Quintus
Cincinnatus's  brother,  Mirabeau  Buonaparte,
president  of  Texas,  b.  in  Louisville,  Ga.,  16  Aug.,
1798;  d.  in  Richmond,  Tex.,  19  Dec,  1859,  was
engaged  in  agricultural  and  mercantile  pursuits
until  1828,  when  he  established  the  Columbus
"Independent,"  a  state-rights  journal,  and  en-
gaged in  politics.  His  second  wife  was  a  daughter
of  the  Rev.  John  N.  Maffitt  (q.  v.).  In  1835  he
emigrated  to  Texas,  and  in  the  movement  for  in-
dependence was  an  active  member  of  the  revolu-
tionary party.  At  San  Jacinto  he  commanded  a
company  of  horse,  leading  a  charge  that  broko
the  Mexican  line,  and  decided  the  issue  of  the
combat.  He  was  commissioned  as  major-general,
appointed  attorney-general  in  the  cabinet  of  Gov.
Henry  Smith,  afterward  made  secretary  of  war,
and  in  1836  elected  the  first  vice-president  of  the
republic.  In  1838  he  was  chosen  president,  which
office  he  held  till  1841.  During  his  term  of  office
the  independence  of  Texas  was  recognized  by  the
principal  powers  of  Europe.  At  the  beginning
of  hostilities  between  the  United  States  and  Mexi-
co in  1846  he  joined  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor's  army
at  Matamoras,  took  an  active  part  in  the  battle
of  Monterey,  and  was  appointed  division-inspector,
with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In  October,
1846,  he  took  the  command  of  an  independent
company  of  Texan  rangers,  and  stationed  him-
self at  Laredo,  where  he  was  for  two  years  en-
gaged in  checking  the  inroads  of  the  Comanches.


LA  MARDELLE


LAMB


599


In  July,  1857,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister
to  the  Argentine  Republic,  but  did  not  go  to  his
post,  and  on  23  Dec,  1857,  was  commissioned  min-
ister, and  on  20  Jan.,  1858,  minister  resident,  to
Nicaragua  and  Costa  Rica,  from  which  posts  he  re-
tired in  May,  1859.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Verse
Memorials "  (New  York,  1857).

LA  MARDELLE,  Guillanme  Francois  de
(lah'-mar'-del),  West  Indian  jurist,  b.  in  the  city  of
Santo  Domingo  in  1732;  d.  in  Tours,  France,  19
Jan.,  1813.  He  studied  law,  and,  while  filling  the
office  of  attorney-general  of  the  superior  court  at
Port  au  Prince,  made  a  special  study  of  slavery
and  the  administration  of  justice  in  the  colony,
aiming  to  better  the  condition  of  the  slaves  and  to
improve  the  proceedings  of  the  courts.  While  he
was  in  France  for  his  health  he  presented  to  Mar-
shal Castries  a  memoir  on  these  subjects,  which
was  approved  by  the  government,  and  its  author
rewarded  with  a  seat  in  the  council  of  state.  In
1786  he  returned  to  his  native  country,  where  he
carried  out  his  ideas,  though  they  met  strong  op-
position. He  published  "Eloge  du  Comte  d'En-
nery,"  with  an  appendix  on  the  administration  of
justice  in  the  colony,  the  first  work  of  the  kind
which  appeared  in  the  colonies  (Paris  and  Port  au
Prince,  1789).  When  the  revolution  began  in
Hayti  he  went  to  France,  taking  up  his  residence
at  Tours,  where  he  published  "  Reforme  judiciaire
en  France"  (Paris,  1806)  and  philosophical  and
metaphysical  works.

LAMARE-PICQUOT,  N.,  French  naturalist,  b.
in  Bayeux,  France,  about  1785 ;  d.  after  1835.  He
established  a  pharmacy  in  Mauritius,  but  afterward
returned  to  Paris,  and  subsequently  travelled  to
the  East  Indies,  where  he  made  natural  history
collections  that  were  bought  for  the  British  mu-
seum. In  1841  he  travelled  in  North  America,
and  returned  to  Paris  with  numerous  specimens.
including  a  plant  that  he  proposed  to  introduce
in  France.  It  was  called  by  the  Indians  "  tipsina,"
and  by  botanists  "  Psoralea  esculenta,"  and  has
taken  the  name  of  Picquotiane,  after  its  importer.
It  had  been  known  to  botanists.  Pursh,  who  first
described  it  about  1815,  called  it  the  famous  bread-
root  of  the  northwestern  Indians,  and  a  favorite
name  with  the  French  voyagers  was  pomme  de
prairie.  A  disease  was  prevailing  at  this  time  in
the  potato,  and  Picquot  proposed  the  root  of  this
plant  as  a  substitute.  In  1847  Mr.  Lamare-Picquot
received  from  the  minister  of  commerce  7,000  francs
and  the  order  to  search  in  North  America  for  nu-
tritious plants.  He  arrived  in  New  York  on  24
Jan.,  and  went  to  the  west,  traversing  Indiana,
Illinois,  Michigan,  Wisconsin,  and  the  northern  part
of  the  Mississippi.  He  returned  to  Havre  in  1848,
with  the  plants  "  psoralea  "  and  "  apios,"  the  latter
of  which  had  been  already  cultivated  in  Europe.

LAMAS,  Andr6s,  South  American  historian,  b.
in  Montevideo,  Uruguay,  30  Nov.,  1817.  He  received
his  education  in  his  native  city,  and  at  an  early
age  attained  note  in  literature  and  politics,  found-
ing the  Historical  institute  of  Montevideo  and  fill-
ing several  important  offices.  During  a  part  of
the  nine  years'  siege  he  was  prefect  of  Montevideo,
was  subsequently  minister  of  finance,  and  several
times  plenipotentiary  to  Brazil  and  Buenos  Ayres.
He  has  made  large  collections  of  South  American
historical  material,  and  his  private  collections  of
manuscript  are  the  most  important  that  exist  on
this  subject.  He  has  published  "  Apuntes  histori-
cos  sobre  las  agresiones  del  dictador  Argentino  D.
Juan-Manuel  Rosas,  contra  la  independencia  de  la
Repiiblica  Oriental  del  Uruguay"  (Montevideo,
1849); "Notice  sur  la  Republique  orientale  de


l'Uruguay  "  (Paris,  1851) ;  "  Colleccao  de  memorias
e  doeumentos,"  relating  to  Rio  de  la  Plata  (Rio
Janeiro,  1855) ;  and  poems  and  historical  treatises.

LAMB,  Edward,  actor,  b.  in  New  York  city,  18
Oct.,  1828;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y,  5  July,  1887.
He  entered  his  profession  as  utility-man  in  the
Chatham  street  theatre  in  1852,  and  subsequently
played  in  the  Bowery  and  other  theatres  in  New
York  and  Brooklyn.  From  1856  till  1859  he  ap-
peared in  low  comedy  parts  in  Richmond,  Wash-
ington, Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  Boston,  and  Mon-
treal, and  in  1880  went  witli  Edward  A.  Sothern
to  San  Francisco,  appearing  as  Asa  Trenchard  in
"Our  American  Cousin."  He  played  his  most
successful  engagement  at  the  old  Park  theatre  in
Brooklyn,  of  which  he  was  lessee  and  manager.

LAMB,  Isaac  Wixan,  inventor,  b.  in  Salem,
Mich..  8  Jan..  1840.  He  is  the  son  of  Rev.  Aro-
swell  Lamb,  a  pioneer  clergyman.  From  an  early
age  the  son  manifested  a  taste  for  mechanical
labor,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve  began  with  his
brother  to  make  whip-lashes  by  hand  for  the  neigh-
bors, after  which  they  constructed  a  machine  that
would  braid  four  strands.  He  afterward  devised  a
machine  that  would  braid  any  number  of  strands,
for  which  he  obtained  a  patent  on  28  June,  1859.
He  next  began  to  experiment  on  a  family  knitting-
machine  that  could  knit  either  flat  or  tubular
work,  and  that  could  widen  or  narrow.  In  this  he
was  finally  successful,  and  obtained  a  patent  on  15
Sept.,  1863.  After  unsuccessful  attempts  to  manu-
facture the  machines,  which  failed  on  account  of
the  incompetency  of  the  workmen,  the  Lamb  knit-
ting-machine manufacturing  company  was  organ-
ized in  Springfield,  Mass.,  in  1865,  and  another
company  under  the  same  name  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
in  the  same  year.  These  companies  were  consoli-
dated in  1867  and  their  manufactory  removed  to
Chiopee  Falls.  Mass.  Mr.  Lamb's  machine  pro-
duces more  than  thirty  kinds  of  knitted  goods,
making  about  4,000  loops  a  minute  at  ordinary
speed.  The  invention  is  patented  in  Great  Britain,
France,  and  Belgium,  and  a  large  manufactory
has  been  erected  in  Switzerland.  The  machine  has
received  a  great  number  of  medals  and  diplomas
at  different  fairs  in  the  United  States,  and  a  silver
medal  at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867.  Mr.  Lamb
sold  his  interest  in  the  Lamb  knitting-machine
manufacturing  company,  and  is  now  secretary  and
treasurer  of  the  Lamb  knitting  company  of  Con-
cord. Mich.  He  was  ordained  by  a  Baptist  coun-
cil in  1869,  and  since  then  has  engaged  in  preach-
ing in  Michigan. — His  brother,  Martin  Thomas,
is  a  Baptist  missionary  in  Utah.

LAMB,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,  1
Jan.,  1735  ;  d.  there,  31  May,  1800.  He  assisted  his
father  in  the  business  of  "optician  and  maker  of
mathematical  instruments,  and  in  1760  engaged  in
the  liquor-trade.  He  was  active  in  all  the  early
scenes  of  the  Revolution  in  New  York,  and  took
an  active  part  in  Montgomery's  expedition  to  Que-
bec, where  he  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.
He  returned  to  New  York  in  the  following  sum-
mer, was  promoted  to  major  and  colonel  of  artil-
lery under  Gen.  Knox,  and  rendered  good  service
throughout  the  war.  He  was  subsequently  elected
to  the  New  York  legislature,  and  was  appointed  by
Washington  collector  of  customs  for  the  port  of
New  York,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death.  See
his  life  bv  Isaac  Q.  Leake  ^Albany,  1850).

LAMB,  Martha  Joanna  Reade  Nash,  histo-
rian, b.  in  Plainfield,  Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1829.  She
is  a  daughter  of  Arvin  Nash  and  Lucinda  Vinton,
and  granddaughter  of  Jacob  Nash  and  Joanna
Reade. She  was  educated  in  all  the  higher  Eng-


600


LAMB


LAMBERT


glstvtsC-


lish  branches  and  the  languages,  and  married
Charles  A,  Lamb,  of  Ohio,  in  1852.  She  resided
eight  years  in  Chicago,  was  there  a  founder  of  the
Home'  for  the  friendless  and  Half-orphan  asylum,
and  secretary  of  the
first  sanitary  fair  in
1863,  the  success  of
which  was  largely
due  to  her.  Since
1866  she  has  resided
in  New  York  city,  de-
voting her  time  to
literature.  Her  dis-
tinguishing work  is
the  "History  of  the
City  of  New  York  "(2
vols.,  8vo,  1877-81),
besides  which  she  has
written  eight  books
for  children  (1869-
'70) ;  "  Spicy,"  a  nov-
el (1873) ;  about  fifty
shorter  stories ;  "  The
Homes  of  America"
(1879) ;  "  Memorial  of  Dr.  J.  D.  Russ,"  "  The  Christ-
mas Owl "  (1881) :  "  The  Christmas  Basket,"  "  Snow
and  Sunshine"  (1882);  "Wall  Street  in  History,"
"  Historical  Sketch  of  New  York  for  the  Tenth  Cen-
sus "  (1883) ;  and  more  than  100  historical  and  other
papers  in  magazines.  In  May,  1883,  she  became
editor  of  the  "  Magazine  of  American  History,"
which  post  she  still  (1887)  holds.  Mrs.  Lamb  has
been  elected  to  membership  in  fifteen  historical
and  learned  societies  in  this  country  and  Europe.

LAMB,  Roger,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  17  Jan.,  1756 ;  d.  in  May,  1830.  He  served
as  a  sergeant  in  the  Royal  Welsh  fusiliers  through-
out the  Burgoyne  campaign,  and  afterward  in  the
Southern  department  under  Sir  Henry  Clinton  and
Cornwallis,  carried  the  regimental  colors  at  the
battle  of  Camden,  and  after  that  action,  having  a
little  medical  knowledge,  was  appointed  temporary
surgeon  to  his  regiment.  At  the  battle  of  Guilford
Court-House  he  saved  Lord  Cornwallis  from  cap-
ture. During  the  war  he  was  in  six  battles,  four
sieges,  and  several  important  expeditions.  In
1778,  when  he  was  prisoner  with  Burgoyne's  army,
he  escaped  with  two  men  whom  he  brought  with
him  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton  at  New  York,  and  again
in  1782.  when  he  was  taken  with  Cornwallis's  army,
he  eluded  the  vigilance  of  the  American  guards,
and  conducted  under  his  command  seven  men  to
Sir  Guy  Carleton,  then  commander-in-chief  in  New
York,  each  time  giving  important  intelligence  re-
specting the  American  army.  For  these  services
he  was  appointed  by  Gen.  Birch,  then  commandant
of  the  city,  his  chief  clerk,  and  adjutant  to  the  Mer-
chants' corps  of  volunteers.  After  the  war  he  re-
turned to  Dublin,  and  for  many  years  taught  the
free  school  in  that  city,  employing  his  leisure
in  writing  two  works,  entitled  "A  Journal  of
Occurrences  during  the  Late  American  War  "  (Dub-
lin, 1809);  and  "  Memoir  of  My  Own  Life  "(1811).
The  "Journal  of  Occurrences  is  one  of  the  most
valuable  of  the  original  sources  from  which  the
history  of  the  Revolutionary  war  has  been  derived,
and  the  "  Memoir  "  gives  a  correct  general  idea  of
North  American  scenes,  and  interesting  anecdotes
of  the  prominent  actors  and  officers  that  were  em-
ployed on  both  sides  during  the  war.  It  also  con-
tains a  description  of  the  fauna  and  flora  of
Canada  and  the  northern  states,  founded  on  much
keen  observation.  In  recognition  of  his  military
and  literary  services  he  was,  28  Jan.,  1809,  placed
upon  the  "  out-pension ''  of  Chelsea  hospital.


LAMBDIN,  James  R.,  artist,  b.  in  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  10  May,  1807.  He  studied  art  in  Philadelphia
in  1823-'5  under  Thomas  Sully,  and  at  eighteen
years  of  age  was  established  in  his  native  place
as  a  portrait-painter.  Subsequently  he  followed
this  profession  with  success  in  the  chief  cities  be-
tween Pittsburg  and  Mobile,  Ala.  In  1837  he  re-
turned to  Philadelphia,  of  which  city  he  has  since
been  a  resident.  Mr.  Lambdin  has  painted  many
portraits  at  Washington,  including  several  of  the
presidents.  He  has  been  professor  of  fine  arts  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  was  for  twenty-
five  years  an  active  officer  of  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  the  fine  arts,  and  has  been  president  of
the  Artists'  fund  society. — His  son,  George  Coch-
ran, artist,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  in  1830.  He  stud-
ied with  his  father,  in  his  native  place,  and  after-
ward in  the  academies  of  Munich  and  Paris.  His
professional  life  has  been  passed  chiefly  in  Phila-
delphia. Mr.  Lambdin  has  been  especially  suc-
cessful as  a  painter  of  still-life,  particularly  flow-
ers, although  he  has  done  agreeable  work  in  other
directions.  His  works  include  "  Dead  Wife  "  (1867) ;
"  Ask  Me  No  More  " ;  "  Portrait  of  Mrs.  Joseph  Har-
rison " ;  and  "  Pink  and  Yellow  Roses  "  (1885).  He
has  devoted  much  attention  to  floriculture  in  his
garden  at  Germantown.  —  His  brother,  Alfred
Cochran,  journalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29
Jan.,  1846,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1866,  and  practised  at
Germantown  for  several  years.  He  edited  the  "  Ger-
mantown Chronicle,"  an  independent  paper,  in
1870-'4,  and  since  1875  has  been  managing  editor
of  the  Philadelphia  "  Times."  He  is  the  author  of
"  An  Account  of  the  Battle  of  Germantown,"  pre-
pared for  its  centennial  celebration  in  1877.

LAMBERT,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  New  Jersey
in  1748 ;  d.  in  Amwell,  N.  J.,  4  Feb.,  1823.  He  re-
ceived an  academical  education,  and  served  in  the
state  house  of  representatives  for  many  years.  He
was  vice-president  of  the  council  and  acting  gov-
ernor of  New  Jersey  in  1802-'3,  elected  to  con-
gress in  1804,  and  re-elected  for  the  succeeding
term,  serving  from  1805  till  1809,  when  he  was
chosen  senator,  serving  till  1815.

LAMBERT,  Sir  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in
1772 ;  d.  in  1847.  He  became  ensign  in  the  first
foot-guards  in  1791,  lieutenant  in  October,  1793,
captain  in  May,  1801,  colonel  in  July,  1810,  and
major-general  in  June,  1813.  He  was  present  at
the  sieges  of  Valenciennes  and  Dunkirk,  and  fought
in  the  Irish  rebellion,  the  expedition  to  Walcheren,
and  with  Wellington  in  the  peninsular  campaigns.
He  accompanied  Sir  Edward  Pakenham's  expedi-
tion to  New  Orleans,  La.,  as  third  in  command,  and
in  the  battle  of  8  Jan.,  1815,  was  severely  wounded.

LAMBERT,  John,  English  traveller,  b.  about
1775.  He  visited  this  country  in  1805  to  study  the
effect  of  its  new  government,  and  to  explore  "  those
parts  rendered  interesting  by  the  glories  of  a  Wolfe
and  a  Washington,"  and  after  travelling  in  Canada
and  this  country,  returned  to  England  and  pub-
lished "  Travels  through  Lower  Canada  and  the
United  States  of  America  in  the  Years  1806,  1807,
and  1808  "  (3  vols.,  London,  1810).  In  his  second  vol-
ume he  publishes  several  essays  from  Washington
Irving's  "Salmagundi,"  saying  that  "they  afford
one  of  the  most  successful  specimens  of  original
composition  that  has  been  hitherto  produced  in  the
United  States,"  and  in  his  third  volume  he  gives
biographical  notes  of  several  statesmen  of  this
country,  a  general  statistical  view  of  the  United
States  for  a  period  of  twenty  years,  and  observa-
tions upon  its  existing  constitution  and  the  cus-
toms of  the  people.


LAMBERVILLE


LAMM


601


LAMBERVILLE,  John  de,  French  mission-
ary, b.  in  France ;  d.  there  in  1699.  He  belonged
to  the  Jesuit  order,  came  to  Canada  probably  in
1668,  and  was  sent  to  labor  among  the  Onondagas
in  1671.  In  1681  he  warned  Frontenac  of  the  in-
trigues that  Gov.  Thomas  Dongan  was  carrying  on
among  the  Iroquois,  and  induced  some  of  that
tribe  to  consent  to  treat  with  the  French  governor
at  Catarocony  (Fort  Frontenac),  but  the  latter  in-
sisted that  the  Iroquois  deputies  should  come  to
Montreal,  and  the  negotiation  was  abandoned.
The  missionary  kept  Frontenac  and  his  successor,
De  la  Barre,  constantly  informed  of  the  feelings
and  plans  of  the  Iroquois,  but  his  advice  was  seldom
heeded.  In  1686  he  endeavored,  unsuccessfully,  to
prevent  the  Iroquois  chiefs  from  meeting  Dongan
at  Albany.  He  set  out  for  Quebec  to  inform  De-
nonville,  who  had  succeeded  De  la  Barre,  of  the
condition  of  affairs,  having  meanwhile  obtained  a
promise  from  the  Onondaga  sachems  that  they
would  not  undertake  any  enterprise  during  his
absence.  He  was  immediately  sent  back  by  the
governor,  loaded  with  presents  for  the  Onondaga
chiefs.  The  governor  of  New  York  had  been  so
successful  in  his  negotiations  with  the  Iroquois
that  Lamberville,  on  his  arrival,  found  a  part  of
their  warriors  ready  to  march  against  the  French
settlements.  But  by  his  suavity  of  manner,  which
had  first  gained  their  affection,  and  by  a  prudent
distribution  of  presents,  Lamberville  dispelled  their
suspicions  and  induced  them  to  make  peace  with
the  French.  Toward  the  end  of  September  he
went  again  to  Quebec  to  report  that  while  the
Onondagas  had  restored  their  prisoners  according
to  treaty,  the  Senecas  refused  to  do  so.  The  gov-
ernor prepared  to  take  the  field  against  the  Sene-
cas, and,  to  cover  his  design  of  treacherously
seizing  some  of  the  Iroquois  chiefs,  sent  Lamber-
ville back  to  Onondaga.  By  order  of  Denonville,
the  missionary  induced  several  of  the  Iroquois  to
assemble  at  Catarocony  in  1687.  The  treacherous
seizure  of  these  chiefs  by  Denonville  put  the  life
of  Lamberville,  who  remained  among  the  Ononda-
gas, in  jeopardy.  But  the  sachems  of  the  tribe
were  convinced  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the
act.  They  insisted  that  he  should  depart,  and  gave
him  guides  and  a  guard  to  save  him  from  the  ven-
geance of  the  young  braves  who  would  hold  him
responsible.  He  escaped  to  Catarocony,  and  shortly
afterward  persuaded  the  Onondagas  to  spare  the
lives  of  some  prisoners  they  had  taken  near  the
fort.  After  the  war  that  ensued,  Denonville  at-
tributed the  safety  of  the  colony  to  Father  de
Lamberville.  Shortly  afterward  Lamberville  re-
turned to  France.  In  1698  the  Iroquois  begged  the
governor  to  recall  him,  saying  that  he  was  better
fitted  than  any  one  else  to  maintain  a  good  under-
standing between  the  two  nations. — His  younger
brother,  James,  French  missionary,  b.  in  France  ;
d.  in  Sault  Saint  Louis,  Canada,  about  1706.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  was
sent  to  Canada,  but  at  what  time  is  unknown.  He
founded  a  mission  at  Gandaouague,  in  the  Mohawk
valley,  in  1675,  and  baptized  the  niece  of  an  Iro-
quois chief  the  same  year.  Gov.  Dongan,  having
discovered,  in  1686.  that  Lamberville's  influence
among  the  Iroquois  was  an  obstacle  to  his  plans,
summoned  the  Onondaga  cantons  to  deliver  the
missionary  to  him,  but  met  with  a  refusal.  Lam-
berville was  recalled  to  Quebec  the  same  year,  and
his  brother  sent  in  his  place.  In  1702  he  was  or-
dered to  return  to  the  Onondaga  tribe.  He  re-
stored the  mission,  and,  through  his  influence,  the
Iroquois  remained  neutral  for  a  time,  although  Eng-
land and  France  were  at  war. In  1709  he  was


waited  on  by  Col.  Peter  Schuyler  (q.  v.),  who  won
his  confidence  and  persuaded  him  to  visit  Canada
in  order  to  confer  with  the  governor  with  a  view  to
peace.  After  his  departure  the  Indians  plundered
the  church  and  house,  and  set  them  on  fire,  and
the  Onondaga  mission  was  finally  broken  up.

LAMETH,  Count  Theodore  (lah'-mate'),  French
soldier,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  24  June,  1756;  d.  in
the  Chateau  de  Busagny,  near  Pontoise,  France,  19
Oct.,  1854.  He  was  descended  from  a  noble  family
of  Picardy.  He  entered  the  navy  at  the  age  of  fif-
teen, but.  abandoning  it  for  the  army  and  after  at-
taining the  rank  of  captain  of  cavalry,  came  with
his  brothers  to  this  country,  where  he  fought  in
the  war  of  the  Revolution,  being  wounded  in  the
combat  of  Grenada.  He  was  made  field-marshal
by  Louis  XVI.,  and  in  1791  was  a  member  of  the
chamber  of  representatives.  He  published  "  Ob-
servations de  M.  le  general  Comte  Theodore  de  La-
meth,  relatives  a  des  notices  qui  se  trouvent  dans
la  biographie  universelle  sur  ses  freres  Charles  et
Alexandre"  (Paris,  1843).  —  His  brother,  Count
Charles  Malo  Francois,  soldier,  b.  in  Paris,
France,  5  Oct.,  1757;  d.  there,  28  Dec,  1832,  served
as  aide  on  the  staff  of  Count  Rochambeau  in  the
American  Revolution,  and  was  wounded  at  the
capture  of  a  British  redoubt  at  Yorktown,  where
he  was  promoted  colonel  in  the  Orleans  dragoons,
and  rewarded  with  the  cross  of  St.  Louis.  During
the  Revolution  his  career  was  singularly  parallel  to
that  of  his  brother  Alexandre.  After  his  return  to
France  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  National  as-
sembly in  1791,  and  was  made  a  field-marshal.  He
fled  in  1792,  and,  settling  in  Hamburg,  engaged  in
business  with  his  brother.  He  served  under  Napo-
leon in  1809-'14,  attaining  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
general.  After  the  restoration  he  lived  in  privacy
until  he  was  elected  to  the  chamber  of  deputies  in
1829,  and  co-operated  in  the  revolution  of  1830. —
Another  brother,  Count  Alexandre,  soldier  and
politician,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  28  Oct.,  1760;  d.
there,  19  xMarch,  1829,
rendered  service  in
the  American  war  of
independenceas  aide-
de-camp  on  Rocham-
beau's  staff,  and  com-
manded, as  adjutant-
general,  the  attack
against  Jamaica.  He
was  chosen  president
of  the  National  as-
sembly in  1790.  In
1792  he  served  as
field-marshal  in  the
Army  of  the  North,
and  in  1792-'5  was
in  an  Austrian  pris-
on. Thence  he  went
to  England,  and  af-
terward to  Hamburg,
where,  with  his  brother  Charles,  he  engaged  in
commerce,  but  returned  to  France,  and  was  prefect
of  several  departments  during  the  empire.  He
was  made  a  lieutenant-general  by  Louis  XVIII.,
during  whose  reign  he  served  four  sessions  as
leader  of  the  opposition  in  the  chamber  of  depu-
ties. Lameth  wrote  much  on  politics,  his  most
important  work  being  "  Histoire  de  l'assemblee
constituante  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1828-'9).

LAMM,  Emile,  inventor,  b.  in  Av,  France,  24
Nov.,  1834 ;  d.  near  Mandeville,  La.,  12  July,  1873.
He  was  educated  at  the  College  royale  in  Metz,
but  came  to  the  United  States  in  1848,  and  became
a  dentist,  following  his  profession  in  Alexandria,


C02


LA  MOUNTAIN


LAMY


La.,  until  the  civil  war.  Dr.  Lamm  served  in  the
Confederate  army  under  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg
during  the  war,  and  after  its  close  resumed  his
practice  in  New  Orleans.  As  a  boy  he  showed  de-
cided mechanical  ingenuity,  and  in  1809  devised
an  ammoniacal  tireless  engine  for  the  propulsion
of  street-cars.  The  system  was  tested  by  street
railway  companies  in  New  Orleans,  New  York,
St.  Louis,  and  other  cities,  with  satisfactory  re-
sults; but  owing  to  Mr  Lamm's  premature  death  and
unfortunate  management  on  the  part  of  the  com-

Eany  that  controlled  the  patent,  the  motor  has  not
een  put  into  practical  operation  in  the  United
States.  The  system  has  been  introduced  in  France
and  Germany,  where  it  has  been  improved  and
perfected,  so  that  at  present  (1887)  it  is  extensively
used  for  street-cars  and  vehicles.  During  his
work  on  this  invention  he  became  impressed  with
the  facility  with  which  the  vapor  of  water  may  be
condensed,  even  at  an  elevated  temperature,  in
water  under  high  pressure ;  and  pursuing  his  ex-
periments, he  produced  another  tireless  engine,
which  he  patented  in  1872,  and  which  is  now  in
practical  use.  He  also  invented  a  method  for  the
manufacture  of  sponge  gold,  for  which  he  ob-
tained a  patent  and  a  gold  medal  at  the  Mechan-
ics' fair  in  New  Orleans.  This  process  is  used
largely  by  dentists  throughout  the  United  States.
Dr.  Lamm  was  a  fellow  of  the  New  Orleans  acade-
my of  sciences. He  was  drowned.

LA  MOUNTAIN,  John,  aeronaut,  b.  in  Wayne
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1830 ;  d.  in  Lansingburgh,  N.  Y.,
in  1878.  He  had  but  little  education,  and  on  the
early  death  of  his  father  he  became  the  sole  sup-
port of  his  mother.  When  a  young  man  he  was
successful  in  making  several  minor  ascensions.  He
then  formed  the  idea  of  making  a  longer  voyage
than  any  on  record,  and  constructed  a  large  balloon
of  silk,  having  an  approximate  capacity  of  70,000
cubic  feet,  which  he  named  "  The  Atlantic."  The  as-
cent was  made  from  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  on  1  July,  1859,
and  several  passengers,  including  John  Wise,  accom-
panied the  aeronaut.  The  states  of  Illinois  and
Indiana  were  passed  over  during  the  night,  and
Ohio  was  reached  in  the  morning.  The  balloon
then  passed  across  Lake  Erie  into  New  York,  and
to  Lake  Ontario,  into  which  it  descended,  but  rose
again,  and  a  landing  was  made  in  Henderson,
Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.  The  time  occupied  in  making
this  journey  was  nineteen  hours  and  fifty  minutes,
and  the  distance  traversed  1,150  miles,  or  826  in  an
air  line.  The  honor  of  planning  and  executing
this  greatest  of  all  aerial  voyages  is  due  to  La
Mountain  alone,  although  the  credit  for  it  has  been
claimed  by  others.  In  September,  1859,  he  made
an  ascension  from  Watertown,  N.  Y..  which  was
remarkable  on  account  of  his  perilous  experience.
The  ascension  was  made  when  the  temperature
was  84°  F.,  but  on  reaching  a  height  of  three  and
one-half  miles  it  had  sunk  to  18°  F.  As  night
came  on,  the  balloon  was  over  the  Canadian  wilder-
ness, and  a  partial  descent  was  made  to  "  tie  up  "
till  daylight  came,  when  he  again  proceeded  in  a
northerly  direction.  Unwilling  to  continue  far-
ther, he  descended  during  the  day,  and  wandered
in  the  wilderness  for  four  days,  without  adequate
food  or  clothing,  until  rescued  by  lumbermen  150
miles  north  of  Ottawa,  and  300  miles  from  Water-
town.  In  18(52  he  was  appointed  aeronautic  engi-
neer to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  under  Thaddeus
S.  C.  Lowe  (q.  v.),  and  in  that  capacity  made  sev-
eral ascensions,  but.  owing  to  lack  of  cordiality
between  himself  and  Mr.  Lowe,  soon  severed  his
connection  with  the  army.  Subsequently  he  made
occasional  ascensions,  but  none  of  importance.


LAMPSON,  Sir  Curtis  Miranda,  bart.,  b.  in
Vermont,  21  Sept..  1806 ;  d.  in  London,  England,
13  March,  1885.  He  went  to  England  in  1830,  and
was  naturalized  in  1848.  On  the  formation  of  the
company  for  laying  the  Atlantic  telegraph,  in  1856,
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  directors,  and  became
vice-president.  The  aid  rendered  by  him  in  the
undertaking  was  acknowledged  in  a  letter  from
Lord  Derby  to  Sir  Stafford  Northcote,  who  pre-
sided at  the  banquet  given  at  Liverpool,  1  Oct.,
1866,  in  honor  of  those  who  had  been  active  in  lay-
ing the  cable.  Sir  Curtis  was  deputy  governor  of
the  Hudson  bay  company,  and  one  of  the  trus-
tees of  the  fund  that  was  given  by  his  friend,  the
late  George  Peabody,  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  of
London.  On  13  Nov.,  1866,  he  was  made  a  baronet.
His  only  daughter  is  the  wife  of  Frederick  Locker,
the  English  poet  and  Shakespearian  collector.

LAMSON,  Alvan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Weston,
Mass.,  18  Nov.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,  17  July,
1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1814,  and
appointed  tutor  in  Bowdoin,  but  left  in  1816,  and
entered  the  Harvard  divinity-school.  In  1818  he
became  pastor  of  the  First  church  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  which  charge  he  retained  till  1860.  He  was
a  vigorous  writer,  a  contributor  to  the  "  Christian
Examiner,"  and  the  author  of  "  History  of  the
First  Church  in  Dedham"  (Dedham,  Mass.,  1839);
"  Sermons  "  (Boston.  1857) ;  and  "  The  Church  of
the  First  Three  Centuries  "  (2d  ed.,  1865).

LAMSON,  Daniel  Lowell,  physician,  b.  in
Hopkinton,  N.  PL,  18  June,  1834.  He  was  educated
at  Hopkinton  and  Fryeburg  academies,  and  was
graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  New
Yoi-k  in  March,  1857.  He  settled  in  practice  in
Fryeburg,  Me.,  in  1862,  was  appointed  state-exam-
iner for  volunteers  and  drafted  men,  and  in  1864
U.  S.  pension  examining  surgeon,  which  post  he
still  retains.  Dr.  Lamson  has  invented  an  adjusta-
ble gauge  spring-vaccinator  and  several  mechanical
appliances  that  are  used  in  surgery.  He  con-
structed a  double-seam  sewing-machine  as  early  as
1859,  and  has  also  devised  a  double-heating  furnace
using  coal  or  wood,  which  he  patented  in  1868,  and
an  endless  cutter  mowing-machine  in  1870.  He  is
the  author  of  "Lectures"  (Fryeburg,  1872)  and
"  Differential  Diagnosis  of  Disease  "  (1870).

LAMY,  John  Baptist,  R.  C.  archbishop,  b.  in
Auvergne,  France,  in  1814;  d.  in  Santa  Je,  New
Mexico,  13  Feb.,  1888.  He  came  to  the  United  States
after  his  ordination,  and  was  stationed  in  1839  in
Ohio,  where  he  secured  the  construction  of  a  fine
church.  He  was  engaged  in  missionary  work  in
Ohio  until  about  1848,  when  he  was  appointed  pas-
tor of  St.  Mary's,  Covington,  Ky.,  then  in  the  dio-
cese of  Cincinnati.  When  the  province  of  New
Mexico  was  acquired  by  the  United  States,  religion
had  greatly  declined  there.  No  bishop  had  visited
the  country  for  eighty  years ;  the  Franciscans,  who
had  ministered  for  centuries  to  the  Spaniards  and
Indians,  had  been  removed,  and  all  schools  had
been  closed.  To  remedy  these  evils  the  holy  see
formed  from  the  territory  a  vicariate-apostolic,  and
Father  Lamy  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Agatho-
nica,  24  Nov.,  1850.  The  territory  then  contained
a  population  of  60,000  whites  and  8,000  Indians,
with  twenty-five  churches  and  forty  chapels.  Bish-
op Lamy  endeavored  to  obtain  exemplary  priests  to
attend  to  the  spiritual  wants  of  his  people,  and
under  his  direction  the  Sisters  of  Loreto  opened  an
academy  in  1853.  On  29  July  of  the  same  year  the
see  of  Santa  Fe  was  created,  and  Dr.  Lamy  elected
its  first  bishop.  He  visited  Europe  to  obtain  aid,
and  returned  with  four  priests,  a  deacon,  and  two
subdeacons. He  also  succeeded  in  securing  the


LANCASTER


LANDA


603


assistance  of  Brothers  of  the  Christian  Doctrine,
who  ultimately  founded  a  college.  Sisters  of
Charity  also  came  to  him,  and  in  1867  the  Jesuits
opened  a  college  at  Las  Vegas,  and  established  a
journal.  In  1875  the  see  was  made  archiepiscopal,
with  Dr.  Lamy  as  archbishop.  In  1885  he  resigned,
leaving  the  diocese  with  34  parish  churches,  203
regularly-attended  chapels,  and  56  priests  who
have  charge  of  111,000  Roman  Catholics  of  Span-
ish origin.  3,000  that  speak  English,  and  12,000
Pueblo  Indians.

LANCASTER,  Sir  James,  English  navigator,
b.  in  England  about  1550;  d.  in  1620.  He  made  a
voyage  to  the  East  Indies  in  1591,  and  afterward
sailed  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  visiting  Cey-
lon and  Palo  Penang,  where  the  mutinous  conduct
of  his  crew  obliged  him  to  return  home.  In  1594
he  engaged  in  a  predatory  expedition  to  South
America,  took  several  prizes,  and  captured  Per-
nambuco  in  Brazil,  returning  in  1595  laden  with
immense  booty.  He  sailed  from  Torbay,  15  Feb.,
1601,  with  a  fleet  of  five  vessels  to  the  East  Indies,
formed  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  king  of
Achen,  established  a  friendly  correspondence  with
the  state  of  Bantam  in  the  island  of  Java,  and  re-
turned in  1605,  with  information  relative  to  a
northwest  passage  to  the  East  Indies,  which  gave
rise  to  the  subsequent  expeditions  of  Hudson  and
others.  Baffin  gave  the  name  of  Lancaster  sound
to  an  inlet  that  he  discovered  in  latitude  74°  N.
This  navigator  received  the  honor  of  knighthood
from  Queen  Elizabeth.

LANCASTER,  Joseph,  educator,  b.  in  London,
25  Nov.,  1778;  d.  in  New  York  city.  24  Oct.,  1838.
At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  decided  to  become  a  cler-

fyman,  but  afterward  united  with  the  Society  of
Yiends,  by  which  he  was  long  afterward  disowned.
In  1798  he  opened  at  South wark  a  school  for  poor
children,  whom  he  taught  almost  gratuitously.
For  many  years  he  was  actively  engaged  in  deliv-
ering lectures,  and  forming  schools  in  various  parts
of  England  on  the  plan  of  employing  the  more  ad-
vanced pupils  in  a  school  to  instruct  the  class  next
below  themselves,  a  plan  that  had  been  originally
introduced  into  England  from  India  by  Dr.  An-
drew Bell.  For  many  years  the  contest  between
the  friends  of  these  two  men  as  to  which  was  en-
titled to  priority  was  very  acrimonious.  His  la-
bors in  giving  this  system  a  notoriety  it  would  not
otherwise  have  obtained,  while  gaining  him  ap-
plause, kept  him  poor;  and  in  1818  he  emigrated
to  the  United  States.  His  system  had  been  pre-
viously introduced  into  American  schools  to  a  con-
siderable extent,  so  that  he  was  not  pecuniarily
benefited  by  the  change.  After  visiting  South
America  and  the  West  Indies,  he  went  in  1829  to
Canada,  where  the  legislature  made  him  some  pe-
cuniary grants  to  enable  him  to  give  his  system  a
fair  trial.  But  he  soon  became  embarrassed  again  ;
some  of  his  friends  purchased  for  him  a  small  an-
nuity, and  he  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  was
run  over  by  a  carriage  in  the  street,  and  died  from
the  injuries  that  he  received.  His  family  went  to
Mexico,  where,  under  the  name  of  Lancaster- J  ones,
several  of  his  grandchildren  have  attained  note  in
politics.  Under  the  management  of  a  National
Lancasterian  society  his  system  has  been  adopted  in
that  country,  as  it  has  to  a  lesser  extent  in  Colom-
bia and  other  parts  of  South  America.  Lancaster
published  "  Improvements  in  Education  "  (London,
1803 ;  New  York,  1807) ;  "  The  British  System  of
Education  "  (Washington,  1812) ;  and  "  Epitome  of
the  Chief  Events  and  Transactions  of  my  own  Life  "
(New  Haven,  1833).  See  "  Life  of  Lancaster,"  by
his  friend  William  Corston.


LANCASTER,  Lydia,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Graithwaite,  Lancashire,  England,  in  1684 ;  d.  30
May,  1761.  In  the  course  of  her  ministry  she
visited  several  times  the  greater  part  of  England,
Ireland,  and  Scotland,  and  did  much  to  advance
the  interests  of  her  society  there  and  in  the  United
States,  whither  she  camein  1718.

LANCASTRO  Y  ABREU,  Maria  Ursula
(lan-cas'-tro),  South  American  adventuress,  b.  in
Rio  Janeiro  in  1682;  d.  in  Goa,  East  Indies,  in
1730.  She  was  the  only  daughter  of  a  family  of
wealth  in  Brazil.  In  1700  she  left  her  home
secretly,  and,  dressing  herself  in  male  costume,  took
the  name  of  Balthazar  do  Conto  Cardoso  and  sailed
for  Portugal.  In  Lisbon  she  enlisted  as  a  volun-
teer in  an  expedition  to  India,  and  soon  afterward
took  part  in  the  attack  of  Amboina  and  in  the
occupation  of  the  islands  of  Corjuem  and  Panelem.
For  these  deeds  she  was  promoted  to  captain,  and
in  1703  she  was  appointed  governor  of  an  impor-
tant castle.  In  1704  the  fortress  Madre  de  Deus  was
put  under  her  charge,  and  from  that  time  till  1714
she  performed  many  great  exploits  that  made  her
assumed  name  well  known.  In  1714  she  fell  in
love  with  the  captain,  Alffonso  Teixeira  Arras  de
Mello,  who  was  the  governor  of  the  castle  S.  Joao
Baptista,  and,  disclosing  her  sex,  she  received  per-
mission from  the  king  to  marry.  On  8  March,
1718,  the  king  of  Portugal,  Joao  V..  granted  her
a  pension  for  her  services  to  the  nation,  with  per-
mission to  bequeath  it  to  her  heirs.

LANCE,  William,  author,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1791 :  d.  in  Texas  in  1840.  He  was
educated  in  Charleston,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  in  1812  was  a  member  of
the  legislature.  He  early  attained  note  as  a
scholar  and  public  speaker,  and  was  a  diligent
classical  student.  He  wrote  frequently,  chiefly
as  a  political  essayist,  and  published  in  Latin  a
"  Life  of  Washington  "  (Charleston,  1834).

LANCHERO,  Luis  (lan-tchay'-ro),  Spanish  sol-
dier, d.  in  Tunja,  Colombia,  in  1562.  He  was  cap-
tain of  the  guards  to  the  Emperor  Charles  v.,
and  served  under  the  Constable  of  Bourbon  at
the  siege  of  Rome  in  1527,  but  in  1533  left  the
Spanish  army  and  went  to  Venezuela  in  search
of  adventures.  He  entered  the  service  of  Geroni-
mo  de  Ortal ;  but  not  meeting  with  the  success
he  expected,  he  joined  Nicholas  Federmann.  with
whom  he  crossed  the  Andes  to  Santa  Fe  de  Bo-
gota. He  filled  the  highest  posts  in  this  colony,
and  although  he  had  been  persecuted  by  the  visitor
Armendariz,  when  this  officer  fell  into  disgrace,
Lanchero  protected  him,  defrayed  the  cost  of  his
journey  to  Spain,  and  aided  him  to  justify  him-
self. Besides  filling  many  civil  posts,  Lanchero
was  engaged  in  most  of  the  military  expeditions
of  his  time.  In  1559  he  founded  the  "city  of  Trini-
dad de  los  Muzos  (now  Muzo).

LANDA,  Diego  de  (lan'dah),  Mexican  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Cifuentes.  Guadalajara,  Spain.  17
March,  1524;  d.  in  Merida,  Mexico.  30  April,  1579.
In  1541  he  became  a  Franciscan  monk,  and  soon
was  sent  as  one  of  the  first  of  his  order  to  Yucatan.
He  founded  the  convent  of  Izamal,  of  which  he
was  elected  superior  in  1553,  and  later  became
provincial  of  his  order  in  Yucatan.  His  severity  in
repressing  the  licentious  customs  of  the  Spaniards
made  him  many  enemies,  and  he  was  accused  of
usurping  the  powers  of  the  bishop,  and  ordered  to
Spain;  but  he  was  absolved  by  the  council  of  the
Indies,  and  in  15T3  returned  to  Yucatan  as  second
bishop  of  Merida.  He  had  again  to  suffer  persecu-
tions, and  an  unsuccessful  attempt  was  made
against  his  life. He  wrote  an  interesting  "  Relaciou


604


LANDER


LANDERS


de  las  cosas  de  Yucatan."  which  gives  a  key  for
deciphering  the  Mexican  hieroglyphics,  and  an
"  Introduccion sobre  las fuentes  de  la historia

{mmitiva  de  Mexico  y  de  la  America  Central  en
os  monumentos  egipcios  y  de  la  historia  de  Egipto
en  los  monumentos  Americanos."  These  were  pre-
served in  manuscript  and  published  by  Brasseur  de
Bourbourg  (Spanish  and  French,  Paris,  1864).

LANDER,  Frederick  William,  soldier,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass..  17  Dec,  1821 ;  d.  in  Paw  Paw,  Va.,
2  March.  1862.  He  was  educated  at  Dummer  acad-
emy, Byfteld,  and  studied  civil  engineering  at  the

military  academy
at  Norwich,  Vt.
He  practised  that
profession  a  few
years  in  Massa-
chusetts, and  was
then  employed  by
the  U.  S.  govern-
ment in  conduct-
ing important  ex-
plorations across
the  continent.  He
made  two  surveys
to  determine  the
practicability  of  a
railroad-route  to
the  Pacific,  and
from  the  second,
which  was  under-
taken at  his  own
expense,  he  alone,  of  all  the  party,  returned  alive.
He  afterward  surveyed  and  constructed  the  great
overland  wagon-route.  While  engaged  in  1858  on
this  work,  his  party  of  seventy  men  were  attacked
by  the  Pah  Ute  Indians,  over  whom  they  gained  a
decisive  victory.  He  made  five  trans-continental
explorations  altogether,  as  engineer,  chief  engineer,
or  superintendent,  and  for  his  efficiency  received
praise  in  the  official  reports  of  the  secretary  of  the
interior.  When  the  civil  war  began  in  1861  he
was  employed  on  important  secret  missions  in  the
southern  states,  served  as  a  volunteer  aide  on  Gen.
McClellan's  staff,  and  participated  with  great
credit  in  the  capture  of  Philippi  and  the  battle  of
Rich  Mountain.  He  led  one  of  the  two  columns
that  set  out,  3  June,  1861,  to  surprise  the  enemy  at
Philippi,  and,  after  marching  all  night,  opened  the
attack  with  an  effective  artillery  fire,  and  soon  put
the  Confederates  to  flight.  He  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  on  17  May,  and  in  July
took  an  important  command  on  the  upper  Potomac.
Hearing  of  the  disaster  at  Ball's  Bluff,  he  hastened
to  Edward's  Ferry,  which  he  held  with  a  single  com-
pany of  sharp-shooters,  but  was  severely  wounded
in  the  leg.  Before  the  wound  was  healed  he  re-
ported for  duty,  and  at  Hancock,  5  Jan.,  1862,  he
repelled  a  greatly  superior  Confederate  force  that
besieged  the  town.  Though  much  debilitated  by
his  wound,  he  made  a  brilliant  dash  upon  the  ene-
my at  Blooming  Gap,  14  Feb.,  1862,  for  which  he
received  a  special  letter  of  thanks  from  the  secre-
tary of  war.  The  enemy  retreated  before  the  Union
cavalry,  but  checked  their  pursuers  in  the  pass,
until  Gen.  Lander  called  for  volunteers  and  swept
down  on  the  Confederate  infantry.  Increasing  ill
health  compelled  him  to  apply  for  temporary  relief
from  military  duty ;  but,  while  preparing  an  attack
on  the  enemy,  he  died  of  congestion  of  the  brain.
His  death  was  announced  in  a  special  order  issued
by  Gen.  McClellan  on  3  March.  Gen.  Lander
wrote  many  stirring  patriotic  poems  on  incidents
of  the  campaign.  —  His  wife,  Jean  Margaret
Davenport,  actress,  b.  in  Wolverhampton,  Eng-


land, 3  May,  1829,  was  the  daughter  of  Thomas
Donald,  a  Scotchman,  who  was  originally  a  lawyer,
but  became  manager  of  the  Richmond  theatre,
where,  at  the  age  of  eight,  Jean  made  her  first
appearance.  In  1838  she  was  brought  to  the
United  States  and  played  in  various  cities.  In
1842  she  returned  to  Europe,  where  she  travelled,
and  studied  music  under  Garcia.  At  the  Lon-
don Olympic  she  became  a  favorite  as  Juliet  in
"  The  Countess "  and  as  Julia  in  "  The  Hunch-
back." In  1846  she  took  a  company  to  Holland,
where  she  was  for  two  years  highly  successful,  and
upon  returning  to  England,  in  1848,  became  well
known  as  a  reader.  In  1849  she  visited  the  United
States  for  the  second  time,  and  appeared,  24  Sept.,
1851,  at  the  Astor  place  opera-house.  She  went
to  California  in  1855,  and  subsequently  twice  re-
visited England.  On  12  Oct.,  I860,  at  San  Fran-
cisco, she  married  Gen.  Lander.  Soon  after  his
death,  together  with  her  mother,  she  took  en-
tire charge  of  the  hospital  department  at  Port
Royal,  S.  C,  where  for  over  a  year  she  rendered
good  service.  She  afterward  returned  to  her
home  in  Massachusetts,  but  on  6  Feb.,  1865,  she
reappeared  upon  the  stage  at  Niblo's  garden,
New  York,  in  a  play  of  her  own  translation  called
"  Messalliance."  She  afterward  played  the  char-
acter of  Queen  Elizabeth  at  the  National  theatre,
in  Washington,  in  April,  1867,  and  appeared  else-
where throughout  the  country  with  success.  She
was  the  first  representative  in  this  country  of
Browning's  "Colombe,"  Hawthorne's  "Hester
Prynne,"  and  Reade's  "  Peg  Woffington,"  also
appearing  in  translations  of  Scribe's  "Adrienne
Lecouvreur,"  Schiller's  "  Mary  Stuart,"  Legouve's
"  Medea,"  and  Giacometti's  "  Queen  Elizabeth."
Her  last  appearance  was  in  Hawthorne's  "  Scarlet
Letter  "  at  the  Boston  theatre. — Gen.  Lander's  sis-
ter, Louisa,  sculptor,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  1  Sept.,
1826,  modelled  excellent  likenesses  of  various
members  of  her  family  in  her  youth,  and  also
executed  cameo  heads.  In  1855  she  went  to  Rome
and  studied  under  Thomas  Crawford,  and  soon
afterward  finished  in  marble  "  To-Day,"  a  figure
emblematic  of  America,  and  "  Galatea."  Among
her  subsequent  works  are  a  bust  of  Gov.  Gore,  of
Massachusetts ;  a  bust  of  Hawthorne  ;  a  statuette
of  Virginia  Dare,  the  first  English  child  born  in
America;  "Undine";  a  life-size  statue  of  "Vir-
ginia " ;  a  reclining  statue  of  "  Evangeline " ;
"  Elizabeth,  the  Exile  of  Siberia  " ;  "  Ceres  Mourn-
ing for  Prosperine  " ;  "  A  Sylph  Alighting,"  and
numerous  portrait-busts.  Her  last  work  is  a  large
group  "  The  Captive  Pioneer." — Another  sister,
Sarah  West,  author,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  27  Nov.,
1819 ;  d.  there,  15  Nov.,  1872,  published  a  series  of
sketches  of  foreign  countries,  under  the  title  of
"  Spectacles  for  Young  Eyes,"  of  which  nearly
50,000  copies  have  been  sold.

LANDERS,  Franklin,  merchant,  b.  in  Morgan
county,  Ind.,  22  March,  1825.  He  attended  a  com-
mon school  during  the  winter,  worked  on  his  fa-
ther's farm  in  the  summer,  and  in  1847,  having
saved  $300,  he  began  business  as  a  merchant,
which  he  followed  for  six  years,  after  which  he

gurchased  a  tract  of  land  and  located  the  town  of
rooklyn,  Ind.  He  removed  to  that  place  and  re-
sumed farming  and  mercantile  pursuits  for  twelve
years,  establishing  five  churches  of  various  de-
nominations on  his  estate,  contributing  largely  to
their  support.  In  all  deeds  of  lots  that  he  sold
he  inserted  a  clause  prohibiting  the  sale  of  in-
toxicating liquors.  He  then  engaged  in  business
in  Indianapolis,  and  in  1860  was  elected  state  sena-
tor.  He  declined  a  nomination  for  congress  in  1864,


LANDIVAR


LANDRETH


605


but  in  1874  was  elected  to  congress  from  Indiana,
and  served  from  6  Dec,  1875,  till  3  March,  1877.

LANDIVAR,  Raphael,  Central  American  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Guatemala,  27  Oct.,  1731 ;  d.  in  Bo-
logna, Italy,  27  Sept.,  1795.  He  became  a  Jesuit
in  Tepozotlan,  7  Feb.,  1750,  and  afterward  taught
theology  and  philosophy  in  his  native  city.  After
the  banishment  of  the  Jesuits  from  the  Spanish
colonies  he  resided  in  Italy.  Besides  several  funer-
al orations  (Los  Angeles,  Mexico,  1766)  he  wrote  a
Latin  poem,  which  was  popular  among  Italian
scholars  in  its  day.  The  last  edition  is  entitled
"  Raphaelis  Landivar  Rusticatio  Mexicana,  Editio
auctior  et  emendatior"  (Bologna,  1782).

LANDO,  or  OLANDO,  Francisco  Manuel  de,
governor  of  Porto  Rico;  b.  in  Castile,  Spain,  about
1480;  d.  in  Spain  after  1539.  He  came  as  the  lieu-
tenant of  Admiral  Diego  Columbus  to  the  island
of  Santo  Domingo  in  1509,  where  he  showed  skill
and  energy,  and  in  the  year  1530  he  was  appointed
by  the  admiral,  and  confirmed  by  the  emperor,
governor  of  the  island  of  Porto  Rico.  In  this
same  year  three  terrible  hurricanes  visited  the  isl-
and— on  26  June  and  23  and  31  Aug. — which  de-
stroyed all  the  farms  and  drowned  almost  all  the
cattle.-  Two  months  afterward,  on  23  Oct.,  the
Caribs  attacked  the  island,  slaughtering  its  in-
habitants and  destroying  their  property.  Owing
to  these  events  and  to  the  recent  conquest  of  Peru,
with  the  exaggerated  accounts  of  its  riches,  the  in-
habitants of  Porto  Rico  made  ready  in  large  num-
bers to  leave  their  island.  To  prevent  its  total  de-
population, Lando  imposed  on  all  who  intended  to
emigrate  the  penalty  of  death  or  mutilation.  These
measures  and  his  persecutions  of  the  Caribs  re-
sulted in  the  firm  establishment  of  the  colony,
where  Lando  remained  until  1539.

LANDOLPHE,  John  Francis,  French  navi-
gator, b.  in  Auxonne,  Burgundy,  3  Feb.,  1747;  d.
in  Paris  in  1825.  He  went  to  Paris  at  the  age  of
eighteen  to  study  medicine,  but  resolved  to  become
a  sailor,  and  he  made  his  first  voyage  in  1767  on  a
merchant  vessel  bound  for  Santo  Domingo.  He  was
made  captain  in  1775,  and  spent  the  next  three
years  in  efforts  to  extend  the  French  colonies  on
the  west  coast  of  Africa.  In  1778  he  made  several
voyages  to  the  Antilles  and  the  coast  of  North
America,  after  which  he  returned  to  Africa.  He
was  at  Guadeloupe  toward  the  end  of  1792,  where
by  his  courage  and  presence  of  mind  he  did  much
to  save  the  colony  from  external  attacks,  and  de-
fended it  against  a  revolt  of  the  negroes.  Later  he
was  intrusted  by  the  French  government  with  the
task  of  obtaining  for  the  island  the  stores  and
munitions  of  war  of  which  it  stood  in  need.  He
skilfully  eluded  the  English  cruisers,  reached  the
United  States  safely,  and  fulfilled  his  mission.  The
French  ambassador  gave  him  the  command  of  a
vessel  that  had  been  taken  from  the  English,  in
which  he  was  to  return  to  Guadeloupe.  On  reach-
ing the  island,  he  found  that  a  captain  who  had
sailed  with  him  was  accused  before  the  revolution-
ary tribunal  of  intending  to  deliver  his  vessel  to
the  enemy.  At  great  risk  to  himself,  Landolphe
pleaded  warmly  for  his  friend  and  procured  his
acquittal.  Some  months  afterward  his  vessel  was
taken  by  an  English  frigate  and  he  was  led  prisoner
to  Portsmouth.  After  his  release  he  was  given
command  of  a  frigate  on  which  he  sailed  for  Guiana
in  1796.  He  cruised  along  this  coast  and  among
the  West  Indian  islands  up  to  1800,  capturing  sev-
eral English  merchantmen.  In  that  year  the
French  squadron  was  attacked  by  a  superior  Eng-
lish force  and  his  vessel  taken.  After  his  release
he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  chiefly  in  writing  his


memoirs.  They  are  entitled  "  Memoires  du  capi-
taine  Landolphe,  contenant  l'histoire  de  ses  voy-
ages pendant  trente-six  ans,  aux  cotes  d'Afrique  et
auxdeux  Ameriques,rediges  sur  son  manuscnt  par
J.  S.  Quesne  "  (Paris,  1823).

LANDRAM,  John  James,  soldier,  b.  in  War-
saw. Ky.,  16  Nov.,  1826.  He  obtained  an  English
education,  and  at  nineteen  years  of  age  enlisted  in
the  1st  Kentucky  cavalry,  under  Col.  Humphrey
Marshall,  and  led  his  co'mpany  in  the  battle  of
Buena  Vista.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1851,  and  was  afterward  circuit  clerk  until  1858,
being  master-commissioner  at  the  same  time.  He
was  then  graduated  at  the  law-school  in  Louisville,
and  settled  in  Warsaw,  Ky.,  where  he  has  since
practised  his  profession.  At  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  he  aided  in  recruiting  and  organizing  for
the  National  government  the  18th  Kentucky  regi-
ment, of  which  he  became  lieutenant-colonel.  He
was  afterward  transferred  to  the  command  of  the
post  at  Cynthiana,  Ky.,  where  large  army  supplies
were  stored.  The  garrison  of  several  hundred  home-
guards  and  recruits,  and  a  squadron  of  artillery,
was  attacked  by  Gen.  John  H.  Morgan's  cavalry,
23  July,  1862,  and  after  a  desperate  struggle,  with
severe  losses  on  both  sides,  was  compelled  to  surren-
der. Col.  Landram  escaped,  with  a  slight  wound,
to  Paris,  where,  on  the  next  day,  he  rallied  and
uniied  several  detachments  of  National  troops,  and
harassed  Morgan  on  his  retirement  from  Ken-
tucky. On  3D  Aug.,  1862,  he  led  his  regiment  in
the  battle  of  Richmond,  Ky.,  where  several  horses
were  shot  under  him,  and  he  received  a  serious
wound  in  the  head,  which  partially  blinded  him
for  life  and  compelled  him  to  retire  from  the  serv-
ice. He  had  been  recommended  for  promotion  to
the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  Col.  Landram  was
elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1863,  and  served  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs
through  the  remainder  of  the  war.  He  was  de-
feated as  a  Republican  candidate  for  congress  in
1876  and  1884,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republi-
can national  convention  in  the  former  vear.

LANDRETH,  David,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia in  1802 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  Pa.,  22  Feb.,  1880.
He  was  the  son  of  David  Landreth,  an  English
farmer,  who  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in
1783.  After  receiving  an  education  in  private
schools  he  joined  his  father  in  the  nursery  busi-
ness. He  was  a  member  of  various  public  organi-
zations, one  of  the  founders  of  the  Pennsylvania
horticultural  society  in  1827,  and  its  corresponding
secretary  from  1828  till  1836,  and  president  of  the
Society  for  the  promotion  of  agriculture.  He  pub-
lished the  "Illustrated  Floral  Magazine"  in  1832,
was  the  author  of  numerous  fugitive  articles  on
agricultural  and  horticultural  subjects,  and  edited,
with  additions,  Johnson's  "  Dictionary  of  Modern
Gardening"  (Philadelphia,  1847).

LANDRETH,  Olin  Henry,  engineer,  b.  in
Addison,  N.  Y.,  21  July,  1852.  He  was  graduated
as  a  civil  engineer  in  1876  at  Union  college,  but
continued  his  scientific  studies  as  a  graduate  for  a
year  longer.  In  August,  1877,  he  became  assistant
astronomer  at  the  Dudley  observatory  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  which  appointment  he  held  until  September,
1879.  when  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  engineer-
ing in  Vanderbilt  university,  Nashville,  Tenn.
Prof.  Landreth  was  consulting  engineer  in  regard
to  the  new  water-supply  of  Nashville  in  1884-'5,
and  has  also  filled  other  shorter  engineering  en-
gagements. He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,
and,  besides  contributing  technical  papers  to  their
proceedings,  he  has  published  '■  Metric  Tables  for
Engineers  "  (Philadelphia,  1883).


606


LANDRY


LANE


LANDRY,  Anguste  Charles  Phi  11  ipe  Robert,

Canadian  author,  b.  in  Quebec,  15  Jan.,  1846.  His
father  was  a  surgeon  of  the  province  of  Quebec,
one  of  the  founders  of  Laval  university,  in  which
he  was  a  professor  for  nearly  thirty  years.  The
son  graduated  at  Quebec  seminary,  studied  at  St.
Anne  agricultural  college,  was  assistant  professor
of  chemistry  in  Laval  university  in  1865-'7,  and
afterward  became  a  farmer.  He  was  an  unsuccess-
ful candidate  in  1873  for  the  local  house,  and  was
first  elected  to  the  Quebec  legislative  assembly  for
Montmagny  in  1875.  He  was  unseated,  29  May,
1876,  by  judgment  of  the  superior  court,  and  elected
for  Montmagny  to  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1878,  and  again  in  1882.  In  1885  Mr.  Landry,
though  a  Conservative,  introduced  a  motion  cen-
suring the  government  of  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald
for  the  execution  of  Louis  Riel.  He  is  a  member
of  the  Entomological  society  of  Canada,  president
of  the  Quebec  Conservative  association,  and  a
knight  of  the  Order  of  Gregory  the  Great.  He  is
the  author,  among  other  works,  of  "  Boissons  al-
cooliques  et  leurs  falsifications  "  (Sainte  Anne  de
la  Pocatiere,  1867) ;  "  Ou  est  la  disgrace  %  Repense
a  une  condamnation  politique "  (Quebec,  1876) ;
"  Traite  populaire  d'agriculture  theorique  et  prac-
tique  "  (Montreal,  1878) ;  "  L'Halie,  ses  beautes  et
ses  souvenirs  "  (Quebec,  1880) ;  "  L'eglise  et  l'etat "
(Rome,  1883);  "Cette  enquete"  (Quebec,  1883);
"  Les  six  raisons  du  Dr.  Verge  contre  le  cercle
Catholique  de  Quebec  "  (1884) ;  and  various  scien-
tific, literary,  and  political  pamphlets.

LANDRY,  Pierre  Armand,  Canadian  lawyer,
b.  in  Dorchester,  N.  B.,  1  May,  1846.  He  was  edu-
cated at  St.  Joseph's  college,  Memramcook,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  New  Brunswick  in  1870.
He  was  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly  of  New
Brunswick  in  1870,  1878,  and  1882,  and  appointed
a  member  of  the  executive  council  and  chief  com-
missioner of  public  works,  13  July,  1878.  He  re-
signed this  portfolio,  25  May,  1882,  and  on  the
same  day  was  appointed  provincial  secretary.  He
resigned  his  seat  in  the  legislative  assembly  in
August,  1883,  and  was  elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament,  to  which  he  was  chosen  again  in  Feb-
ruary, 1887.  He  became  queen's  counsel  in  1881,
and  refused  a  judgeship  in  1885.

LANE,  Amos,  lawyer,  b.  near  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  1
March,  1778 ;  d.  in  Lawrenceburg,  Ind.,  2  Sept.,  1849.
He  received  a  public-school  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in
Lawrenceburg,  Ind.,  having  removed  to  the  Ohio
river  in  1807.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  legis-
lature, in  which  he  served  one  session  as  speaker,
and  was  afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  1833  till  1837. — His  son,  James
Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Lawrenceburg,  Ind.,  22  June,
1814;  d.  near  Leavenworth,  Kansas.  1  July,  1866,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840,  and
elected  to  the  city  council  of  Lawrenceburg.  In
May.  1846,  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  3d  Indi-
ana volunteer  regiment,  organizing  for  the  Mexi-
can war,  was  chosen  colonel,  and  commanded  a
brigade  at  Buena  Vista.  He  became  colonel  of  the
5th  Indiana  regiment  in  1847,  and  in  1848  was
chosen  lieutenant-governor  of  Indiana.  From  1853
till  1855  he  was  a  representative  in  congress,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  voted  for  the
repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise.  In  1855  he
went  to  Kansas,  where  he  took  an  active  part  in
politics  as  a  leader  of  the  Free-state  party,  and
was  made  chairman  of  the  executive  committee  of
the  Topeka  constitutional  convention.  He  was
elected  by  the  people  major-general  of  the  free-
state  troops,  and  was  active  in  driving  out  the


Missouri  invaders.  In  1856  he  was  elected  to  the
TJ.  S.  senate  by  the  legislature  that  met  under  the
Topeka  constitution :  but  the  election  was  not  recog-
nized by  congress,  and  he  was  indicted  in  Douglas
county  for  high  treason  and  forced  to  flee  from  the
territory.  In  1857  he  was  president  of  the  Leaven-
worth constitutional  convention,  and  again  made
major-general  of  the  territorial  troops.  In  1858  he
shot  a  neighbor  named  Jenkins  in  a  quarrel  about
a  well,  for  which  he  was  tried  and  acquitted.  On
the  admission  of  Kansas  to  the  Union  in  1861,  he
was  elected  to  the  IT.  S.  senate,  serving  on  the  com-
mittees of  Indian  affairs  and  agriculture. In  May,

1861,  he  commanded  the  frontier  guards  that  were
organized  for  the  defence  of  Washington,  and  on
18  Dec.  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers; but  the  appointment  was  cancelled,  21  March,

1862.  He  commanded  the  Kansas  brigade  in  the
field  for  four  months,  rendering  good  service  in
western  Missouri.  He  narrowly  escaped  from  the
Lawrence  massacre  in  August,  1863,  and  was  an
aide  to  Gen.  Curtis  during  Gen.  Sterling  Price's
raid  in  October,  1864.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Baltimore  convention  of  1864.  He  was  re-elected
to  the  United  States  senate  in  1865,  but  in  the
following  year,  while  on  his  way  home,  he  was  at-
tacked with  paralysis,  his  mind  became  unsettled,
and  he  committed  suicide.

LANE,  Ebenezer,  jurist,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  17  Dec,  1793;  d.  in  Sandusky,  Ohio,  13
June,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1811,  studied  law  under  his  uncle,  Matthew  Gris-
wold,  of  Lyme,  Conn.,  in  1814  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and,  after  practising  for  three  years  in  Connec-
ticut, removed  to  Ohio  and  settled  in  Norwalk,
Huron  co.  He  became  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  in  1824,  and  from  1837  till  1845  was
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio.  After  his  re-
tirement from  the  bench  he  resumed  his  profes-
sion, and  was  afterward  engaged  in  various  rela-
tions with  the  western  railroads,  withdrawing  from
active  employment  in  1859.

LANE,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ulster  county,
N.  Y.,  13  April,  1784;  d.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  6
May,  1859.  He  joined  the  Philadelphia  confer-
ence of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1805,
and  was  itinerant  missionary  in  central  and  west-
ern New  York,  and  in  Virginia  and  in  Maryland,
subsequently  settling  near  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.  He
became  agent  for  the  Methodist  book  concern  in
1836,  and  for  many  years  was  treasurer  of  the
Methodist  missionary  society.  Under  his  manage-
ment the  book  concern  doubled  its  business,  and
the  missionary  society  was  relieved  of  a  debt  of
$60,000. — His  son,  George  Washington,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,  1815 :  d.  in
Oxford,  Ga.,  21  Sept.,  1848,  was  licensed  to  preach
in  the  Methodist  ministry  in  1834,  and,  removing
to  Georgia,  was  for  ten  years  professor  of  languages
in  Emory  college,  Oxford.

LANE,  Joel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Halifax  county,
N.  C,  in  1740;  d.  in  Wake  county,  N.  C,  in  1795.
He  removed  with  his  two  brothers,  Joseph  and
Jesse,  from  Halifax  to  Wake  county  N.  C,  was
one  of  the  first  settlers  in  that  region,  and  amassed
a  large  fortune.  In  1775  he  was  a  member  of
the  Provincial  congress  that  met  at  Hillsbor-
ough, N.  C,  and  in  1781  he  served  in  the  gen-
eral assembly,  which  was  held  in  his  own  house.
In  April.  1792,  he  gave  to  the  state  of  North  Caro-
lina 1.000  acres  of  land,  upon  which  the  city  of
Raleigh  was  built. — His  great-nephew,  Joseph,
soldier,  b.  in  Buncombe  county.  N.  C,  14  Dec,
1801 ;  d.  in  Oregon,  19  April,  1881,  removed  with
his  parents  to Henderson  county,  Ky.,  in  1804,


LANE


LANE


607


and  in  1816  he  went  to  Warwick  county,  Ind.,
where  for  several  years  he  was  a  clerk  in  a  mer-
cantile house.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature
in  1822,  continued  in  office  till  1846,  when  he  en-
listed as  a  private  in
the  2d  regiment  of
Indiana  volunteers,
was  in  a  few  weeks
commissioned  its  colo-
nel, and  in  June  re-
ceived from  President
Polk  the  appointment
of  brigadier  -  general.
He  was  wounded  at
the  battle  of  Buena
Vista,  was  brevetted
major-general  for  gal-
lantry at  Huamantla,
commanded  at  Atlix-
eo,  took  Matamoras,
22  Nov.,  1847,  cap-
tured Orizaba  in  Jan-
uary, 1848,  and  the
next  month  fought  the  robber-chief  Jaranta  at
Tchualtaplan.  He  was  known  as  the  "  Marion  of
the  Mexican  army."  At  the  conclusion  of  the
war  he  was  appointed  governor  of  Oregon  by
President  Polk,  was  its  delegate  to  congress,  being
elected  as  a  Democrat  in  1851— '7,  and  in  1853  com-
manded the  settlers  in  the  campaign  against  the
Rogue  Indians,  whom  he  defeated  at  the  battle
near  Table  Rock,  in  which  he  was  severely  wound-
ed. On  the  admission  of  Oregon  as  a  state  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator,  served 'from  1859  till  1861,
and  in  1860  was  nominated  for  vice-president  on
the  John  C.  Breckinridge  ticket.  His  defeat  ended
his  political  career,  and  he  passed  his  old  age  in  ob-
scurity and  poverty  in  a  remote  part  of  Oregon. —
Joseph's  son,  Lafayette,  congressman,  b<  in  Van-
derberg  county,  Ind.,  12  Nov.,  1842,  was  educated
in  Washington,  D.  O,  and  in  Stamford,  Conn.,
adopted  law  as  a  profession,  and  removed  to  Ore-
gon. He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1864,
code-commissioner  of  Oregon  in  1874,  and  in  that
year  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  to  fill
a  vacancy  occasioned  by  the  death  of  George  A.
La  Dow,  serving  till  1877.  He  was  defeated  at  the
next  congressional  election,  and  is  now  (1887)  en-
gaged in  the  practice  of  law. — Another  great-
nephew  of  Joel,  Henry  Smith,  senator,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county,  Ky.,  24  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Craw-
fordsville,  Ind.,  11  June,  1881,  worked  on  a  farm
and  attended  school  at  intervals  till  he  was  six-
teen years  old.  He  began  the  study  of  law  at
eighteen,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  twenty-one,
and,  removing  to  Indiana,  practised  his  profession
till  1854.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1837,  and
the  next  year  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Repub-
lican, serving  till  1843.  The  defeat  of  Henry  Clay
for  the  presidency  retired  Mr.  Lane  from  political
life  for  sixteen  years.  At  the  first  National  Re-
publican convention  he  made  so  effective  a  speech
that,  in  June,  1856,  he  was  elected  permanent  presi-
dent of  that  body,  and  for  several  years  he  led  the
Republican  party  in  the  state.  The  election  of
1858  gave  the  Republicans  the  majority  of  both
houses  of  the  Indiana  legislature.  In  1859,  with
the  aid  of  the  "  Americans,"  they  elected  Mr.  Lane
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  hoping  to  annul  the  informal
election  of  1858  that  gave  the  seat  to  Jesse  D.
Bright.  The  case  was  referred  to  the  congres-
sional committee  on  elections,  which  reported  in
favor  of  the  validity  of  the  former  election,  and
sustained  Mr.  Bright.  Mr.  Lane  became  governor
of  Indiana  in  I860,  and  in  February  of  that  year


was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  till  1867.
He  retired  from  politics  at  the  end  of  his  term,
and,  except  as  Indian  peace-commissioner  under
Gen.  Grant,  undertook  no  regular  public  service.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  loyalists'  convention  in
1866,  to  the  Chicago  national  Republican  conven-
tion in  1868,  and  to  that  of  Cincinnati  in  1876.

LANE,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Virginia,  8  April,
1789;  d.  in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  10  Oct.,  1855.  His
early  life  was  passed  in  Georgia,  where  he  was  a
student  for  several  years  at  Franklin  college.  He
entered  the  South  Carolina  conference  of  the
Methodist  church  in  1814,  and  the  next  year  was
sent  to  the  Natchez  circuit,  becoming  the  pioneer
of  Methodism  in  Mississippi.  His  earlv  work
there  was  among  the  Cherokee  and  Creek  Indians,
whose  confidence  he  won  by  his  daring  and  self-
sacrifice.  He  was  appointed  presiding  elder  on
the  Mississippi  circuit  in  1820,  and  this  year  set-
tled on  the  estate  of  his  father-in-law.  Rev.  Newit
Vick,  the  site  of  the  present  city  of  Vicksburg,
which  Mr.  Lane  named  in  Vick's  honor.  Mr.
Lane  subsequently  engaged  in  business,  was  pro-
bate judge  of  Warren  county,  and,  although  preach-
ing continually,  became  one  of  the  most  influen-
tial business  men  in  the  state  of  Mississippi.  He
re-entered  the  conference  in  1831,  and  during  the
greater  part  of  his  subsequent  career  was  a  presid-
ing elder.  For  many  years  he  was  president  of
the  conference  missionary  society,  and  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  Centenary  college,  Jackson,  La.

LANE,  Jonathan  Homer,  mathematician,  b.
in  Geneseo,  N.  Y.,  9  Aug.,  1819;  d.  in  Washing-
ton. D.  C,  3  May,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1846,  entered  the  employ  of  the  U.  S.  coast
survey  in  1847,  and  a  year  later  was  made  assistant
examiner  in  the  U.  S.  patent-office,  becoming  prin-
cipal examiner  in  1851.  Subsequently  he  re-en-
tered the  coast  survey,  and  from  1869  till  18b0  was
connected  with  the  bureau  of  weights  and  meas-
ures. He  devoted  considerable  attention  to  as-
tronomy, and  was  sent,  under  the  auspices  of  the
coast  survey,  with  the  expedition  to  Des  Moines,
Iowa,  to  observe  the  total  solar  eclipse  of  1869,
and  to  Catania,  Spain,  in  1870,  for  a  similar  pur-
pose. Mr.  Lane  was  a  member  of  scientific  socie-
ties, and  was  early  elected  to  membership  in  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  Among  his  impor-
tant inventions  were  a  machine  for  finding  the
real  roots  of  the  higher  equations;  a  machine  for
very  exact  uniform  motion ;  a  visual  telegraph ;
a  visual  method  for  the  comparison  of  clocks  at
great  distances  apart :  an  improved  basin  for  mer-
curial horizon  :  and  a  mechanism  for  holding  the
Drummond  light  and  reflector  on  shipboard.  His
principal  memoirs  were  "  On  the  Law  of  Electric
Induction  in  Metals"  (1846);  "On  the  Law  of  In-
duction of  an  Electric  Current  on  Itself"  (1851):
"  Report  on  the  Solar  Eclipse  of  7  Aug.,  1869 "
(1869);  "Theoretical  Temperature  of  the  Sun"
(1870):  "Report  on  the  Solar  Eclipse  of  12  Dec,
1870"  (1871);  "Description  of  a  New  Form  of
Mercurial  Horizon  "(1871);  and"Coefficientsof  Ex-
pansion of  the  British  Standard  Yard  Bar  "(1877).

LANE,  Sir  Ralph,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in
Northamptonshire,  England,  about  1530;  d.  in
Ireland  in  1604.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Sir
Ralph  of  Orlingbury,  and  Maud,  first  cousin  of
Catherine  Parr,  queen  of  Henry  VIII.  The  son
entered  the  queen  s  service  in  1563,  was  an  equerry
in  her  court,  held  a  command  in  Ireland  in  1583-'4,
and  in  1585,  by  invitation  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
took  charge  of  the  colony  that  the  latter  was  about
to  send  to  Virginia.  Sir  Richard  Grenville  (q.  v.),
who  commanded  the  fleet  that  bore  the  colony  to


608


LANG


LANGDON


this  country,  left  Lane  with  107  nten  on  Roanoke
island,  and  on  25  Aug.  returned  to  England.  Lane
at  once  erected  a  fort,  and  began  to  explore  the
coast  and  rivers  of  the  country  within  a  radius  of
about  100  miles.  He  soon  became  convinced  that
a  mistake  had  been  made  in  settling  on  Roanoke
island  on  account  of  the  dangerous  coast  and  bad
harbor,  and  resolved  to  move  the  colony  to  Chesa-
peake bay  as  soon  as  supplies  should  arrive  from
England.  Provisions  soon  ran  short,  there  was
trouble  with  the  Indians,  and  Lane  and  his  men
finally  abandoned  the  colony  on  19  June,  1586,
returning  to  England  in  the  fleet  of  Sir  Francis
Drake.  Lane  served  as  a  colonel  under  Drake  in  the
Portuguese  expedition  of  1589,  was  muster-master-
general  in  Ireland  in  1591,  where  he  was  danger-
ously wounded,  and  was  knighted  by  the  lord
deputy  in  1593. Several  letters  of  Sir  Ralph  are

E reserved  in  Hakluyt's  "  Voyages "  and  Francis
i.  Hawks's  "  History  of  North  Carolina "  (1857),
and  have  been  edited  by  Edward  E.  Hale  in  "Ar-
chaeologia  Americana,"  vol.  iv.  (1860).  These  let-
ters show  that  enmity  between  Lane  and  Sir  Rich-
ard Grenville,  which  began  on  the  voyage  to  Vir-
ginia, probably  had  much  to  do  with  the  former's
abandonment  of  his  enterprise.

LANG,  Gavin,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in  Glas-
ford,  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  in  July,  1835.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Glasgow,
licensed  to  preach  in  1864,  and  served  as  assistant
minister  at  the  parish  church  in  that  city.  In
1865  he  became  pastor  at  Fyvie,  Aberdeenshire,
where  he  remained  five  years,  and  then  was  for  a
short  time  pastor  of  his  father's  church  at  Glas-
ford.  In  1870  he  succeeded  Rev.  Alexander  Ma-
thieson  as  pastor  of  St.  Andrew's  Presbyterian
church,  Montreal.  When  the  union  between  the
adherents  of  the  Free  church  and  the  Established
church  in  Canada  was  proposed,  the  scheme  was
strongly  opposed  by  Mr.  Lang,  and  when  the
union  was  consummated  in  1875  he  was  one  of  the
three  ministers  that  stood  aloof,  claiming  to  re-
main still  the  Presbyterian  church  of  Canada,  in
connection  with  the  Church  of  Scotland.  When
the  United  church  applied  for  confirmatory  legis-
lation from  the  Dominion  parliament,  Mr.  Lang
appeared  before  the  private  bills  committee  and
strenuously  opposed  the  measure,  which  was,  how-
ever, passed.  He  is  now  (1887)  a  professor  in  Dal-
housic  college,  N.  B.  He  is  an  impressive  preacher,
and  has  for  years  taken  an  active  part  in  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  Evangelical  alliance.

LANG,  Louis,  artist,  b.  in  Waldsee,  Wiirtem-
berg,  29  Feb.,  1812.  His  father,  a  historical  paint-
er, wished  him  to  become  a  musician,  but  his  taste
was  for  art.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  executed
pastels  with  success.  He  studied  at  Stuttgart
and  Paris,  and  settled  in  the  United  States  in
1838.  his  studio  being  for  several  years  in  Phila-
delphia. He  spent  the  years  1841-'5  in  Italy,  and
came  to  New  York  in  the  latter  year,  where  he
now  (1887)  resides,  with  frequent  visits  to  Europe.
He  was  elected  a  National  academician  in  1852,
and  is  a  member  of  the  Artists'  fund  society.
Lang's  style  is  characterized  by  brilliant  but  well-
balanced  coloring ;  his  choice  of  subjects  is  senti-
mental and  popular.  Among  his  best-known
works  are  "  Maid  of  Saragossa,"  "  Mary  Stuart
distributing  Gifts,"  "Blind  Nydia,"  "Jephtha's
Daughter,"  "  Neapolitan  Fisher  Family,"  "  Little
Graziosa  among  the  Butterflies  "  (1871) ;  "  Landing
of  the  Market-Boat  at  Capri "  (1876) ;  and  "  Ro-
meo and  Juliet,"  which  is  in  the  Century  club,
New  York.  His  most  recent  work  at  the  National
academy  is  "  Portrait  of  a  Little  Child  "  (1885).


LANGDELL,  Christopher  Columbus,  lawver,
b.  in  Hillsborough  county,  N.  H.,  22  May,  1826.
He  entered  Harvard  in  1848,  but  left  in  1849  to
become  a  teacher,  and  was  afterward  graduated  at
the  law-school  in  1853.  He  then  practised  in  New
York  city  till  1870,  when  he  became  professor  of
jurisprudence,  and  dean  of  the  law  faculty,  at  Har-
vard. He  was  given  his  degree  of  A.  B.,  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  class  of  1851,  in  1870,  and  that  of  LL.  I),
in  1875.  Prof.  Langdell  has  published  "Selection
of  Cases  on  the  Law  of  Contracts  "  (2  parts,  Boston,
1870 ;  enlarged  ed.,  1877) ;  "  Cases  on  Sales  "  (1872) ;
"  Summary  of  Equity  Pleading  "  (Cambridge,  1877 :
2d  ed.,  1883);  and  "Cases  in  Equity  Pleading"
(printed  privately,  1878).

LANGDON,  Oliver  Monroe,  physician,  b.  near
Columbus.  Ohio,  2  Feb.,  1817;  d.  there,  15  June,
1878.  He  studied  at  St.  Xavier's  college,  Cin-
cinnati, was  graduated  at  the  Medical  college  of
Ohio  in  1838,  and  after  two  years  in  Madison,
Ind.,  settled  in  Cincinnati.  He  was  soon  after-
ward appointed  physician  to  one  of  the  four  town-
ships into  which  the  city  was  then  divided,  prac-
tised till  1846.  then  joined  the  4th  regiment  of
Ohio  volunteers,  and  served  as  its  surgeon  till
the  close  of  the  Mexican  war.  Dr.  Langdon  was
one  of  the  founders  of  Miami  medical  college,  and
an  instigator  of  the  movement  that  removed  lu-
natics from  the  Cincinnati  commercial  hospital
to  the  lunatic  asylum  at  Lick  Run,  of  which  he
was  superintendent  in  1850-'6.  At  that  date  he
organized,  and  was  made  superintendent  of,  the
insane  asylum  at  Longview,  continuing  in  office
till  1870,  when  failure  of  health  compelled  his  re-
tirement from  all  active  duties.  Previous  to  1866
all  the  colored  insane  in  the  state  of  Ohio  had
been  confined  in  prisons ;  at  that  date  Dr.  Lang-
don established  a  separate  department  for  their  ac-
commodation at  Longview  asylum,  and,  as  the
trustees  of  Longview  could  not,  under  their  charter,
own  a  negro  institution,  it  was  purchased  in  Dr.
Langdon's  name,  and  was  held  in  trust  for  the
county  by  him.  He  was  a  member  of  various
medical  societies,  and  a  trustee  of  Miami  medical
college  from  its  foundation  till  his  death.

LANGDON,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  Jan.,  1723 ;  d.  in  Hampton  Falls,  N.  II.,
29  Nov.,  1797.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1740,  and  while  teaching  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,
studied  theology,  and  was  licensed  to  preach.  In
1745  he  was  appointed  chaplain  of  a  regiment,  and
was  present  at  the  capture  of  Louisburg.  On  his
return  he  was  appointed  assistant  to  Rev.  James
Fitch,  of  the  North  church  of  Portsmouth,  was  or-
dained pastor  in  1747,  and  continued  in  that  charge
till  1774,  when  he  became  president  of  Harvard.
His  ardent  patriotism  led  him  to  adopt  measures
that  were  obnoxious  to  the  Tory  students,  and
although  he  endeavored  to  administer  the  govern-
ment of  the  college  with  justice,  his  resignation
was  virtually  compelled  in  1780.  The  next  year  he
became  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at
Hampton  Falls,  N.  H.  In  1788  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  New  Hampshire  convention  that  adopted
the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  often  led  its
debates,  and  did  much  to  remove  prejudice  against
the  constitution.  He  was  distinguished  as  a  scholar
and  theologian,  and  exerted  a  wide  influence  in  his
community.  The  University  of  Aberdeen  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1762,  and  he  was  a  member
of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  from
its  foundation.  He  published  "  Summary  of
Christian  Faith  and  Practice"  (1768);  "Observa-
tions on  the  Revelations  "  (1791) ;  "  Remarks  on  the
Leading  Sentiments  of  Dr.  Hopkins's  System  of


LANGDON


LANGEVIN


609


Doctrines"  (1794);  and  many  sermons.  In  1761,
in  connection  with  Col.  Joseph  Blanchard,  he  pre-
pared and  published  a  map  of  New  Hampshire.

LANGDON,  William  Chauncy,  clergyman,  b.
in  Burlington,  Vt.,  19  Aug.,  1831.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Transylvania  university  in  1850,  and  was
adjunct  professor  of  astronomy  and  chemistry  in
Shelby  college,  Ky.,  in  1850-'l.  In  May,  1851,  he
was  appointed  assistant  examiner  of  the'U.  S.  pat-
ent-office, and  four  years  later  he  became  chief
examiner.  In  1856  he  resigned  and  entered  on
the  practice  of  patent  law,  but  not  long  afterward
resolved  to  enter  the  ministry  of  the  Episcopal
church,  and  was  made  deacon  in  1858,  and  priest
in  1859.  He  served  for  a  year  as  assistant  minister
in  St.  Andrew's  church,  Philadelphia,  and  in  the
autumn  of  1859  went  to  Rome,  Italy,  and  founded
the  American  Episcopal  church  in  that  city,  of
which  he  was  the  first  rector.  Returning  to  the
United  States,  he  was  rector  of  St.  John's  church,
Havre  de  Grace,  Md.,  from  1862  till  1866.  In  the
general  convention  of  1865  he  brought  forward  the
subject  of  Italian  Catholic  reform,  and  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  joint  committee,  and  sent
to  Italy  in  this  behalf  in  January,  1867.  He  vis-
ited Florence,  where  he  remained  until  1873,  being
the  agent  and  instrument  of  intercourse  between
the  bishops  and  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England
and  of  the  American  church,  and  those  members  of
the  Latin  churches  that  were  inclined  to  reform.
He  was  active  in  bringing  about  relations  between
the  "Old  Catholics "  and  the  American  bishops,
and  was  present  at  the  Old  Catholic  congress  in
1872,  in  Cologne,  and  also  at  subsequent  congresses
in  1872,  1873,  and  1874,  as  well  as  at  the  reunion
conferences  in  Cologne  and  Bonn  in  1872-'5.  He
founded  Emmanuel  church,  Geneva.  Switzerland.
in  1873,  and  was  in  charge  until  1875.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1874  from  Gambier  college,
Ohio.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1875,
and  accepted  the  rectorship  of  Christ  church.  Cain-
bridge,  Mass.,  in  1876,  but  toward  the  close  of  1878
resigned,  greatly  broken  in  health.  In  1883  he
became  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Bedford,  Pa.,
where  he  now  (1887)  resides.  Besides  numerous  re-
ports of  his  special  work  in  Europe,  Dr.  Langdon
has  published  "  Some  Account  of  the  Catholic  Re-
form Movement  in  the  Italian  Church  "  (London,
1868) ;  "  The  Defects  in  our  Practical  Catholicity  "
(New  York,  1871);  "Plain  Papers  for  Parish
Priests  and  People  "  (1880-'3) ;  and  "  The  Conflict
of  Practice  and  Principle  in  American  Church
Polity  "  (Cambridge,  1882).

LANGDON,  Woodbury,  statesman,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth. N.  II.,  in  1739;  d.  there,  13  Jan.,  1805.
He  received  a  public-school  education,  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits,  and  was  active  in  pre-Revolu-
tionary  movements.  He  was  a  delegate  from  New
Hampshire  to  the  Continental  congress  of  1779-80,
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  in  1781— '4,
and  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Hamp-
shire in  1782,  and  subsequently  from  1786  till  1790.
— His  brother,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  EL,  in  December,  1739 ;  d.  there,  18  Sept.,  1819,
after  receiving  a  common-school  education  entered
a  counting-house  and  became  a  successful  merchant.
In  1774,  with  John  Sullivan  and  others,  he  partici-
pated in  the  removal  of  the  armament  and  mili-
tary stores  from  Fort  William  and  Mary  in  Ports-
mouth harbor.  He  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the
Continental  congress  in  1775,  but  resigned  in  June.
1776,  to  become  navy  agent.  In  1777,  while  he
was  speaker  of  the  New  Hampshire  assembly,
when  means  were  wanted  to  support  a  regiment.
Langdon  gave  all  his  money,  pledged  his  plate,
vol.  m. — 39


and  subscribed  the  proceeds  of  70  hogsheads  of
tobacco  for  the  purpose  of  equipping  the  brigade
with  which  Gen.  John  Stark  subsequently  de-
feated the  Hessians  at  Bennington.  Langdon
participated  in  the  battle  of  Stillwater,  and  com-
manded a  company  at  Saratoga,  and  in  Rhode
Island.  In  1779  he  was  continental  agent  in  New
Hampshire,  and  president  of  the  State  convention.
He  was  again  a  dele-
gate to  congress  in
1783,  was  repeatedly
a  member  of  the  legis-
lature and  its  speaker,
and  in  1787  a  delegate
to  the  convention  that
framed  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United
States.  In  March,
1788,  he  became  gov-
ernor of  New  Hamp-
shire, and  in  1789  he
was  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor, holding  office  till
1801,  and  was  chosen
president  of  the  sen-
ate in  order  that  the
electoral  votes  for
president  of  the  United  States  might  be  counted.
A  president  of  the  senate  had  therefore  a  legal
existence  before  there  was  either  a  president  or  a
vice-president  of  the  United  States.  He  was  a
Republican  in  politics  and  acted  with  Jefferson,
who,  on  assuming  office  in  1801,  offered  him  the
post  of  secretary  of  the  navy,  which  he  declined.
From  1805  till  1812.  with  the  exception  of  one
year,  he  was  governor  of  New  Hampshire,  and  in
1812  the  Republican  congressional  caucus  offered
him  the  nomination  for  the  office  of  vice-president
of  the  United  States,  which  he  declined  on  the
score  of  age  and  infirmities,  passing  the  remainder
of  his  life  in  retirement.

LANGELIER,  Francois  Charles  Stanislas,
Canadian  statesman,  b.  at  Sainte  Rosalie.  Quebec,
24  Dec.  1838.  He  was  educated  in  classics  at  St.
Hyacinthe  college,  and  in  law  at  Laval  university,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1861.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  that  year,  and  in
1863  was  appointed  professor  of  Roman  law  at
Laval,  becoming,  in  1870.  professor  of  civil  law
and  political  economy.  He  was  elected  for  Mont-
magny  to  the  legislature  of  Quebec.  16  Dec,  1873,
and  for  Portneuf  in  1878.  but  was  defeated  in  1881.
He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  and
commissioner  of  crown  lands  of  the  province  of
Quebec  from  8  March.  1878.  and  treasurer  from
March,  1879,  till  the  resignation  of  the  Joly  minis-
try in  October,  1879.  He  was  first  elected  to  the
Dominion  parliament  for  Megan  tic  in  1884,  and  for
Centre  Quebec  in  1887.  In  1882  he  was  elected
mayor  of  Quebec  which  office  he  s*ill  (1887)  holds.
LANGERFELDT,  Theodore  Otto,  artist,  b.  in
Buckeburg.  Schaumburg-Lippe,  Germany.  2  -March,
1841.  He  first  studied  architecture  at  the  Poly-
technic school.  Hanover,  which  gave  a  bias  to  his
selection  of  subjects.  He  then  passed  five  years  in
London,  and  removed  to  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1868,
where  he  has  since  resided.  He  paints  chiefly  in
water-colors.  One  of  his  architectural  paintings
was  awarded  a  prize  at  the  Centennial  exhibition
of  Philadelphia  in  187<>.

LANGEVIN,  Jean  Pierre  Francois  La  Force,
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Quebec.  22  September,  1821.
He  was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of  Quebec,  and
ordained  a  priest,  22  Sept.,  1844.  He  was  professor
of  the  higher  mathematics  in  the  Seminary  of


610


LANGEVIN


LANGLADE


Quebec  from  1840  till  1849,  parish  priest  of  St.
Clair  from  1850  till  1854,  at  Beauport  from  1854
till  1858,  and  principal  of  Laval  normal  school
from  1858  till  1867.  On  1  May,  1867,  he  was  con-
secrated bishop  of  St.  Germain  de  Kimouski  in  the
province  of  Quebec.  In  1870  he  attended  the  (Ecu-
menical council  of  the  Vatican,  and  while  on  a
second  visit  to  Rome  in  1886  was  made  a  Roman
count,  and  assistant  to  the  apostolic  throne.  He
founded  the  College  of  Rimouski  in  1870,  L'hospice
des  soeurs  de  la  charite  in  1872,  Les  scaurs  des
petites  eeoles  in  1874,  and  established  a  chapter  in
his  cathedral  in  1877.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Traite
de  calcul  differentiel "  (Quebec,  1848) :  "  Histoire
du  Canada  en  tableaux"  (1860);  "Notes  sur  les
archives  de  Notre  Dame  de  Beauport"  (1860);
"  Reponses  aux  programmes  de  pedagogie  et
d'agriculture"  (1862);  and  "Cours  de  pedagogie"
(1865). — His  brother,  Edmund  Charles  Hippo-
lyte,  clergyman,  b.  in  Quebec,  30  Aug.,  1824,  was
ordained  a  priest  in  1847,  became  vicar-general
of  Quebec  in  1867,  and  of  Rimouski  in  the  same
year.  He  is  the  author  of  a  life  of  Bishop  Laval
(Montreal,  1874),  and  "  Notes  historiques  sur  le
chapitre  de  la  cathedral  de  Quebec"  (1874). — An-
other brother,  Sir  Hector  Louis,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Quebec,  26  Aug.,  1826,  was  educated
at  the  seminary  in  that  city.  He  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in
October,  1850,  and  was  appointed  queen's  counsel
in  1864.  He  was  ed-
itor of  the  "Melanges
religieux,"  of  Mont-
real, from  1847  till
1849,  also  of  the
"Journal  d'agricul-
ture "  of  that  city,
and  in  1857  of  the
"  Courrier  du  Cana-
da," of  Quebec.  He
was  mayor  of  Quebec
from  1858.  till  1861,
represented  Dorches-
ter in  the  Canadian
assembly  from  1857
till  the  union  in  1867,
and  afterward  in  the
Dominion  parliament
till  1874,  when  he  re-
tired. He  also  represented  Dorchester  in  the  local
legislature  from  1867  till  1871,  when  he  was  elected
by  acclamation  for  Quebec  Centre,  which  he  repre-
sented till  he  retired  in  January,  1874.  He  was
elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  for  Charlevoix
in  January,  1876,  and  again  returned  for  this  con-
stituency in  April,  1877,  after  having  been  unseated
on  petition,  and  unsuccessfully  contested  Rimouski
in  1878.  He  was  elected  by  acclamation  for  the
city  of  Three  Rivers,  17  Nov.,  1878,  without  oppo-
sition for  that  constituency  in  1882,  and  again  in
1887.  He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council
of  Canada  from  30  March,  1864,  till  1867,  held  the
office  of  solicitor-general  for  Lower  Canada  from
30  March,  1864,  till  November,  1865,  and  was  post-
master-general from  that  date  till  1867.  He  was
sworn  as  a  member  of  the  privy  council,  1  July,
1867,  and  appointed  secretary  of  state,  for  Canada,
which  portfolio  he  retained  until  appointed  minister
of  public  works,  8  Dec,  1869.  While  in  the  state
department  he  was  ex  -  officio  registrar-general,
superintendent-general  of  Indian  affairs,  and  was
a  commissioner  to  assist  the  speaker  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  interior  economy  of  the  house  of  com-
mons ;  also  chairman  of  the  railway  committee  of
the  privy  council. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Char-


Ol^^pa*j^^


lottetown  union  conference  in  1864,  to  that  in  Que-
bec in  the  same  year,  and  to  the  London  colonial
conference  of  1866-'7,  to  complete  the  terms  of
union  of  the  British  North  American  provinces,
lie  acted  as  a  leader  of  the  Lower  Canada  Con-
servatives in  1873,  during  the  absence  in  England
of  Sir  George  Etienne  Cartier,  and  after  his  death
became,  in  1873,  leader  of  the  party  in  that
province.  He  was  made  postmaster-general,  19
Oct.,  1878,  and  minister  of  public  works,  20  May,
1879.  On  5  April,  1879,  he  was  chosen  by  the  Mar-
quis of  Lome,  the  governor-general,  to  go  to  Lon-
don and  lay  before  the  British  government  the
views  of  the  Canadian  cabinet  relative  to  the  pro-
posed dismissal  of  Mr.  Letellier  de  St.  Just,  the
lieutenant-governor  of  the  province  of  Quebec.
His  mission  resulted  in  the  recognition  by  the
home  government  of  the  constitutional  rights  of
the  Canadian  government  to  remove  lieutenant-
governors  for  proper  cause.  He  was  created  a  com-
panion of  the  Order  of  the  Bath  in  1868,  a  knight-
commander  of  the  Order  of  Pope  Gregory  the
Great  in  1870,  and  a  knight-commander  of  the
Order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George  in  May,  1881.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Le  Canada,  ses  institutions  "
(Quebec,  1855) ;  "  Droit  administratis  ou  manuel
des  paroisses  et  fabriques"  (1862;  2d  ed.,  1878);
and  "Report  on  British  Columbia"  (1872).— An-
other brother,  Edward  Joseph,  Canadian  official,
b.  in  Quebec  in  1833,  was  educated  at  the  seminary
of  his  native  city.  He  was  admitted  as  a  notary
in  December,  1858,  and  was  a  member  of  the  cham-
ber of  notaries  for  the  district  of  Quebec.  He
served  as  a  volunteer  officer  during  the  excitement
that  was  caused  by  the  "  Trent "  affair,  was  ap-
pointed clerk  of  the  crown  in  chancery,  4  Jan.,
1865  ;  to  the  same  office  for  the  Dominion,  5  July,
1867 ;  deputy  registrar-general,  1  July,  1868  ;  under-
secretary of  state  for  Canada,  9  July,  1873;  secre-
tary for  the  civil-service  board  in  1876,  and  clerk
of  the  senate,  25  Jan.,  1883.

LANGLADE,  Charles  Michel  de,  French  sol-
dier, b.  in  Mackinaw,  Mich.,  in  May,  1729 ;  d.  in
Green  Bay,  Wis.,  in  January,  1800.  He  was  the
son  of  Augustin  de  Langlade  and  of  Domitilde,
widow  of  Daniel  Villeneuve,  and  sister  of  Nis-so-
na-quet,  the  principal  chief  of  the  Ottawas.  At
the  head  of  the  Ottawas  he  planned  and  executed
the  ambuscade  that  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  Gen.
Edward  Braddock  on  Monongahela  river  in  1755.
After  that  event  he  retired  to  Green  Bay,  and  the
following  year  returned  to  Fort  Duquesne,  where,
as  a  lieutenant  of  infantry,  he  rendered  valuable
service  to  the  commander  of  that  post  in  obtaining
information  of  the  movements  of  the  English  in
the  vicinity  of  Fort  Cumberland.  In  1757,  at  the
head  of  337  Ottawas,  he  joined  Montcalm  just  as
that  general  had  completed  the  investment  of  Fort
George,  and,  for  the  aid  which  he  gave  the  French
on  that  occasion,  he  was,  at  the  end  of  the  cam-
paign, appointed  by  the  Canadian  governor.  Vau-
dreuil,  second  in  command  of  the  post  of  Macki-
naw. He  was  again  with  Montcalm  during  the
siege  of  Quebec  by  Gen.  Wolfe,  and  on  20  July,
1759,  planned  an  ambuscade  and  attack  on  a  de-
tachment of  Wolfe's  army,  2,000  strong.  Had  he
been  properly  supported  he  probably  would  have
put  an  end  to  the  English  expedition.  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  battle  of  the  Plains  of  Abra-
ham, and,  on  28  April,  1760,  fought  under  the
Chevalier  de  Levis,  when  that  officer,  at  the  head
of  the  Canadian  militia,  achieved  an  abortive  tri-
umph upon  the  same  field  which  had  witnessed
the  defeat  of  Montcalm.  At  the  time  of  Pontiac's
conspiracy,  in  1763,  he  gave  the  western  garrisons


LANGLEY


LANGLEY


611


timely  notice  of  that  chieftain's  treachery,  and,  had
his  warning  been  heeded,  the  massacres  at  the  dif-
ferent frontier  posts  would  not  have  occurred.  At
the  beginning  of  the  American  Revolution,  Lang-
lade attached  himself  to  the  English  cause,  and,
at  the  head  of  a  large  body  of  Indians,  composed
of  Sioux,  Sacs,  Foxes,  Menomonees,  Winnebagoes,
Ottawas,Chippewas,  and  other  western  tribes,  joined
Burgoyne's  army  at  Skenesborough  (now  White-
hall, N.  Y.)  at  the  end  of  July,  1777.  Upon  the
murder  of  Jane  McCrea  (q.  v.),  and  the  severe  rep-
rimand which  that  event  called  forth  from  Bur-
goyne,  the  Indians  deserted  the  British  general
almost  to  a  man,  leaving  Langlade  and  St.  Luc  no
alternative  but  to  return  with  them.  These  two
were  afterward  the  objects  of  a  bitter  attack  on  the
part  of  Burgoyne  in  parliament,  since,  had  their
influence  been  exerted  to  detain  his  Indian  allies,
Burgoyne  believed  his  subsequent  disaster  would
not  have  occurred.  Langlade,  however,  does  not
seem  to  have  been  censured  by  the  English  govern-
ment, since,  in  1780,  he  was  made  Indian  agent,
and  later  Indian  superintendent  and  commander-
in-chief,  of  the  Canadian  militia,  which  last  two
posts  he  retained  until  his  death.  He  was  also
granted  for  his  services  to  the  English  during  the
Revolutionary  war  a  life  annuity  of  $800.  After
the  war  he  settled  at  Green  Bay,  where  he  became
one  of  the  most  enterprising  pioneers  of  the  west.
He  is  still  known  there  as  "the  founder  and  father
of  Wisconsin."  Although  during  his  life  he  had
taken  part  in  ninety-nine  battles  and  skirmishes,
he  was  of  a  mild  and  patient  disposition,  and  in-
spired the  affection  and  respect  of  those  with  whom
he  came  into  social  relations.  His  integrity  was
proverbial,  and  his  accounts  with  the  English  gov-
ernment were  always  remarkable  for  their  exact-
ness. Langlade  was  of  medium  height,  squarely
built,  with  broad  shoulders  and  piercing,  jet-black
eyes.  His  head  was  slightly  bald,  and  in  his  old
age  his  remaining  locks  were  streaked  with  silver.
His  face  was  round  and  full  of  expression.  He
married,  12  Aug.,  1754,  at  Mackinaw,  Charlotte
Ambroisine  Bourassa,  by  whom  he  had  two  daugh-
ters. It  is  believed  that  none  of  his  descendants
are  now  living.

LANGLEY,  Samuel  Pierpont,  astronomer,  b.
in  Roxbury,  Boston.  Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1834.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Boston  Latin-school,  and  then
turned  his  attention  to  civil  engineering,  after
which  he  was  occupied  with  the  practice  of  archi-
tecture. As  a  boy  he  showed  a  decided  fondness
for  astronomy,  not  only  reading  books  on  that  sci-
ence, but  also  experimenting  and  making  small
telescopes  for  his  own  use.  In  1865,  after  spend-
ing two  years  in  Europe,  he  returned  to  the  United
States,  was  for  a  few  months  an  assistant  in  the
Harvard  observatory,  and  then  was  called  to  a
chair  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  at
Annapolis.  In  1867  he  was  invited  to  fill  the  profes-
sorship of  astronomy  in  the  Western  university  of
Pennsylvania  in  Pittsburg,  with  charge  of  the  ob-
servatory in  Allegheny  City.  Here  he  has  since  re-
mained, and  in  January,  1887,  received  the  appoint-
ment of  assistant  secretary  of  the  Smithsonian
institution,  succeeding  to  the  full  secretaryship  in
November,  1887.  His  work  at  the  Allegheny  ob-
servatory began  in  1869  with  the  establishment  of  a
complete  time  service,  then  a  novel  feature,  which
has  since  been  widely  copied.  The  present  ex-
tended systematic  distribution  of  time  began  then
at  Pittsburg.  Prof.  Langley  accompanied  the  par-
ties that  were  sent  out  by  the  U.  S.  coa»t  sur-
vey to  observe  the  total  eclipses  of  1869  and  1870,
being  sent  during  the  former  year  to  Oakland,  Ky.,


@7.  rf? ^^f^^~)


and  to  Xeres,  Spain,  during  the  latter  year.  He
also  observed  the  solar  eclipse  of  1878  from  Pike's
Peak.  In  1870  he  began  his  series  of  brilliant  re-
searches on  the  sun  which  have  since  led  to  his
being  recognized  as
one  of  the  foremost
authorities  on  that
body.  H  is  first  paper
was  on  the  structure
of  the  photosphere,
and  included  a  plate
giving  the  most  de-
tailed representation
of  a  sun-spot  that
had  appeared  up  to
that  time.  This  he
followed  with  a  study
of  the  heat  of  the  so-
lar surface  by  means
of  the  thermopile.
He  showed  among  his
conclusions  that  the
direct  effect  of  sun-
spots  on  terrestrial  temperatures  is  sensible.  Find-
ing that  the  thermopile  was  not  sufficiently  sensitive
for  his  work,  he  invented  the  bolometer,  with  which
exceedingly  delicate  measurements  of  heat  were
made.  He  spent  the  winter  of  1878-'9  on  Mount
Etna,  Sicily,  obtaining  excellent  results.  In  1881  he
organized  an  expedition,  which  was  fitted  out  at  the
cost  of  a  citizen  of  Pittsburg;  but  went  also  under
the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  signal  service  to  the  top
of  Mount  Whitney,  in  California,  and  there  made
important  observations  in  solar  heat  and  its  absorp-
tion by  the  earth's  atmosphere.  In  1885  he  was
invited  to  lecture  at  the  Royal  institution,  London,
and  there  gave  an  account  of  the  novel  results  that
he  had  obtained  on  Mount  Whitney.  His  scientific
papers  have  been  very  numerous  and  include  more
than  fifty  important  titles.  Of  these,  aside  from
those  directly  of  scientific  value,  the  most  interest-
ing are  a  series  of  popular  expositions  entitled
"  The  New  Astronomy  "  that  he  contributed  to  the
"  Century  "  in  1884-'6.  Prof.  Langley  has  delivered
courses  of  lectures  before  the  Lowell  and  Peabody
institutes,  and  in  1882  was  invited  to  address  the
British  association  for  the  advancement  of  science
at  Southampton.  He  has  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  from  Stevens  institute  of  technology  in
1882,  and  that  of  LL.D.  from  the  Universities  of
Wisconsin  in  1882.  Michigan  in  1883,  and  Harvard
in  1885.  In  1886  he  received  the  first  Henry  Dra-
per medal  that  was  awarded  by  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  for  his  work  on  astronomical
physics.  During  the  present  year  (1887)  he  re-
ceived the  Rumford  medal  from  the  Royal  society,
London,  and  also  the  Rumford  medal  from  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  two  dis-
tinct foundations,  whose  awards  were  conferred
independently.  Prof.  Langley  is  a  member  of
numerous  foreign  and  American  scientific  societies,
and  in  1876  received  an  election  to  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  In  1878  he  was  elected  vice-
president  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  delivering  his  retiring  ad-
dress at  its  Saratoga  meeting,  and  in  1880  was
elected  president  of  that  association,  presiding  over
the  deliberations  of  its  New  York  meeting  in
August,  1887.— His  brother,  John  Williams,
chemist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  21  Oct.,  1841,  was
graduated  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Har-
vard in  1861,  and  then  served  as  assistant  surgeon
in  the  U.  S.  navy  during  the  civil  war,  after  which
he  visited  Europe.  In  1867  he  became  assistant
professor  of  natural  philosophy  and  chemistry  in


612


LANGMUIR


LANGWORTHY


the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  where  he  remained  for
three  years,  becoming,  in  1872,  professor  of  chem-
istry in  the  Western  university  of  Pennsylvania.-
Since  1875  he  has  filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  in
the  University  of  Michigan.  Prof.  Langley's  sci-
entific work  has  been  principally  in  connection
with  the  development  of  the  chemistry  of  iron-
ores,  and  his  results  have  been  published  in  the
"  American  Journal  of  Science "  and  elsewhere.
In  1877  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.
from  the  University  of  Michigan,  and,  besides  be-
ing a  member  of  several  societies,  held  the  office  of
vice-president  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science  in  1884.

LANGMUIR,  John  Woodbnrn,  Canadian  of-
ficial, b.  in  Warwickmains,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  6
Nov.,  1835.  He  was  educated  at  Kilmarnock,  came
to  Canada  in  1849,  and  was  a  merchant  at  Pictou
till  1867.  In  1859  he  was  elected  mayor  of  that
town,  and  in  1868  appointed  by  the  Sandfield-
Macdonald  administration  inspector  of  prisons  and
public  charities  for  Ontario,  which  post  he  re-
signed in  1882.  During  his  term  of  office  there
were  founded  under  his  supervision  the  asylums
for  the  insane  at  Toronto  and  Hamilton,  the  asy-
lum for  idiots  at  Orillia,  the  institution  for  the
deaf  and  dumb  at  Belleville,  the  institution  for
the  blind  at  Brantford,  and  the  Central  prison,
and  the  Mercer  reformatory  and  refuge  at  Toronto.
His  reports  to  the  legislature  during  his  inspector-
ship fill  fourteen  volumes.  In  1882  Mr.  Langmuir
and  others  established  the  Toronto  general  trust
company,  of  which  he  is  now  (1887)  manager.  He
is  one  of  the  Niagara  Falls  park  commissioners.

LANGSDORFF,  George  Henry,  Baron  de,
German  traveller,  b.  in  Laisk,  Suabia,  in  1774;  d.  in
Fribourg,  Germany,  3  July,  1852.  He  studied
medicine  in  the  University  of  Gottingen,  began  his
travels  in  1797,  and  during  the  following  years
visited  Japan  and  explored  Siberia.  After  the
peace  of  1815  he  entered  the  service  of  Russia,  and
was  appointed  consul-general  in  Brazil.  He  occu-
pied himself  very  actively  with  plans  of  coloniza-
tion for  this  country,  with  only  partial  success,
but  acquired  much  knowledge  of  the  natural  his-
tory of  Brazil.  He  went  to  Russia  in  1823  and
spent  some  time  in  exploring  the  Ural  mountains.
On  his  return  to  Brazil  he  was  employed  at
the  expense  of  the  Russian  government,  and  in
company  with  the  astronomer  Ruszow,  the  natu-
ralists Riedel  and  Menetries,  and  the  painter  Ru-
gendas,  in  extensive  journeys  in  the  interior  of
Brazil  from  1825  till  1829.  The  botanical  collec-
tions in  the  museums  of  St.  Petersburg  benefited
greatly  by  his  labors  during  this  period.  Among
his  works  are  "  Plants  collected  during  a  Voyage
Round  the  World"  (2  parts,  Tubingen,  1810-18),
and  "  Memoirs  on  Brazil,  a  Guide  for  those  who
wish  to  Settle  there  "  (Paris.  1820).

LANGSTON,  John  Mercer,  educator,  b.  in
Louisa  county,  Va.,  14  Dec,  1829.  He  was  by
birth  a  slave,  but  was  emancipated  at  the  age  of
six  years.  He  was  graduated  at  Oberlin  in  1849,
and  at  the  theological  department  in  1853.  After
studying  law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ohio
in  1854,  and  practised  his  profession  there  until
1869,  during  which  time  he  was  clerk  of  several
townships  in  Ohio,  being  the  first  colored  man  that
was  elected  to  an  office  of  any  sort  by  popular  vote.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  board  of  education
of  Oberlin.  In  1869  he  was  called  to  a  professor-
ship of  law  in  Howard  university,  Washington,
D.  C,  and  became  dean  of  the  faculty  of  the  law
department  and  active  in  its  organization,  remain-
ing there  seven  years. He  was  appointed  by  Presi-


dent Grant  a  member  of  the  board  of  health  of
the  District  of  Columbia,  and  was  elected  its  sec-
retary in  1875.  In  1877-85  he  was  U,  S.  minister
and  consul-general  in  Hayti.  On  his  return  to
this  country  in  1885  he  was  appointed  president
of  the  Virginia  normal  and  collegiate  institute  in
Petersburg,  which  office  he  now  (1887)  holds.  In
addition  to  various  addresses  and  papers  on  polit-
ical, biographical,  literary,  and  scientific  subjects,
Mr.  Langston  is  the  author  of  a  volume  of  select-
ed addresses  entitled  "  Freedom  and  Citizenship  "
(Washington,  1883).

LANGSTROTH,  Lorenzo  Lorraine,  apiarian,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Dec,  1810.  He  was
graduated  at  Y  ale  in  1830,  and  subsequently  held
a  tutorship  there  in  1834-'5.  After  this  he  was
pastor  of  various  Congregational  churches  in  Mas-
sachusetts, and  in  1848  became  principal  of  a
young  ladies'  school  in  Philadelphia.  Since  1858
he  has  made  Oxford,  Ohio,  his  residence,  and  de-
voted his  time  to  bee-keeping.  He  invented  the
movable-comb  hive,  which  has  come  into  exten-
sive use,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Hive  and  the
Honey- Bee"  (Northampton,  1853).

LANGTRY,  Lillie,  actress,  b.  in  the  island  of
Jersey  in  1852.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Very  Rev.
William  Corbet  Le  Breton,  dean  of  Jersey,  mar-
ried Edward  Langtry,  a  native  of  Belfast,  Ireland,
and  became  distinguished  for  taste  and  beauty
in  London  society.  Determining  to  go  upon  the
stage,  she  made  her  debut  as  Lady  Clara,  in  "  A
Fair  Encounter,"  in  the  Town  hall  at  Twicken-
ham, and  soon  afterward  appeared  at  the  Haymar-
ket  theatre,  London,  as  Miss  Hardcastle  in  "  She
Stoops  to  Conquer,"  on  15  Dec,  1881.  In  the
following  month  she  played  Blanche  Haye  in
Thomas  W.  Robertson's  play  of  "  Ours."  After
a  provincial  tour,  during  which  she  essayed  new
characters,  she  made  her  appearance  in  Septem-
ber, 1882,  as  Hester  Grazebrook  in  Tom  Tay-
lor's "  Unequal  Match,"  and  a  week  later  as  Rosa-
lind in  "  As  You  Like  It."  The  same  autumn  she
came  to  the  United  States  and  played  in  New
York  and  Boston  to  large  audiences,  which,  like
the  English  public,  manifested  at  first  a  qualified
approval.  As  she  improved  rapidly  in  her  acting,
she  gained  the  praise  of  critics  and  popular  ap-
plause. Returning  to  London,  she  leased  the
Prince's  theatre,  and  appeared  on  20  Jan.,  1885,  in
the  title  role  of  an  English  version  of  "La  Prin-
cesse  Georges,"  by  Alexander  Dumas  the  younger,
on  11  Feb.  as  Lady  Teazle,  and  on  6  April  as  Lady
Ormonde  in  "Peril."  In  1886  she  created  the
character  of  the  heroine  of  Charles  F.  Coghlan's
"  Enemies,"  and  played  Pauline  in  the  "  Lady  of
Lyons."  In  the  autumn  of  that  year  she  returned
to  the  United  States,  and  repeated  her  siiccesses
in  this  country,  where  she  has  invested  most  of  her
earnings.  Other  characters  played  by  Mrs.  Lang-
try  are  Julia  in  "  The  Hunchback,"  the  title  role
of  "  Galatea,"  and  the  part  of  Lady  Clancarty  in
"  The  Young  Tramp."  which  was  written  for  her
by  G.  F.  Mills.  In  July,  1887,  while  in  San  Fran-
cisco, she  renounced  British  allegiance,  and  applied
for  naturalization  as  a  citizen  of  the  United  States.

LANGWORTHY,  Edward,  patriot.  He  was
educated  in  Whitefield's  orphan  house,  in  Georgia,
where  he  subsequently  taught,  but  at  the  opening
of  the  Revolution  became  secretary  for  the  coun-
cil of  safety,  organized  11  Dec,  1775.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  from  Georgia
in  1777-'9,  and  a  signer  of  the  articles  of  confedera-
tion. After  the  establishment  of  the  constitution
he  removed  to  Maryland,  where  he  died.  Mr.  Lang-
worthy  was  the  first  to  attempt  to  write  a  history


LANIER


LANMAN


613


of  Georgia,  for  which  purpose  he  collected  a  vari-
ety of  rare  papers  during  his  political  service.

LANIER,  Sidney,  poet,  b.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  3
Feb.,  1842  ;  d.  in  Lynn,  N.  C,  7  Sept.,  1881.  When
a  child  he  learned  to  play  many  instruments  al-
most without  instruction,  devoting  himself  espe-
cially to  the  flute.  He  was  graduated  at  Ogle-
thorpe college,  Midway,  Ga.,  in  1860. He  enlisted

in  the  Confederate
army  in  April,  1861,
and  participated  in
the  seven  days'  fight-
ing near  Richmond.
Afterward  he  was
transferred  to  the
signal  service,  with
headquarters  at  Pe-
tersburg. In  1863  his
detachment  served
in  Virginia  and
North  Carolina,  and
afterward,  while  in
command  of  a  block-
ade-run ner,  he  was
captured,and  for  five
months  imprisoned
in  Point  Lookout,
Pla.  His  experience  is  pictured  in  a  novel  that
he  wrote  in  three  weeks  entitled  "  Tiger- Lilies  "
(New  York,  1867).  He  was  a  clerk  in  Mont-
gomery, Ala.,  in  1865-'7,  afterward  principal  of
an  academy  in  Prattville,  Ala.,  and  in 1868-'72

Practised  law  with  his  father.  Robert  S.  Lanier,  in
tacon.  At  the  suggestion  of  his  friend  Bayard
Taylor  he  was  chosen  to  write  the  words  of  the
cantata  for  the  opening  of  the  Centennial  exhibi-
tion in  Philadelphia  in  1876.  In  October,  1877,
he  settled  in  Baltimore  and  delivered  lectures  on
English  literature.  In  1879  he  was  appointed  lec-
turer on  this  subject  at  Johns  Hopkins  university.
In  December,  1880,  he  wrote  his  poem  "  Sunrise,"
one  of  a  projected  series  entitled  "  Hymns  of  the
Marshes."  In  the  following  summer  he  encamped
in  the  mountains  of  North  Carolina,  where  he  died
of  consumption.  His  scholarship  was  wide  and
accurate,  and  his  investigations  in  the  scientific
construction  of  verse  are  formulated  in  his  "Sci-
ence of  English  Verse"  (New  York,  1880).  His
other  works  are  "  Florida :  Its  Scenery.  Climate.
and  History "  (Philadelphia.  1876) :  "  Poems "
(1877) ;  "  The  Bov's  Froissart "  (New  York.  1878) ;
"The  Bov's  King  Arthur"  (1880);  "The  Bov's
Mabinogion"  (1881);  "The  Boy's  Percy"  (1882);
and  "  The  English  Novel  and  the  Principles  of  its
Development "  (1883).  A  collection  of  his  poems,
with  a  memorial  by  William  Hayes  Ward,  was  ed-
ited by  his  wife,  Mary  Day  Lanier  (1884). — His
brother,  Clifford  Anderson,  author,  b.  in  Griffin,
Ga".,  was  educated  at  Oglethorpe  college,  but  his
studies  were  interrupted  by  the  civil  war.  He
served  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  afterward
signal  officer  on  the  steamer  "Talisman,"  running
the  blockade  between  Wilmington,  N.  C.  and  Ber-
muda until  the  vessel  was  wrecked  in  December,
1864.  In  1885-'6  Mr.  Lanier  was  superintendent
of  the  city  schools.  Montgomery,  Ala.  Ho  is  the
author  of  occasional  poems  and  essavs  and  of  a
novel  entitled  "Thorn-Fruit"  (New  York.  1867).

LANIGAN,  George  Thomas,  journalist,  b.  on
St.  Charles  river,  Canada,  10  Dec.  1845;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  Feb.,  1886.  After  receiving
his  early  education  at  the  Montreal  high-school,  he
learned  telegraphy,  and  worked  as  an  operator,
and  afterward  as  superintendent  of  a  circuit  on  the
government  telegraph-lines. During  the  Fenian


raid  of  1866  he  sent  important  despatches  to  New
York  journals.  Returning  to  Montreal,  he  estab-
lished with  Robert  Graham  and  others  the  "  Free
Lance,"  a  satirical  and  humorous  paper,  which  de-
veloped into  the  "  Evening  Star,"  and  is  still  pub-
lished under  that  name.  After  selling  his  interest
Mr.  Lanigan  came  to  the  United  States  and  was
connected  with  various  newspapers.  He  was  the
author  of  "Canadian  Ballads"  (Montreal,  1864);
"Fables  Out  of  the  World"  (New  York,  1878);
and  a  comic  "  Life  of  Andrew  Jackson,"  which  was
never  finished.  Among  his  most  successful  humor-
ous poems  are  "The  Amateur  Orlando  "and  "A
Threnody  for  the  Ahkoond  of  Swat."

LANMAN,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,
13  June,  1769  ;  d.  there,  7  Aug.,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1788,  studied  law.  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1791,  and  began  practice  in
his  native  town.  He  was  state's  attorney  for  New
London  county  from  1814  till  1819,  a  member  of
the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature  in  1817  and
again  in  1832,  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
framed  the  first  constitution  for  Connecticut  in
1818,  and  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1819.
Mr.  Lanman  was  subsequently  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  6  Dec,  1819,
till  3  March,  1825.  From  1826  till  1829  he  was
judge  of  the  supreme  and  superior  courts  of
Connecticut,  and  for  several  years  was  mayor  of
Norwich.  His  second  wife  was  the  mother  of  Park
Benjamin,  the  author. — His  son.  Charles  James,
lawyer,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  5  June.  1795;  d.
in  New  London,  Conn.,  25  July,  1N70.  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1814,  and  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1817.  He  was  soon  afterward  invited  by  Henry
Clay  to  settle  in  Kentucky,  but  preferred  to  emi-
grate to  Michigan,  on  the  solicitation  of  Gen.
Lewis  Cass.  Locating  at  Frenchtown  (now  Mon-
roe), on  Raisin  river,  he  held  many  offices,  includ-
ing those  of  attorney  for  the  territory,  judge  of
probate,  and  inspector  of  customs.  He  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Monroe  in  1823  receiver  of
public  moneys  for  the  district  of  Michigan,  re-
appointed by  President  John  Quincy  Adams,  and
continued  in  office  eight  years.  He  was  a  founder
of  Tecumseh,  Mich.,  a  commissioner  to  locate  many
county-seats  in  the  state,  and  the  surveyor  and  once
the  sole  owner  of  the  land  where  the  city  of  Grand
Rapids  now  stands.  Although  not  a  pracl  ical  farm-
er, he  at  one  time  cultivated  two  farms,  and  was
the  first  to  import  the  best  breeds  of  blooded  horses
from  Kentucky  and  Virginia.  In  1835  he  returned
to  Norwich,  and  in  the  panic  of  1837  lost  the
greater  part  of  his  property.  In  1^38  he  was
chosen  mayor  of  his  native  town,  and  filled  other
local  offices.  In  1862  he  removed  to  New  London,
where  he  remained  until  his  death. — Another  son,
James  Henry,  b.  in  Norwich.  Conn.,  4  Dec,  1812;
d.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  10  Jan.,  1887,  was  edu-
cated at  Washington  (now  Trinity)  college,  studied
law  at  Harvard,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  prac-
tised at  Norwich.  New  London,  and  Baltimore,
Md.  He  then  removed  to  New  York,  and  devoted
himself  to  literature.  Visiting  Michigan  a  short
time  before  it  was  made  a  state,  on  the  invitation
of  his  brother,  he  became  interested  in  the  coun-
try and  its  people,  spent  one  or  two  years  there,
and  published  a  "  History  of  Michigan,  Civil  and
Topographical"  (New  York.  1839),  which  was  sub-
sequently issued  by  Harper  and  Brothers  in  their
"Family  Library,"  under  the  title  "  Historv  of
Michigan  from  its  Earliest  Colonization  to  the  Pres-
ent Time  "  (1842).  He  contributed  to  the  "  National
Portrait  Gallery"  (1861).  the  "North  American"
and "American Quarterly" Reviews,  and the


614


LANMAN


LANSDOWNE


"  Jurist."  For  several  years  he  was  also  one  of  the
chief  writers  for  "  Hunt's  Merchants'  Magazine."
Failing  health  compelling  him  to  give  up  all  lit-
erary work,  he  retired  to  his  native  town,  where
he  resided  until  his  death. — Charles  James's  son,
Charles,  b.  in  Monroe,  Mich.,  14  June,  1819,  re-
ceived an  academical  education,  and  had  been  ten

years  in  a  busi-
ness-house in  New
York  city  when
he  returned  to
Michigan,  and  in
1845  took  charge
of  the  "  Monroe
Gazette."  The
following  year  he
was  associate  ed-
itor of  the  Cincin-
nati "  Chronicle,"
and  in  1847  was
an  assistant  on  the
New  York  "  Ex-
press." In  1849
ne  was  librarian
of  the  war  de-
partment at  Wash-
ington, in  1850
librarian  of  copyrights  and  private  secretary  of
Daniel  Webster  (at  whose  request  he  resigned  his
official  employment),  in  1853  examiner  of  deposi-
taries for  the  southern  states,  in  1855-7  librarian
and  head  of  the  returns  office  in  the  interior  de-
partment, in  186(5  librarian  of  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives, and  from  1871  till  1882  secretary
to  the  Japanese  legation.  He  studied  painting
with  Asher  B.  Durand,  and,  although  only  an
amateur,  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  of  design  in  1846,  and  has  frequently
exhibited  paintings  and  sketches  from  nature  in
oil.  Among  his  pictures  are  "  Brookside  and
Homestead,"  "  Home  in  the  Woods "  (1881),  and
"Frontier  Home"  (1884).  He  has  contributed
frequently  to  English  and  American  journals,  and
was  one  of  the  first  to  describe  in  book-form  the
scenery  of  the  river  Saguenay  and  of  the  mountains
of  North  Carolina,  being  called  by  Washington
Irving  "the  picturesque  explorer  of  the  United
States."  Among  Mr.  Lanman's  published  works
are  "Essays  for  Summer  Hours"  (Boston,  1842);
"Letters  from  a  Landscape-Painter"  (1845);  "A
Summer  in  the  Wilderness "  (New  York,  1847) ;
"A  Tour  to  the  River  Saguenay"  (Philadelphia
and  London,  1848) ;  "Letters  from  the  Alleghany
Mountains"  (New  York,  1849);  "  Haw-ho-noo,  or
Records  of  a  Tourist"  (Philadelphia,  1850);  "  Pri-
vate Life  of  Daniel  Webster''  (New  York  and
London,  1852) ;  "  Adventures  in  the  Wilds  of
America"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1856;  London,
1859) ;  "  Dictionary  of  Congress  "  (Philadelphia,
1858 ;  Washington,  published  by  order  of  congress,
3  eds.,  1862-'4;  Hartford,  2  eds..  1868-'9) ;  "Life
of  William  Woodbridge "  (Washington,  1867);
"Red  Book  of  Michigan"  (Detroit,  1871);  "Re-
sources of  America"  compiled  for  the  Japanese
government  (Washington,  1872) ;  "  The  Japanese
in  America"  (New  York  and  London,  1872);  "Bio-
graphical Annals  of  the  Civil  Government  of  the
United  States"  (Washington,  1876:  2d  ed.,
revised,  New  York,  1887) ;  "  Life  of  Octavius
Perinchief  "  (Washington,  1879) ;  "  Curious  Charac-
ters and  Pleasant  Places"  (Edinburgh,  1881);
'  Leading  Men  of  Japan  "  (Boston.  1883) ;  "  Far-
thest North  "  (New  York,  1885) ;  and  "  Haphazard
Personalities"  (Boston,  1886).  He  has  edited
"The  Prison Life  of  Alfred  Ely"  (New  York,


1862),  and  the  "  Sermons  "  of  Rev.  Octavius  Per-
inchief (2  vols.,  Washington,  1869-70).

LANMAN,  Joseph,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  11  July,  1811;  d.  there,  13  March,
1874.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  1
Jan.,  1825,  and  passed  that  grade  on  4  June.  1831.
His  first  years  of  service  were  spent  on  the  Brazil,
West  India,  and  Pacific  squadrons.  He  was  com-
missioned lieutenant,  3  March,  1835,  and  served  in
the  West  India  squadron  in  1840,  on  ordnance
duty  in  1845-'6,  and  in  the  Pacific  squadron  in
1847-8.  He  was  on  special  duty  from  1849  till
1851,  and  in  1852  in  the  sloop-of-war  "  San  Jacinto,"
of  the  Mediterranean  squadron.  He  was  com-
missioned commander,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  sta-
tioned in  the  Washington  navy-yard  in  1855-'6,
after  which  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Michi-
gan "  in  the  great  lakes  from  1859  till  1861,  when
he  became  captain.  He  commanded  the  steam-
sloop  "  Saranac,"  of  the  Pacific  squadron,  in  1862.
On  29  Aug.  of  that  year  he  was  made  commodore
and  assigned  to  the  steam-sloop  "Lancaster,"  of
the  Pacific  squadron,  in  1863,  and  the  frigate
"Minnesota,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  in  1864-'5.  Com.  Lanman  commanded
the  2d  division  of  Admiral  Porter's  squadron  at
the  two  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  was  com-
mended in  the  admiral's  official  report.  He  be-
came rear-admiral,  8  Dec,  1867,  and  was  made
commandant  of  the  Portsmouth  navy-yard,  after
which  he  commanded  the  south  Atlantic  squad-
ron on  the  coast  of  Brazil.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States  in  May,  1872,  he  was  retired,  and
resided  in  Norwich  until  his  death.

LANSDOWNE,  Henry  Charles  Keith  Petty
Fitzmaurice,  Marquis  of,  governor  -  general  of
Canada,  b.  in  England,  14  Jan.,  1845.  He  is  the
eldest  son  of  Henry,  fourth  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,
under-secretary  of  state  for  foreign  affairs  from
1856  till  1858,  and  of  Emily  JanelVfercer  Elphin-
stone  de  Flahault,  Baroness  Nairne.  His  great-
grandfather, the  first
Marquis  of  Lans-
downe, was  secretary
of  state  in  1766,  but
was  dismissed  from
office  in  1768  in  con-
sequence of  his  con-
ciliatory policy  to-
ward the  American
colonies,  and  in  1782
consented  to  take  of-
fice only  on  condition
that  the  king  should
recognize  the  United
States.  The  present
marquis  was  educated
at  Eton  and  at  Oxford,
where  he  was  gradu-
ated with  honors  in
the  final  classical  course.  He  succeeded  to  the
peerage  on  the  death  of  his  father  in  1866,  and  en-
tered political  life  in  1869  as  a  junior  lord  of  the
treasury  in  William  E.  Gladstone's  administration.
He  supported  Mr.  Gladstone's  first  land  bill  in
1870,  and  strongly  urged  the  justice  of  giving
security  to  tenants  against  the  confiscation  of  their
improvements  and  against  capricious  evictions.
He  served  from  1869  till  1872  under  Robert  Lowe,
chancellor  of  the  exchequer.  In  1872  he  succeeded
Lord  Northbrook,  who  became  governor  -  general
of  India,  as  under-secretary  of  state  for  war,  and
served  till  1874,  when  the  Gladstone  administra-
tion was  defeated.  On  Gladstone's  return  to  power
in  1880  he  became  under-secretarv  of  state  for


LANSIL


LAPA


615


India,  and  resigned  the  same  year  in  consequence
of  his  disapproval  of  the  new  Irish  policy  of  the
government.  He  delivered  speeches  on  this  sub-
ject during  this  and  the  two  following  years,
strongly  condemning  the  creation  of  dual  owner-
ship of  Irish  lands,  and  advocating  its  complete
transfer  to  the  occupying  tenants.  He  took  part
repeatedly  in  the  house  of  lords  debates,  served
on  several  important  committees  and  commissions,
and  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  Irish  jury
laws  and  of  the  joint  committee  on  the  channel
tunnel  proposal.  On  18  Aug.,  1883.  he  was  ap-
pointed governor-general  of  Canada  and  was  sworn
in  on  23  Oct.,  1883.  During  1884  the  marquis  de-
voted much  of  his  time  to  making  himself  person-
ally known  in  the  older  provinces  of  Canada,  to
becoming  acquainted  with  them,  and  in  1885  he
visited  Manitoba,  the  northwest  territories,  and
British  Columbia.  In  1884  he  was  made  a  knight
grand  cross  of  the  Order  St.  Michael  and  St.
George,  received  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.
the  same  vear,  and  the  confederation  medal  in
1885.  In  1888  he  was  appointed  governor-general
of  India.  He  married,  on  8  Nov.,  1869,  Lady  Maud
Evelyn  Hamilton,  youngest  daughter  of  James,
Duke  of  Abercorn,  K.  G.  She  is  well  known  for
her  beautv  and  scholarlv  attainments.

LANSIL,  Walter  F.,  artist,  b.  in  Bangor,  Me.,
in  184G.  He  studied  art  in  his  native  place,  and
then  settled  in Boston,  where  he  has  passed  his

firofessional  life.  He  effectively  represents  the
nminous  effects  of  sunrise  and  sunset.  Among
his  works  are  "  Crossing  the  Georges  "  and  an  even-
ing "  View  of  Charlestown,  with  Shipping."

LANSING,  Dirck  Cornelius,  clergyman,  b.
in  Lansingburg,  Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  3  March,
1785 ;  d.  in  Walnut  Hills,  Ohio,  19  March,  1857.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1804,  became  a
Presbyterian  clergyman,  and  was  a  trustee  of  Au-
burn seminary  from  1820  till  1830,  its  vice-presi-
dent from  1820  till  1824,  and  professor  of  sacred
rhetoric  and  pastoral  theology  from  1821  till  1826,
serving  without  salary  and  raising  large  sums  for
the  seminary.  Williams  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1826.  He  published  "  Sermons  on  Im-
portant Subjects"  (Auburn,  1825).

LANSING,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
30  Jan.,  1754;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  Dec,  1829.
He  studied  law  with  James  Duane  in  New  York,
and  in  1776-'7  was  the  military  secretary  of  Gen.
Philip  Schuyler.  He  was  a  member  from  Albany
of  the  4th,  5th.  6th,  and  7th  sessions  of  the  New
York  assembly,  on  3  Feb.,  1784,  became  a  member
of  congress  under  the  articles  of  confederation.
and  on  26  Oct.  following  was  reappointed.  On  13
Jan.,  1786,  he  was  elected  speaker  of  the  New  York
assembly,  and  on  28  April  he  was  appointed  in
place  of  John  Jay.  resigned,  on  the  commission
that  met  at  Hartford.  Conn.,  and  made  final  divis-
ion of  the  territorial  claims  of  New  York  and
Massachusetts.  On  29  Sept.,  1786,  he  was  appointed
by  the  council  of  appointment  mayor  of  Albany,
and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  a  member  of  the
10th  session  of  the  New  York  assembly.  On  26
Jan.,  1787,  he  was  again  a  delegated  member  of
congress  under  the  confederation.  On  6  March,
1787,  the  New  York  legislature  appointed  him,
with  Robert  Yates  and  Alexander  Hamilton,  a
delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  convention,  which
assembled  on  23  May  and  framed  the  constitution
of  the  United  States.  On  10  July,  1787,  he  ad-
dressed a  letter  to  Gov.  George  Clinton,  resigning
his  membership  in  the  convention  on  the  ground
that  the  state  had  not  delegated  to  its  representa-
tives power  to  form  a  new  government,  but  only  to


pass  amendments  to  the  articles  of  confederation.
The  resolution  under  which  he  acted  justified  this
view,  which  was  concurred  in  by  Judge  Yates,
though  Alexander  Hamilton  elected  to  remain  in
the  convention  and  was  active  in  framing  the  con-
stitution. Mr.  Lansing  was  a  member  of  the  New
York  state  convention  that  met  at  Poughkeepsie
in  June,  1788,  to  ratify  the  Federal  constitution.
He  was  re-elected  speaker  of  the  New  York  assem-
bly at  its  12th  session,  and  by  an  act  of  the  legis-
lature he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  oh  the
part  of  the  state  to  settle  the  controversy  with
Vermont.  On  28  Sept.,  1790,  he  was  appointed  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state  of  New
York,  and  by  act  of  legislature,  passed  6  July,  1791,
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  to  de-
termine the  claims  of  the  city  and  county  of  New
York  to  lands  in  Vermont.  'On  15  Feb.",  1798,  he
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme
court,  succeeding  Robert  Yates,  and  on  28  Oct.,
1801,  chancellor  of  the  state  in  place  of  Robert  R.
Livingston,  resigned,  and  held  the  office  until  1814,
when  by  reason  of  age  he  became  ineligible,  and
was  succeeded  by  James  Kent.  In  1804  he  was
unanimously  nominated  for  governor  of  New  York
by  the  anti-Federalists,  and  accepted  the  nomina-
tion, but  subsequently  declined.  The  course  that
was  pursued  by  Chancellor  Lansing  and  those  in
sympathy  with  his  views,  in  endeavoring  to  defeat
the  ratification  of  the  Federal  constitution,  resulted
in  the  adoption  by  the  1st  U.  S.  congress  of  the  im-
portant amendments  to  the  constitution  that  were
passed  by  that  body.  Chancellor  Lansing  ranked
as  one  of  the  distinguished  lawyers  of  his  time,  and
as  an  upright  and  able  judge.  He  mysteriously
disappeared,  having  left  his  hotel  to  post  a  letter
on  board  the  Albany  boat  at  the  foot  of  Cortland
street.  New  York  city.  It  was  supposed  that  he
was  either  robbed  and  murdered  or  accidentally
drowned.  He  published  "  Select  Cases  in  Chancery
and  in  the  Supreme  Court  in  1824  and  1828."

LANSING,  Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y..  in  1748:  d.  in  Tappan,  N.  Y.,  in  1835.  In
early  life  he  was  master  of  an  Albany  and  New
York  sailing-vessel,  but  subsequently  studied  the-
ology in  Albany,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  by  a
general  meeting  of  ministers  and  elders  in  1780.
His  first  charge  was  the  united  churches  of  what
are  now  Greenbush,  Linlithgo,  and  Taghkanic,
near  Albany.  He  remained  there  from  1781  till
1784,  when  he  became  pastor  of  Tappan  and  Clarks-
town,  and  in  1830  took  charge  of  the  Tappan
church  alone,  preaching  there  until  his  death.  His
home  and  church  were  near  the  spot  on  which
Andre  was  hung  during  the  Revolution.  Mr.
Lansing  possessed  much  individuality  of  charac-
ter, and  preached  bold  and  characteristic  sermons
in  Dutch. Many  anecdotes  are  told  of  him.

LAPA,  Jose"  <le  Almeida  Vasconcellos  Sove-
ral  e  Carvallo  (lah'-pah),  Count  of,  Portuguese
governor,  b.  in  Lapa,  Portugal,  early  in  the  18th
century;  d.  in  Lisbon  in  17^2.  He  entered  the
army,  reached  the  rank  of  general,  and  in  October,
1770,  was  appointed  governor  of  the  province  of
Goyaz  in  Brazil.  Lapa  is  described  by  his  biogra-
pher, Balthazar  da  Silva  Lisboa.  as  honest,  intelli-
gent, and  enterprising.  In  1773  he  visited  the
province,  and,  being  touched  by  the  poverty  of  the
people,  began  an  agricultural  undertaking,  which
was  crowned  with  extraordinary  success.  In  1774
he  undertook  the  conquest  of  the  Indians  in  his
territory,  which  was  accomplished  in  two  vears.
Lapa  also  brought  colonists  from  Portugal  and
distributed  them  through  the  country.  In  1777
he  was  recalled.


616


LA PELTRIE


LAPHAM


LA  PELTRIE.  Marie  Madeleine  de,  educator,
b.  in  Alencon,  Prance,  in  1603 ;  d.  in  Quebec,  Cana-
da, in  1671.  She  married  at  the  age  of  seventeen,
and  was  left  a  widow  at  twenty-two.  Having  seen
an  appeal  in  the  first  Jesuit  relation  from  Father
Le  Jeune  for  help  to  educate  the  Indian  girls,  she
decided  to  spend  her  fortune  in  founding  an  insti-
tution to  take  charge  of  this  work.  Several  obsta-
cles interposed,  so  that  it  was  not  until  1639  that  she
was  able  to  sail  for  Quebec,  accompanied  by  Mother
Mary  of  the  Incarnation,  two  other  Ursuline  nuns,
and  several  hospital  sisters.  She  visited  the  Indian
village  in  the  neighborhood,  and  kissed  every  little
girl  in  it,  "  unmindful  of  much  that  might  have
created  disgust."  She  then  proceeded  to  found  the
Ursuline  convent  of  Quebec,  the  pioneer  school  of
Canada  for  the  instruction  of  girls.  After  the
founding  of  the  convent  she  stripped  herself  of  all
she  had  retained  for  her  own  use  in  order  to  clothe
the  children,  who  were  brought  to  her  almost
naked.  She  was  present  at  the  foundation  of  Mon-
treal, and  decorated  its  first  altar.  During  the  rest
of  her  life  she  shared  the  labors  of  the  nuns.

LA  PEROUSE,  Jean  Francois  de  Galaup,
French  navigator,  b.  in  C-uo,  near  Albi.  Langue-
doc,  France,  22  Aug.,  1741 ;  d.  at  sea  in  1788.  He
entered  the  navy  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  in  1759
was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  in  an  engage-
ment with  Sir  Edward  Hawke  off  Belle  Isle.  After
a  short  captivity  he  was  returned  to  France,  and
having  served  in  various  campaigns  became  an  en-
sign, 1  Oct.,  1764,  and  lieutenant  de  vaisseau,  4
April,  1775.  From  1764  till  1778  he  made  several
expeditions,  after  which  he  fought  in  the  war  of
American  independence,  in  command  of  the  frigate
•'  L'Amazone  "  of  Count  d'Estaing's  flotilla.  In
1780  he  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of  capitaine  de
vaisseau,  and  he  assisted  in  the  capture  of  a  frigate
and  five  vessels  of  inferior  rank  on  the  coast  of
New  England.  In  1782  he  entered  Hudson  bay
with  a  small  fleet  and  destroyed  the  British  trad-
ing establishments  there.  On  the  conclusion  of
the  war,  Louis  XVI.,  with  a  view  of  securing  to
the  French  people  a  share  in  the  glory  that  the
English  were  reaping  from  the  discoveries  of  navi-
gators like  Capt.  Cook,  caused  the  frigates  "  L'As-
trolabe  "  and  "  La  Boussole  "  to  be  fitted  out  under
command  of  La  Perouse  for  explorations  in  the
Pacific  and  along  the  coasts  of  America,  China,
Japan,  and  Tartary.  He  sailed  from  Brest,  1  Aug.,
1785,  doubled  Cape  Horn,  and  went  to  the  north-
west coast  of  America,  which  he  explored  from
Mount  St.  Elias  to  Monterey,  Cal.,  discovering  a
bay  in  latitude  58°,  which  he  named  Port  des
Francais.  He  afterward  explored  the  coast  of
Asia,  discovering  the  straits  between  Saghalien
and  Yezo  that  bear  his  name,  and  sent  to  France,
from  Petropavlovsk  copies  of  his  journals  and
charts  and  other  data,  from  which  an  account  of
his  voyage  was  subsequently  prepared.  On  7  Feb.,
1788,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  French  minister  of
marine  from  Botany  bay,  announcing  his  intention
of  going  to  the  Isle  of  France  by  way  of  Van  Die-
men's  Land,  the  Friendly  isles,  and  New  Guinea,
which  was  the  last  intelligence  that  was  received
from  this  expedition.  In  1791  a  squadron  was  sent
in  search  of  La  Perouse  under  the  command  of
Admiral  D'Entrecasteaux,  who  failed  in  tracing
him.  In  1826,  while  navigating  the  New  Hebrides,
Peter  Dillon  found  near  the  island  of  Vanikoro
debris  that  had  evidently  belonged  to  La  Perouse's
expedition,  and  in  1828  Dumont  d'Urville  visited
Vanikoro  and  ascertained  that  many  years  previ-
ous two  ships  had  foundered  on  a  reef  off  the  west
coast  of  the  island,  and  that  the  surviving  crew


had  sailed  in  a  small  vessel  which  they  built  and
had  never  been  heard  of  afterward.

LAPHAM,  Elbridge  Gerry,  senator,  b.  in
Farraington,  Ontario  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  Oct.,  1814;  d.in
Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  8  Jan.,  1890.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  working  in  the  summer
to  aid  in  supporting  his  family.  After  completing
his  studies  at  the  Canandaigua  academy,  where  he
was  a  classmate  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  he  studied
civil  engineering  and  followed  his  profession  on  the
Michigan  Southern  railroad.  He  then  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,  and  practised  in
Canandaigua.  He  was  elected  to  the  Constitu-
tional convention  of  New  York  in  1867,  and  in
1874  he  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
serving  till  1881.  In  that  year  he  was  elected  to
the  United  States  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  resignation  of  Roscoe  Conkling,  for  the
term  ending  in  1885.

LAPHAM,  Increase  Allen,  naturalist,  b.  in
Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  7  March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Oconomewoc,
Wis.,  14  Sept.,  1875.  He  began  life  by  cutting
stones  for  canal-locks,  his  father  being  a  contractor
on  the  Erie  canal,  then  became  a  rodman,  and  for
ten  years  was  employed  as  an  engineer  in  various
works.  In  1836  he  settled  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,
where  he  was  made  register  of  claims  and  dealt
in  real  estate.  Meanwhile  he  showed  great  ac-
tivity in  various  branches  of  natural  science.  In
1838  he  prepared  a  "Catalogue  of  Plants  and
Shells  found  in  the  Vicinity  of  Milwaukee."  Ul-
timately his  herbarium  contained  over  8,000  speci-
mens, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  consid-
ered the  best  collection  of  the  flora  of  Wisconsin.
Soon  afterward  he  published  "  A  Geographical
and  Topographical  Description  of  Wisconsin"
(Milwaukee,  1844;  2d  ed.,  1846).  His  study  of
the  '•  Grasses  of  Wisconsin  "  (1853),  and  of  other
states,  led  to  his  suggestion  to  the  commissioner  of
patents  concerning  the  desirability  and  utility  of  a
descriptive  catalogue  of  all  the  native,  naturalized,
and  cultivated  grasses  of  the  United  States.  In
1867  he  was  appointed  by  the  legislature  of  Wis-
consin to  investigate  the  disastrous  effects  of  the
destruction  of  forest-trees,  and  subsequently  made
a  report  on  the  subject.  His  work  on  the  fluctua-
tions in  the  level  of  Lake  Michigan  began  as  early
as  1836,  and  was  continued  until  1849,  when  he  an-
nounced the  existence  of  "  a  slight  lunar  tide  in
Lake  Michigan,"  and  communicated  a  description
of  his  investigation  to  the  Smithsonian  institution.
Mr.  Lapham  was  probably  best  known  by  his
"Antiquities  of  Wisconsin."  published  by  the
Smithsonian  institution  in  1855.  It  gave  the  results
of  a  systematic  and  thorough  investigation  of  the
remains  of  a  prehistoric  people  who  once  inhabited
that  state,  and  was  undertaken  at  the  request  of
the  American  antiquarian  society.  Mr.  Lapham
was  one  of  the  first  to  point  out  the  value  of  storm
indications,  especially  on  the  great  lakes,  and,  in
concert  with  Henry  E.  Paine,  framed  the  law  of
1870,  which  established  the  signal-office  in  Wash-
ington. He  gave  valuable  aid  to  Gen.  Albert  J.
Myer,  the  chief  signal-officer,  and  the  place  of
meteorologist,  now  held  by  Cleveland  Abbe,  was
offered  to  him,  but  he  declined  it  on  account  of  the
night  labor,  although  for  a  short  time  after  Novem-
ber, 1871,  he  held  the  office  of  assistant  in  Chicago.
The  geology  of  Wisconsin  was  the  subject  of  his
investigations  from  the  beginning  of  his  residence
in  that  state,  and  he  contributed  to  Foster  and
Whitney's  "  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Lake  Su-
perior" (1852)  a  chapter  on  the  "Geology  of
Southeastern  Wisconsin,"  and  in  1855  made  a
"Geological  Map  of Wisconsin,"  also  in  1869  a


LAPIIAM


LARDNER


617


"  New  Geological  Map  of  Wisconsin."  In  1873  he
was  appointed  chief  geologist  of  Wisconsin,  but  a
subsequent  legislature  refusing  to  confirm  him,  the
office  was  vacated  in  February,  1875.  In  other
ways  he  did  much  to  increase  the  scientific  knowl-
edge of  Wisconsin,  and  he  was  also  one  of  the
founders  of  Milwaukee  female  college,  long  presi-
dent of  its  board  of  trustees,  and  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  collections  of  the  University  of  Wis-
consin. In  1860  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Amherst,  and  he  was  a  member  of  various  sci-
entific societies.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Wisconsin  historical  society  and  the  Wisconsin
academy  of  sciences,  arts,  and  letters,  being  presi-
dent of  the  former  organization  for  many  years.
His  bibliography,  in  addition  to  the  worksalready
mentioned,  includes  nearly  fifty  papers  contributed
to  scientific  publications.  See  "A  Biographical
Sketch,"  by  Samuel  S.  Sherman  (Milwaukee,  1876).

LAPHAM,  William  Berry,  physician,  b.  in
Greenwood,  Me.,  21  Aug.,  1828.  He  entered  Wa-
terville  college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1851,  and,
although  he  was  not  graduated  in  course,  received
the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1873.  He  studied
medicine  and  began  practice  in  1856,  served  dur-
ing the  civil  war  in  the  National  army,  and  edited
"The  Maine  Farmer"  in  1872-'83,  the  "Maine
Genealogist"  in  1875-'8.  and  "  Farm  and  Hearth  "
since  1885.  Dr.  Lapham  is  the  author  of  several
pamphlet  genealogies  and  of  histories  of  Wood-
stock, Me.  (Portland,  1882) ;  Paris,  Me.  (Paris,  1884) ;
and  Norway,  Me.  (Portland,  1886).

LA  PUERTA,  Luis  (lah-poo-air'-tah),  Peruvian
statesman,  b.  in  Cuzco  in  August,  1811.  He  studied
in  the  College  of  San  Bernardo,  in  his  native  city,
and  in  1827  entered  the  army.  For  services  in  the
battle  of  Yanacochea  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-
colonel  on  the  field,  and  afterward  served  as  gen-
eral secretary  of  the  presidency  of  the  council  of
state  and  in  other  important  posts.  He  was  pro-
moted general  on  2  Jan.,  1855,  after  the  battle  of
Miraflores,  where  he  defeated  Gen.  Echenique,  who
was  in  arms  against  the  government.  He  served
successively  as  prefect  of  the  provinces  of  Cuzco
and  Ayacueho.  minister  of  war,  marine,  and  for-
eign affairs,  president  of  the  council  of  ministers,
senator,  and  deputy  in  several  legislatures.  In
1876  he  became  vice-president  of  the  republic,  and
on  16  May,  1879,  when  President  Prado  assumed
command  of  the  army  against  Chili,  he  took  charge
of  the  executive  till  29  Nov.,  when  Prado  returned.
On  18  Dec,  Prado  abandoned  the  government  and
the  country,  and  La  Puerta  again  occupied  the
presidency,  but  on  the  23d  was  deposed  by  Nicolas
de  Pierola,  and  has  since  lived  in  retirement.

LA  RAVARDIERE,  Daniel  de  la  Tousche,
Sieur  de,  French  explorer,  b.  in  Poitou  about
1570;  d.  after  1631.  He  was  trained  to  a  military
life,  and  served  against  the  Duke  of  Parma.
After  returning  from  a  voyage  to  Maranhao  about
1609,  he  enlisted  the  interest  of  people  of  the  court
in  the  island,  which  had  hitherto  been  neglected
by  the  Portuguese,  and  departed  as  one  of  the
commanders  of  an  expedition  for  its  colonization.
Arriving  with  three  vessels  in  the  beginning  of
1612,  he  built  four  forts  and  a  convent,  persuaded
the  natives  to  abandon  cannibalism,  and  entered
into  amicable  relations  with  the  tribes  on  the
island  and  the  neighboring  parts  of  the  continent.
When  the  colony  was  established  he  undertook  the
exploration  of  Amazon  river,  and  thereby  excited
the  jealousy  of  the  Spaniards,  who  compelled  him
to  take  refuge  in  his  fortified  post.  Soon  after-
ward the  Portuguese  commanders  were  ordered  to
effect  the  conquest  of  the  growing  French  colony.


K^^s^>-tzaU»-<^rz--»-0


In  August,  1614,  they  concentrated  their  forces  in
front  of  Maranhao,  and  constructed  a  fort  on  the
opposite  shore.  On  19  Nov.,  1614,  La  Ravardiere
attacked  the  position  with  200  Frenchmen  and  500
Indians,  and  was  beaten.  The  two  commanders
made  a  truce  pending  the  settlement  of  the  ques-
tion of  the  right  of  possession  between  the  two
courts.  On  3  Nov.,  1615,  the  French  colonists
evacuated  the  island.  La  Ravardiere.  who  was  a
Protestant,  was  vice-admiral  of  the  fleet  of  La
Rochelle  in  1621,  and  under  Razilly,  his  old  col-
league in  the  command  of  Maranhao,  in  1629.
LARCOM,  Lucy,  poet,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  in

1826.  As  a  child  of  seven  years  she  wrote  sto-
ries and  poems  for  her  own' amusement.  When
she  was  ten  years

old  her  father  died,
and  her  mother  es-
tablished a  factory
boarding-house  at
Lowell,  where,  af-
ter spending  two
or  three  years  in
school,  Lucy  en-
tered the  mills.
While  working  as
a  cotton-operative
she  contributed
largely  to  the
"Lowell  Offering."
writing  for  the  first
volumes  a  series  of
parables  that  at-
tracted attention.  John  G.  Whittier,  then  conduct-
ing a  Free-soil  paper  in  Lowell,  encouraged  her
literary  efforts.  W  hen  about  twenty  years  of  age
she  went  to  Illinois  with  a  married  sister,  taught
there  for  some  time,  and  was  for  three  years  a  pu-
pil in  Monticello  female  seminary.  On  her  return
to  Massachusetts  she  was  employed  for  six  years
in  a  seminary  at  Norton,  but  desisted  on  the  fail-
ure of  her  health,  only  taking  classes  occasionally
in  Boston  schools.  During  the  civil  war  she  wrote
many  patriotic  poems.  When  "Our  Young  Folks"
was  established  in  Boston  in  1865,  she  became  an
assistant  and  in  the  following  year  chief  editor,
conducting  the  magazine  till  1874.  Miss  Larcom
has  subsequently  resided  at  Beverly,  Mass.  Her
published  works  are  "Ships  in  the  Mist,  and  other
Stories"  (Boston,  1859);  "Poems"  (1868):  "An
Idyl  of  Work,  a  Story  in  Verse  "  (1875) ;  "  Childhood
Songs  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Wild  Roses  of  Cape  Ann.  and
other  Poems  "  (1880).  A  complete  collection  of  her
"  Poetical  Works  "  appeared  in  1884.  She  has  edit-
ed several  collections  of  poetrv,  including  "  Breath-
ings of  a  Better  Life"  (Boston,  1867);  "Hillside
and  Seaside  in  Poetry"  (1876);  and  "Roadside
Poems  for  Summer  Travellers"  (1877).

LARDNER,  Dionysius,  British  physicist,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  3  April,  1793;  d.  in  Paris,  France,
29  April,  1859.  After  spending  four  years  in  the
office  of  his  father,  a  solicitor,  he  entered  Trinity
college.  Dublin,  gained  many  prizes  in  mathematics
and  metaphysics,  was  graduated  in  1817,  and  con-
tinued  a  resident member  of  the  university  till

1827.  During  his  college  career  he  evinced  an  ex-
traordinary aptitude  for  mathematical  studies.  He
took  orders,  and  was  for  some  time  chaplain  at  his
college,  but  subsequently  desisted  from  clerical
functions.  Upon  the  establishment  of  the  Lon-
don university  he  accepted  the  professorship  of
natural  philosophy  and  astronomy,  to  which  chair
he  was  appointed  in  1828.  In  1840  he  eloped  with
the  wife  of  an  officer  in  the  army  and  came  to
the  United  States. He  was  sued  for  damages,  and


618


LARDNER


LARNED


a  verdict  of  £8,000  was  entered  against  him.  He
married  this  lady  after  her  husband's  death.  Dur-
ing five  years'  residence  in  this  country  he  deliv-
ered in  the  chief  cities  a  series  of  lectures,  which
were  published  and  have  passed  through  many  edi-
tions. On  his  return  to  Europe  in  1845  he  settled
in  Paris,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He
published  "  Popular  Lectures  on  the  Steam-En-
gine "  (London,  1828),  edited  the  "  Cabinet  Cyclo-
paedia"  (134  vols.,  1830-*44),  to  which  he  contribut-
ed numerous  articles,  and  was  the  author  of  many
other  works  on  scientific  and  technical  subjects,  in-
cluding hand-books  on  physical  science  (1851-'6).

LARDNER,  James  L.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13
April,  1881.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman on  10  May,  1820,  and  was  commissioned  as
lieutenant  on  17  May,  1828,  while  serving  as  navi-
gating officer  of  the  "Vincennes"  in  a  cruise
around  the  world.  From  1845  till  1848  he  com-
manded the  receiving-ship  at  Philadelphia,  and  in
May,  1850,  sailed  in  command  of  the  brig  "  Por-
poise "  for  the  coast  of  Africa,  where  he  remained
three  years.  He  was  commissioned  commander  on
17  May,  1851,  and  captain  on  19  May,  1861,  as-
signed to  the  steam  frigate  "  Susquehanna,"  of  the
North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  and  was
present  at  the  capture  of  Port  Royal.  For  his
services  on  that  occasion,  and  in  the  blockade  of
South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  a  vote  of  thanks  was
carried  in  the  house  of  representatives  at  the
recommendation  of  President  Lincoln,  but  it  was
lost  in  the  senate.  He  commanded  the  Eastern
Gulf  blockading  squadron  from  May,  1862,  till  the
December  following,  when  he  was  prostrated  by
yellow  fever  at  Key  West.  In  May,  1863,  he  took
command  of  the  West  India  squadron,  which  was
withdrawn  in  October,  1864.  He  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  commodore  on  16  July,  1862,  and
rear-admiral  on  25  July,  1866,  when  he  was  re-
tired from  active  service.

LAREAU,  Edmond,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  St.
Gregoire,  Iberville,  Quebec,  12  March,  1848.  He
was  educated  at  the  College  of  Sainte  Marie  de
Mannoir,  and  was  graduated  in  law  at  Victoria
college  and  McGill  university.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1870,  and  was  an  unsuccessful  candi-
date for  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1882,  but  was
elected  to  the  legislative  assembly  of  Quebec  in
1886.  He  has  been  professor  of  civil  law  in  McGill
university  since  1876,  was  at  one  time  editor  of
"  Le  Pays  "  and  "  Le  National,"  and  is  a  member
of  the  "  Societe  de  legislation  "  of  Paris.  He  has
contributed  largely  to  periodicals,  and  among  other
works  is  the  author  of  "  Histoire  du  droit  Cana-
dien"  (Montreal,  1872);  "Histoire  de  la  littera-
ture  Canadienne"  (1874);  "Melanges  historiques
et  litteraires"  (1877);  "Histoire  abregee  de  la
litterature  "  (1884) ;  "  La  code  civil  annote  "  (1885).

LA  RIBOURDE,  Gabriel  de,  French  mission-
ary, b.  in  Burgundy  in  1610 ;  d.  on  the  banks  of
the  Illinois,  9  Sept.,  1680.  He  was  the  last  sur-
vivor of  a  noble  Burgundian  family,  and  entered
the  order  of  St.  Francis  in  1640.  He  was  ap-
pointed master  of  novices  at  Bethune,  and  held
successively  the  highest  offices  in  the  order.  He
came  to  Canada  in  1670,  and  was  soon  afterward
made  superior  of  the  Recollet  Franciscans  in  the
colony.  Later  he  was  sent  to  Fort  Frontenac,
where  he  built  a  rude  chapel  and  began  a  mission.
He  was  induced  by  Hennepin  to  join  La  Salle's
party,  reached  the  mouth  of  St.  Joseph's  river
in  November.  1679,  and  with  two  other  Recol-
lets  built  a  bark  cabin,  the  first  Roman  Catholic
church in the lower peninsula of Michigan.


Leaving  this  post  in  December,  the  Recollets
reached  the  country  of  the  Illinois  Indians  and
raised  a  cabin  for  a  chapel  at  Fort  Crevecceur,  near
the  present  city  of  Peoria.  Here  he  was  adopted
by  the  Illinois  chief,  Asapista,  and  followed  the
tribe  in  their  summer  hunts.  He  had  hardly  any
success  in  converting  the  Indians.  In  September,
1680,  the  Illinois  were  attacked  by  the  Iroquois,
and  fled.  Father  Gabriel  and  his  two  companions
set  out  to  reach  Green  Bay  in  a  bark  canoe  with-
out any  provisions.  The  boat  began  to  leak,  and
they  were  forced  to  land.  While  his  companions
were  repairing  it,  Father  Gabriel  retired  to  the
shade  of  a  neighboring  grove  to  recite  his  breviary.
It  was  supposed  that,  tempted  by  the  beauty  of  the
scenery,  he  took  a  walk  along  the  banks  of  the
river.  When  his  companions  sought  him  in  the
evening  no  trace  of  him  could  be  found.  It  was
learned  afterward  that  he  had  come  upon  some
Kickapoos,  who  killed  him  and  threw  his  body  into
a  hole.  An  account  of  his  death  is  given  in  Hen-
nepin's "  Nouvelle  decouverte."

LARIMER,  William,  politician,  b.  in  West-
moreland county,  Pa.,  24  Oct.,  1809;  d.  near  Leav-
enworth, Kan.,  16  May,  1875.  He  removed  to  Pitts-
burg in  1834,  and  became  a  banker  and  merchant,
treasurer  of  the  Ohio  and  Pennsylvania,  and  after-
ward president  of  the  Pittsburg  and  Connellsville,
railroad.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  anti-
slavery  movement,  assisted  in  the  organization  of
the  Liberty  party,  and  supported  James  G.  Birney
for  president  in  1840.  After  that  he  acted  with
the  Whigs  and  was  a  political  leader  in  Pennsylva-
nia. In  1855  he  went  to  Nebraska,  was  a  zealous
Republican,  and  served  in  the  territorial  legisla-
ture in  1856.  He  removed  to  Kansas  in  1858,  but
in  October  of  that  year  led  a  party  of  gold-seekers
to  the  Pike's  Peak  country.  He  built  the  first
house  in  Denver,  Col.,  and  was  U.  S.  commissioner
and  judge  of  probate.  In  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  raised  a  regiment  of  volunteers  in  Col-
orado and  was  commissioned  colonel,  but  resigned
and  returned  to  Kansas,  where  he  re-entered  the
army  as  a  captain  of  cavalry  in  1863.  He  served
in  Kansas,  Indian  territory,  and  Arkansas,  and  was
mustered  out  in  August,  1865.  The  remainder  of
his  life  was  passed  on  a  farm  in  the  vicinity  of
Leavenworth.  In  1872  he  earnestly  supported  his
friend  Horace  Greelev  for  the  presidency.

LA  RIVIERE,  Alphonse  Alfred  Clement,
Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Montreal,  24  July,  1842.
He  was  educated  at  Jacques  Cartier  normal  school
and  St.  Mary's  college  in  his  native  city,  was  con-
nected with  the  Dominion  land-office  at  Winnipeg
from  October,  1871,  till  1875,  and  founded  the  as-
sociation St.  Jean  Baptiste  de  Manitoba  in  1872,
and  La  societe  de  colonization  de  Manitoba  in
1874.  He  is  superintendent  of  Roman  Catholic
schools  and  joint  secretary  of  the  board  of  educa-
tion, and  is  a  member  of  the  council  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Manitoba.  He  was  elected  by  acclamation
for  St.  Boniface  to  the  provincial  legislature  in
1878.  re-elected  in  1879,  and  was  appointed
provincial  secretary  in  1881.  He  was  re-elected  in
1882,  and  again  in  1886,  and  was  appointed  minister
of  agriculture,  statistics,  and  health,  6  Sept.,  1883,
which  portfolio  he  resigned  in  August,  1886,  and
became  provincial  treasurer.  He  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  arts  and  manufactures  for
the  province  of  Quebec,  was  for  a  time  special
correspondent  of  "  La  Minerve,"  of  Montreal,  and
is  now  chief  editor  of  "Le  Manitoba."

LARNED,  Augusta,  author,  b.  in  Rutland,  Jef-
ferson co.,  N.  Y.,  16  April,  1835.  She  was  edu-
cated at  Watertown  and  Potsdam  seminaries  and


LARNED


LARNED


619


the  Spingler  institute,  New  York,  and  settled  in
that  city  as  a  newspaper  correspondent  and  a  con-
tributor of  sketches,  stories,  and  poems  to  periodi-
cals. In  1870  she  edited  "  The  Revolution,"  a
woman's-rights  newspaper.  She  is  the  author  of
six  volumes  of  "  Home  Stories "  (New  York,  1872-3)
that  were  originally  published  in  magazines  and
newspapers ;  ••  Talks  with  Girls  "  (1873) ;  "  Old
Tales  Retold  from  Grecian  Mythology "  (1875) ;
"  The  Norse  Grandmother.  Tales  from  the  Eddas  "
(1880);  and  "Village  Photographs"  (1887).

LARNED,  or  LEARNED,  Ebenezer,  soldier,
b.  in  Oxford,  Mass.,  18  April,  1728 :  d.  there,  1  April,
1801.  He  was  a  son  of  Col.  Ebenezer,  the  largest
landholder  of  Oxford.  The  son  was  a  captain  of
rangers  during  the  old  French  war,  and  marched
with  his  company  from  Fort  Edward  to  the  relief
of  Fort  William  Henry.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Provincial  congress  at  Concord  in  1774.  In  the
beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  marched  to
Cambridge  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  of  eight
months'  militia,  arriving  after  the  battle  of  Lex-
ington. He  fought  at  Bunker  Hill  and  served
during  the  siege  of  Boston,  unbarring  the  gates
with  his  own  hands  at  the  evacuation.  At  Dor-
chester he  received  an  injury  and  was  disabled.
After  retiring  from  the  field  for  nearly  a  year,  he
was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  by  the  Conti-
nental congress  in  April,  1777,  and  commanded  a
brigade  at  Saratoga.  At  Stillwater  he  was  the
first  man  to  enter  the  breach.  Soon  afterward  his
health  failed  and  he  left  the  army.  In  1779  he
was  chairman  of  the  Constitutional  convention.

LARNED,  Edwin  C  ha  lining,  lawyer,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  L,  14  July,  1820 ;  d.  in  Lake  Forest.
111.,  18  Sept.,  1884.  His  father  was  a  merchant  of
Providence,  and  his  grandfather.  William  Lamed,
served  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  Edwin  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1840.  After  graduation
he  was  professor  of  mathematics  for  one  year  in
Kemper  college,  Wis.  He  then  studied  law  with
Albert  C.  Greene,  marrying  one  of  the  daugh-
ters of  his  preceptor,  and  in  1847  removing  to
Chicago.  He  was  an  enthusiastic  anti-slavery  man,
and  gained  his  first  celebrity  by  a  speech  in  1851,
in  answer  to  one  by  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  on  the
fugitive-slave  law.  It  was  published  in  pamphlet-
form,  and  was  called  by  Mr.  Douglas  the  best
that  had  been  made  on  that  side  of  fhe  question.
In  Chicago  he  was  identified  with  many  works  of
public  interest.  He  was  a  warm  friend  of  Abraham
Lincoln,  and  in  1860  made  speeches  in  his  support.
Afterward  he  was  an  active  member  of  the  Union
defence  committee,  and  by  his  writings  and
speeches  did  much  to  promote  its  objects.  Mr.
Lincoln  appointed  Mr.  Earned  U.  S.  district  attor-
ney for  the  northern  district  of  Illinois  in  1861,
but  he  lost  his  health  and  was  obliged  to  go  to
Europe  for  rest.  After  the  war  he  continued  his
practice  as  a  lawyer  for  a  time,  and  then  went  to
Cambridge,  Mass.,  to  live  while  his  son  was  in  Har-
vard. Immediately  after  the  Chicago  fire  in  1871
he  returned  to  Chicago  and  devoted  himself  to  the
work  of  the  Relief  and  aid  society.  In  1872-'3  he
again  visited  Europe  with  his  family.  He  wrote
many  letters  from  abroad  for  the  press,  and  his
published  speeches  and  writings  would  fill  a  large
volume.  Failing  health  again  obliged  him  to  retire
from  active  practice,  but  he  continued  to  write,
and  produced  a  "  Life  of  Swedenborg,"  not  yet  pub-
lished, and  many  articles  for  the  press.  See  "  Me-
morial of  EdwinChanning  Earned  "  (Chicago,  1886).

LARNED,  Simon,  merchant,  b.  in  Thompson,
Conn.,  13  Aug.,  1753;  d.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  16
Nov.,  1817. In  the  Revolutionary  war  he  served


as  a  captain  in  the  3d  Massachusetts  regiment.
He  settled  as  a  merchant  in  Pittsfield  in  1784,  was
a  representative  in  the  general  court  in  1791,  and
served  as  county  treasurer  and  sheriff  for  many
years.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  the  place  of  a
member  who  had  resigned  in  November,  1804,  and
served  till  the  following  March.  In  1812  he  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  9th  U.  S.  infantry,  and  saw
service  at  Plattsburgh  and  on  the  Mohawk. — His
son,  Sylvester,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,
23  Aug.,  1796 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  31  Aug.,
1820,  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1813,  and
studied  theology  at  Andover  and  at  Princeton,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1816.  He  was  or-
dained in  New  York  city  in  July,  1817,  and
preached  in  various  churches,  attracting  large  au-
diences by  an  extraordinary  gift  of  pathetic  ora-
tory. Though  invited  to  the  pastorship  of  large
churches  in  Baltimore,  Alexandria,  and  Boston,  he
decided  to  go  to  the  south  as  an  evangelist  with
his  friend.  Rev.  Elias  Cornelius.  Arriving  in
New  Orleans  in  January,  1818,  he  organized  the
first  Presbyterian  church  in  that  city.  The  build-
ing was  completed  on  4  July,  1819.  Remaining
in  New  Orleans  during  the  summer  of  1820,  he
ministered  to  his  parishioners  during  an  epidemic
of  yellow  fever  until  he  was  seized  with  the  dis-
ease. His  "Life  and  Sermons"  were  published
by  Rev.  Ralph  R.  Gurley  (New  York.  1844).—
Simon's  nephew.  Benjamin  Franklin,  soldier,
b.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass..  6  Sept.,  1794;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  6  Sept.,  1862,  entered  the  U.  S.  army
as  ensign  on  21  Oct..  1818,  was  promoted  to  a  first
lieutenancy  in  the  summer  of  1814,  and  took  part
in  the  defence  of  Fort  Erie,  receiving  the  brevet
rank  of  captain  for  gallant  conduct.  In  January,
1815.  he  was  appointed  regimental  paymaster,  and
on  the  reduction  of  the  army  retained  as  paymaster
of  the  5th  infantry,  with  rank  and  pay  of  major.
In  1847.  when  two  deputy  paymaster-generalships
were  created.  Maj.  Lamed  was  appointed  to  one
of  them  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  and
on  the  death  of  Gen.  Nathan  Towson,  in  1854,  he
succeeded  to  the  paymaster-generalship  by  right  of
seniority,  with  the  rank  of  colonel.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  thoroughly  reorganized  his
department;  but  his  health,  which  was  already  im-
paired, gave  way  under  the  strain.

LARNED,  William  Augustus,  educator,  b.  in
Thompson.  Conn..  23  June,  1806:  d.  in  New  Ha-
ven, Conn..  3  Feb.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1826,  taught  for  two  years  in  Salisbury,
N.  C,  was  a  tutor  at  Yale  for  the  next  three  years,
and  then  pursued  the  theological  course.  He  was
settled  in  a  pastoral  charge  at  Millbury.  Mass.,  in
.May.  1834.  but  resigned  in  the  autumn  of  1835,  on
account  of  failing  health,  and  associated  himself
with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Nathaniel  S.  S.  Neman  in  a
theological  school  that  was  established  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  teaching  Hebrew  and  Greek  until  the  insti-
tution was  discontinued  in  1839.  In  that  year  he
succeeded  Ohauncev  A.  Goodrich  in  the  professor-
ship of  rhetoric  and  English  literature  at  Yale,
which  post  he  held  till  his  death.  He  was  a  con-
stant contributor  to  the  -  New  Englander,"  and  in
1854  and  isr>r>  acted  as  its  editor.  In  the  later
vears  of  his  life  he  prepared  and  printed,  but  did
hot  publish,  a  valuable  edition  of  the  "Oration  of
Demosthenes  on  the  Crown,"  with  philological  and
rhetorical  notes.— His  sister.  Ellen  Douglas,  b.  in
Thompson,  Conn..  13  July.  1825,  has  assisted  in
compiling  several  genealogies,  family  histories,  and
historical  sketches,  is  the  author  of  a  "  History  of
Windham  Countv,  Conn."  (Worcester,  1874;  new
ed.,  1880),  and  of  a  "  History  of  the  Town  of  Wood-


620


LAROCHE


LARRABEE


stock,  Conn."  (1887).— His  half-brother,  Joseph
Gay  Eaton,  lawyer,  b.  in  Thompson,  Conn.,  29
April,  1819 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3  June,  1870,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1839,  taught  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  and  Charleston,  S.  C,  for  a  year  and  a  half,
studied  law,  taught  in  Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  and  in
1842  became  a  tutor  at  Yale.  In  1847  he  resigned
the  tutorship,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began

Sractice  in  New  Haven.  In  1852  he  removed  to
i  ew  York  city.  He  was  especially  familiar  with
the  law  of  patents,  and  became  interested  in  the
development  of  certain  inventions.  In  1855  he  en-
gaged in  the  manufacture  of  steam  fire-engines  of
a  design  that  was  invented  mainly  by  himself,  and
was  the  first  used  in  New  York  city.  In  introduc-
ing them  he  overcame  strong  opposition.  In  1863
he  was  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  government  assist-
ant inspector  of  iron-clads,  and  until  the  end  of
the  war  supervised  the  work  in  the  Brooklyn  navy-
yard.  He  subsequently  resumed  legal  practice.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Free-soil  party
in  Connecticut,  and  in  1845  contributed  to  the
"  New  Englander  "  a  series  of  articles  on  "  Massa-
chusetts vs.  South  Carolina."  During  the  later
years  of  his  life  he  interested  himself  in  genealogi-
cal subjects,  and  compiled  records  of  his  ances-
tors which  formed  the  basis  of  "  The  Learned  Fam-
ily," by  William  L.  Learned  (Albany,  1882).

"LAROCHE,  Antoine  de,  French  navigator.
He  lived  in  the  17th  century,  and  entered  the  Eng-
lish naval  service.  All  that  is  known  about  his
voyages  and  discoveries  is  contained  in  the  work  of
Seixasy  Louera,  entitled  "  Descripcion  geographica
de  la  region  Magellanica."  a  section  of  which  treats
of  the  discovery  that  was  made  by  De  Laroche  of  a
new  passage  from  the  North  sea  into  the  South  sea.
Laroche  is  said  to  have  returned  from  the  island  of
Chiloe  in  May,  1675,  doubled  Cape  Horn,  and  tried
to  enter  the  south  Atlantic  by  way  of  the  Strait  of
Lemaire,  for  at  that  time  it  was  not  known  that
there  was  an  open  sea  east  of  Staten  island.  The
western  winds  were  so  violent,  and  the  currents  so
rapid,  that  he  was  carried  eastward  without  being
able  to  approach  the  lands  that  lie  along  the  Strait
of  Magellan.  The  month  of  May  was  already  ad-
vanced, and  winter  was  beginning.  He  de-
spaired of  safety,  and  his  anxiety  increased  when
he  saw  an  unknown  land  before  him  in  the  east.
After  many  efforts  he  succeeded  in  reaching  a  bay,
where  he  anchored  near  a  cape  sloping  southward,
and  where  the  sea  was  deep.  He  distinguished
mountains  near  the  coast  covered  with  snow,  and
was  exposed  to  very  stormy  winds.  At  the  end  of
fourteen  days  the  weather  cleared,  and  he  found
that  he  was  anchored  at  one  of  the  extremities  of
this  land,  and  discovered  to  the  south  and  southeast
other  mountains  covered  with  snow.  A  gale  from
the  south  now  forced  him  northward  for  three  days
as  far  as  the  forty-sixth  degree  of  south  latitude.
The  storm  calmed,  and  at  about  the  forty-fifth  de-
gree he  reached  a  country  without  inhabitants  and
which  he  represented  as  very  pleasant.  Here  he
spent  six  days,  and  procured  water,  wood,  and  fish.
He  then  sailed  for  the  Bay  of  All  Saints  in  Brazil.
Some  writers  have  thought  that  Laroche's  island
was  the  land  that  was  seen  by  Duclos-Guyot  in
June,  1756,  which  he  named  St.  Pierre  and  which
Cook  named  South  Georgia  in  1772.

LA  ROCHE,  R6ne,  physician,  b.  in  the  island
of  Santo  Domingo  in  1755 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
6  June,  1819.  He  received  a  classical  education  in
France,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Montpellier  in  1779,  and  practised  in  Santo
Domingo  until  in  1793  he  was  forced  to  flee  to
the  United  States  in  consequence  of  the  revolu-


tion in  that  island.  He  obtained  a  practice  among
the  French  families  in  Philadelphia,  where  he
gained  a  reputation  among  native  Americans  by
his  successful  treatment  of  yellow  fever  during  the
epidemic  of  1794  and  succeeding  years. — His  son,
Rene,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1795 ;  d.
there  in  December,  1872,  was  the  author  of  a  trea-
tise on  "  Pneumonia :  its  supposed  Connection,
Pathological  and  Etiological,  with  Autumnal  Fe-
vers "  (Philadelphia,  1854) ;  and  of  an  exhaustive
work  on  "  Yellow  Fever,  considered  in  its  Histori-
cal, Pathological,  Etiological,  and  Therapeutical
Relations  "  (1855).  For  some  years  before  his  death
he  was  engaged  in  preparing  a  history  of  medicine.

LAROSE,  John  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in  Le-
high county,  Pa.,  in  February,  1755 ;  d.  near  Mi-
amisburgh,  Ohio,  17  Nov.,  1844.  He  served  in  the
Revolutionary  army  in  1776,  after  which  he  taught
in  North  Carolina,  studied  theology  privately,  was
licensed  in  1795,  and  preached  in  Guilford  county,
N.  C,  till  1804,  when  he  removed  to  Ohio.  In  1805
he  organized  the  German  Reformed  church  of  St.
John's,  and  in  1809  that  of  Germantown.  He  left
manuscripts  in  German  of  theological  treatises  and
many  poems  that  were  never  published.

LARRABEE,  Charles  Hathaway,  jurist,  b.
in  Rome,  N.  Y.,  9  Nov.,  1820;  d.  in  Tehachapi
Pass,  Cal.,  20  Jan.,  1883.  He  was  taken  to  Ohio
whe"n  a  child,  educated  at  Granville  college  (now
Denison  university),  read  law,  then  engaged  in  civil
engineering,  aiding  in  the  construction  of  the  Lit-
tle Miami  railroad,  the  earliest  work  of  the  kind  in
Ohio,  removed  to  Pontotoc,  Miss.,  was  there  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  was  an  unsuccessful  candi-
date for  the  legislature.  Removing  to  Chicago,
111.,  in  1844,  he  edited  the  "  Democratic  Advocate,*'
was  city  attorney  in  1846,  and  in  1847  founded
Horicon,  Wis.,  where  he  erected  mills  for  utilizing
the  water-power  at  that  place.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1847,  in
which  body  he  effectively  advocated  the  homestead
exemption  clause,  and  judge  of  the  Wisconsin  su-
preme court  from  1848  till  1858,  when  he  resigned,
and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  5  Dec,  1859,  till  3  March,  1861.  His  prompt
and  energetic  support  of  the  National  government
did  much  to  promote  the  enrolment  of  volunteers
among  the  Democrats  of  Wisconsin.  In  April,
1861,  he  raised  a  company  in  the  1st  Wisconsin
regiment,  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  and  in  the
following  month  appointed  major  of  the  5th  Wis-
consin infantry.  He  served  through  the  peninsular
campaign,  and  was  in  Gen.  Winfield  S.  Hancock's
brigade  at  Lewinsville,  Lee's  Mills,  and  Williams-
burg, where  he  took  part  in  a  brilliant  bayonet
charge.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  24th
Wisconsin  in  August,  1862,  fought  with  credit  in
Gen.  Philip  Sheridan's  division  at  Perryville,  and
served  in  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  and  that  of
the  Cumberland  till  27  Aug.,  1863,  when  he  re-
signed on  account  of  failing  health  and  entered
the  invalid  corps.  He  removed  to  California  in  the
spring  of  1864,  practised  law  at  Salem,  Oregon,  and
Seattle,  Washington  territory,  and  finally  settled
at  San  Bernardino,  Cal.

LARRABEE,  William  Clark,  educator,  b.  in
Cape  Elizabeth,  Me.,  23  Dec,  1802 :  d.  in  Green-
castle,  Ind.,  4  May,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1828,  taught  in  Alfred,  Me.,  for  two
years,  was  appointed  in  1830  a  tutor  in  the  newly
established  Wesleyan  university,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  he  was  elected  principal  of  Oneida  confer-
ence seminary,  Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,  where  he  continued
for  four  years,  becoming  also,  in  1832,  a  minister  in
the  Oneida  conference. In  1835  Mr.  Larrabee  was


LARREMORE


LA  SALLE


621


chosen  principal  of  the  Maine  Wesleyan  seminary,
Kent's  Hill,  Me.  In  1837  he  served  as  an  assist-
ant to  Dr.  Charles  I.  Jackson  on  the  first  geological
survey  of Maine. About 1840 he  was  elected

frofessor  of  mathematics  and  natural  science  in
ndiana  Asbury  university  (now  Depauw  univer-
sity). He  remained  in  this  post  and  as  profes-
sor of  mathematics  alone  till  1852.  and  on  his  re-
tirement from  it  became  emeritus  professor  of
oriental  languages  and  literature.  During  one
year  he  served  as  acting  president,  and  made  a
thorough  revision  of  the  course  of  study.  In  1852
he  was  elected  to  be  the  first  superintendent  of
public  instruction  of  Indiana,  and  reorganized  the
school  system  of  the  state.  He  retired  from  the
office  at  the  end  of  1854,  and  after  an  interval  of  a
single  term  was  elected  to  a  second  term  in  1856.
Prof.  Larrabee  was  one  of  the  pioneer  high-school
teachers  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  The
denomination  had  very  few  schools  when  he  began
his  career,  and  educated  men  among  its  ministers
were  the  exception.  Nearly  all  of  the  colleges  and
seminaries  that  the  church  now  possesses  were
established  after  he  was  born,  and  the  earlier  ones
were  controlled,  during  a  whole  generation,  by
persons  that  had  been  under  his  instruction.  He
was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Ladies'  Repository"  (if
Cincinnati,  and  served  as  its  editor  in  1852.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Scientific  Evidences  of  Natu-
ral and  Revealed  Religion "  (Cincinnati,  1850) :
"Wesley  and  His  Co-Laborers"  (2  vols.,  1851);
"Asbury  and  His  Co- Laborers "  (2  vols..  1853);
and  '•  Rosabower,"  a  collection  of  essays  and  mis-
cellanies, mostly  made  up  from  his  contributions
to  the  "  Ladies'  Repository  "  (1854).

LARREMORE,  Richard  Ludlow,  jurist,  b.  in
Astoria,  N.  Y.,  6  Sept.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Rutgers  in  1850,  and  read  law  in  the  office  of  Rob-
inson, Betts,  and  Robinson.  He  was  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  board  of  education  in  New
York,  and  was  made  its  president  in  1808.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  18G7,
and  in  1870  was  elected  a  justice  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  of  Xew  York  for  fifteen  years,  and
re-elected  in  1885,  when  he  became  chief  justice.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Univer-
sity of  the  citv  of  New  York  in  1870.

LARTIGUE,  James,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Montreal,  Canada,  20  June,  1777:  d.  there,  19
April,  1840.  After  studying  and  practising  law
for  a  few  years,  he  entered  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sul-
pice,  Montreal,  and  when  his  theological  studies
were  finished  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Denaut.  who
appointed  him  his  secretary.  Although  a  simple
priest,  he  had  much  to  do  with  the  government  of
the  Canadian  church  while  holding  this  office.  Af-
ter the  death  of  Bishop  Denaut  he  retired  among
the  community  of  St.  Sulpice  in  1807  and  was  ap-
pointed director  of  the  seminary.  During  the  in-
vasion of  Canada  by  the  forces  of  the  United  States,
by  request  of  the  governor-general.  Sir  George
Prevost,  he  restored  order  among  the  Canadian
militia,  who  were  threatening  to  disband.  In  1819
secret  agents  were  employed  by  the  British  govern-
ment to  discover  some  means  of  wresting  from  the
Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice  its  large  possessions.  Lar-
tigue,  from  his  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  his  loyal-
ty as  a  British  subject,  was  judged  by  the  Sulpi-
tians  peculiarly  fitted  to  argue  the  question  with
the  English  ministry.  On  his  voyage  across  the
Atlantic  he  interested  Archbishop  Plessis,  who  was
going  to  Rome,  in  the  affair,  and  by  their  united
efforts  the  English  government  took  no  further
steps  in  the  matter.  In  1820,  while  still  in  London,
he  was  named  titular  bishop  of  Telmessa  and  suf-


fragan bishop  of  the  district  of  Montreal,  auxiliary
to  Quebec.  He  immediately  sailed  for  Canada,  and
arrived  in  Montreal.  20  July,  but  his  consecration
was  delayed  till  1  Jan.,  1821.  Quarrels  arose  be-
tween him  and  Sulpitians.  The  new  bishop  in-
sisted on  residing  among  them.  and.  as  his  presence
would  interfere  with  the  authority  of  their  supe-
rior, they  objected,  and  during  his  absence  on  a
pastoral  visitation  they  removed  his  furniture.
They  now  offered  to  build  him  an  episcopal  resi-
dence ;  but  he  declined,  and  the  result  was  a  war  of
pamphlets  that  continued  till  1830.  The  citizens
of  Montreal  afterward  supplied  him  with  the  funds
necessary  to  erect  a  residence,  and  the  cathedral  of
St.  James,  which  was  finished  in  1825.  Bishop
Lartigue  had  also  some  difficulties  with  his  clergy,
who  at  first  refused  to  recognize  his  authority.
These  disputes  were  finally  settled  by  the  erection
of  Montreal  into  a  titular  bishopric,  13  May,  1836.
In  the  insurrection  of  1837  he  excited  the  anger  of
the  French  Canadians  by  excommunicating  all
who  should  be  taken  with  arms  in  their  hands.
The  exasperation  of  his  flock  found  vent  in  a  riot,
and  he  was  obliged  to  fly  from  Montreal,  but  when
the  insurrection  was  subdued  he  returned.  Al-
though he  seemed  to  care  nothing  for  the  insults
that  were  offered  to  him,  his  spirit  was  broken,
and  his  health  declined  rapidly  after  his  return.

LA  SALLE,  Robert  Cavelier,  Sieur  de,  French
explorer,  b.  in  Rouen,  22  Nov..  1G43  :  d.  in  Texas,
20  March,  1687.  He  was  of  an  honorable  burgher
family,  in  early  life  became  connected  with  the
Jesuits,  and  seems  to  have  taught  in  their  schools;
but  he  soon  left
them,  and  in  1666
went  to  Canada  to
seek  his  fortune.
The  priests  of  the
Seminary  of  St. Sul-
pice, feudal  owners
of  the  island  of
Montreal,  granted
him  a  tract  of  land
at  an  exposed  and
dangerous  place,  to
which,  in  mockery
of  his  schemes,  was
afterward  given
the  nickname  of
La  Chine.  These
schemes  involved
no  less  than  the
discovery  of  a  way
to  China  across  the

American  continent.  In  1669  La  Salle  sold  his  new
estates,  and  set  out  on  his  tour  of  western  explora-
tion in  company  with  two  Sulpitian  priests,  who
were  bound  for  the  upper  lakes.  He  soon  left  them,
and  with  a  few  followers  made  his  way  southward
and  westward,  discovered  the  Ohio,  and  descended
it  as  far  at  least  as  the  rapids  at  Louisville.  A
vear  or  two  later  he  made  another  journey,  as-
cended Lake  Michigan,  and  crossed  thence  to  the
Illinois.  It  is  maintained  by  some  that  he  de-
scended this  river  to  the  Mississippi,  thus  antici-
pating the  discovery  of  Marquette  and  Jolliet ;  but
the  weight  of  evidence  inclines  to  the  belief  that
he  visited  onlv  the  upper  part  of  the  Illinois.  In
1673,  on  the  recommendation  of  Count  Frontenac,
governor  of  Canada,  La  Salle  obtained  a  patent  of
nobilitv  and  a  grant  of  Fort  Frontenac,  with  adja-
cent lands.  This  post  had  just  been  established  at
the  site  of  the  present  city  of  Kingston,  on  Lake
Ontario.  It  was  well  situated  for  the  fur-trade,
and  La  Salle  was  now  in  a  fair  way  of  enriching


622


LA  SALLE


LAS  CASAS


himself,  had  riches  been  his  chief  object. He  re-

farded  them,  however,  as  but  the  instruments  of
is  favorite  designs.  Going  to  France  in  1677,  he
laid  his  plans  before  the  minister,  Colbert,  and  di-
lated on  the  vast  extent  of  the  great  west,  its
boundless  resources,  and  the  advantages  of  colo-
nizing it  and  opening  trade  with  its  numerous  In-
dian tribes,  to  this  end  he  asked  permission  to
build  forts  in  the  western  valleys,  with  seignorial
rights  over  all  lands  that  he  might  discover  and
colonize  within  twenty  years.  He  received  in  re-
turn royal  letters-patent,  which,  while  they  did  not
grant  all  he  asked,  gave  him  ample  powers  of  ex-
ploring and  occupying  the  west,  provided  always
that  it  should  cost  the  king  nothing.  He  looked
to  the  fur-trade  to  support  the  enterprise,  and  ap-
pealed to  relatives  and  friends  to  become  his  part-
ners. Having  thus  raised  the  needful  money,  he
returned  to  Canada,  accompanied  by  the  Chevalier
de  Tonti  and  a  friar  named  Louis  Hennepin.

The  new  enterprise  aroused  jealousy  and  oppo-
sition among  the  Canadian  merchants :  but  men  at
length  were  hired  and  stores  collected,  and  in  No-
vember, 1678,  La  Salle  and  his  company  set  out
from  Port  Frontenac.  He  had  laid  aside  his
scheme  of  finding  a  way  to  China,  and,  convinced
that  the  Mississippi  flowed  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,
had  substituted  a  vast  plan  which  should  plant
France  on  its  shores,  and  open  to  her  the  whole
interior  of  the  continent.  The  party  proceeded  to
Niagara,  and  spent  the  winter  in  building,  above
the  cataract,  a  small  vessel,  which  La  Salle  named
the  "  Griffin."  In  the  following  summer  he  as-
cended the  lakes  to  Mackinaw,  whence  he  continued
his  voyage  in  canoes,  sending  back  the  "  Griffin  "
with  a  load  of  furs  to  appease  his  clamorous  credi-
tors. After  a  stormy  autumnal  voyage  up  Lake
Michigan,  he  ascended  the  river  St.  Joseph,  crossed
to  the  waters  of  the  Illinois,  and  descended  that
river  to  a  spot  below  Peoria,  where  he  built  a  fort
that  he  named  Fort  Crevecceur.  He  gave  it  this
name  by  reason  of  the  misfortunes  that  had  already
begun  to  overwhelm  him.  He  learned  that  his
creditors  had  seized  his  property  in  Canada,  and
that  his  vessel,  the  "  Griffin,"  which  had  on  board
materials  that  were  indispensable  to  his  undertak-
ing, had  been  wrecked,  probably  through  treachery.
In  this  extremity  he  resolved  to  leave  the  party  in
command  of  Henry  de  Tonti,  and  return  on  foot
to  Canada  for  the  necessary  supplies.  After  a  win-
ter journey  of  more  than  a  thousand  miles  he
reached  Fort  Frontenac,  provided  the  needed  suc-
cor, and  was  about  to  return  when  he  learned  that
the  men  that  he  had  left  with  Tonti  had  mutinied,
plundered  his  camp,  and  were  advancing  on  Lake
Ontario,  intending  to  kill  him.  He  met  them  with
a  few  followers  on  the  lake,  effectually  chastised
them,  and  compelled  them  to  submit.  Then  he  set
out  again  for  the  Illinois,  hoping  to  rejoin  Tonti,
who  had  remained  there  with  a  few  faithful  men.
On  arriving,  he  found  a  scene  of  havoc.  A  war
party  of  five  hundred  Iroquois  had  invaded  the
Illinois  country,  driven  off  the  friendly  tribes,  and
spread  universal  desolation.  The  greai  town  of
the  Illinois  Indians,  near  the  present  village  of
Utica,  was  burned  to  ashes ;  the  bodies  of  the  dead
in  the  neighboring  graveyard  were  dug  up,  the
bones  scattered,  and  the  skulls  stuck  in  derision
on  sticks  that  were  planted  in  the  ground.  La
Salle  looked  in  vain  for  traces  of  his  brave  and
faithful  lieutenant,  Tonti.  He  descended  the  Illi-
nois to  its  mouth,  and  the  mystery  was  still  un-
solved, though  he  found  everywhere  hideous  signs
of  the  triumph  of  the  savage  conquerors.  The  en-
terprise was  ruined,  and  all  must  be  begun  anew.


With  unabated  resolution  he  prepared  for  another
effort,  and,  after  spending  the  winter  in  negotia-
tion with  the  Miamis  and  other  western  tribes,  he
set  out  for  Canada  in  the  spring  of  1681  to  collect
his  scattered  resources.  On  reaching  Mackinaw  he
was  cheered  by  finding  Tonti,  who,  after  heroic  but
vain  efforts  to  stay  the  carnage  in  the  valley  of  the
Illinois,  had  made  his  escape  with  his  few  followers.
They  went  together  to  Fort  Frontenac.  Through
the  influence  of  the  governor  and  the  support  of  a
rich  relative,  La  Salle  found  means  to  appease  his
creditors,  and  even  to  gain  fresh  advances.  Then,
accompanied  by  Tonti,  thirty  Frenchmen,  and  a
band  of  faithful  Indians,  he  moved  up  the  lakes
with  a  flotilla  of  canoes,  crossed  by  the  Chicago
portage  to  the  waters  of  the  Illinois,  descended
that  stream  to  its  mouth,  and  on  6  Feb.,  1682,  em-
barked on  the  Mississippi.  After  running  the
gauntlet  of  its  various  tribes,  he  reached  its  mouth
on  9  April,  planted  a  column  bearing  the  arms  of
France,  and  in  the  name  of  Louis  XIV.  took  pos-
session of  the  whole  valley  of  the  great  river,  from
the  Alleghanies  to  the  Rocky  mountains.

The  first  step  of  his  enterprise  was  at  last  ac-
complished. The  next  was  to  plant  a  fortified  set-
tlement on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  that  should  secure
for  France  the  vast  regions  between  it  and  Cana-
da. A  bitter  and  vindictive  opposition  awaited
him,  not  only  from  the  jealous  Canadian  fur-trad-
ers, but  from  the  new  governor,  La  Barre,  who  had
lately  supplanted  Frontenac.  La  Salle  returned
to  France,  and  laid  his  plans  before  the  court.-
They  were  approved,  and,  in  spite  of  La  Barre's
hostile  representations,  a  squadron  was  placed  at
his  disposal,  under  command  of  an  officer  named
Beaujeu.  In  1684  he  sailed  for  the  Gulf  of  Mexi-
co, fell  into  a  misunderstanding  with  Beaujeu,
failed  to  find  the  Mississippi,  and  landed  with  his
colonists  at  Matagorda  bay,  which  he  mistook  for
a  western  mouth  of  the  river  of  which  he  was  in
search.  One  of  the  vessels,  laden  with  indispensa-
ble stores,  was  wrecked — it  is  said  through  treach-
ery— at  the  entrance  of  the  bay.  Beaujeu  and  his
squadron  sailed  for  France,  and  La  Salle,  with  his
colonists,  was  left  alone.  The  sick,  disconsolate,
famished,  and  mutinous  company  fortified  them-
selves as  they  could  by  the  banks  of  the  little  river
Lavaca,  and  La  Salle,  becoming  aware  of  the  fatal
error  of  his  position,  made  repeated  journeys  to
discover  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.  Nearly  two
years  passed,  and  the  situation  grew  from  bad  to
worse.  La  Salle  made  a  last  and  desperate  attempt
to  reach  the  Mississippi,  resolved  to  ascend  it  and
bring  back  relief  from  Canada  to  the  perishing  colo-
nists. In  March,  1687,  he  reached  a  branch  of  the
river  Trinity,  and  here  several  of  his  followers,
who  bore  a  grudge  against  their  leader,  conspired
to  kill  him,  ambushed  themselves  in  the  high  grass,
and  shot  him  through  the  brain.  La  Salle  was  of
a  shy,  proud,  and  reserved  nature,  beloved  by  a  few
intimates,  and  greatly  liked  and  respected  by  the
Indians,  but  awakening  neither  enthusiasm  nor
affection  in  those  under  his  command.  Here  lay
one  of  the  causes  of  his  failure.  His  schemes,
moreover,  were  too  vast  for  his  resources,  and  even
his  rare  energy  and  fortitude  could  not  grapple
with  the  ceaseless  enmities  and  jealousies  arrayed
against  him.  He  stands,  nevertheless,  the  foremost
pioneer  of  the  great  west.

LAS  CASAS,  Gonzalo  (las-cah'-sas),  Mexican
agriculturist,  b.  in  Oajaca  in  1548  ;  d.  there  in  1601.
He  was  chief  judge,and  held  an  Indian  commandery
in  Misteca,  province  of  Oajaca,  and  gave  valuable
assistance  to  the  Spanish  authorities  by  his  knowl-
edge of  Indian  dialects,  which  he  learned  from  his


LAS  HERAS


LASTRA


623


mother,  an  Indian  woman.  He  directed  his  at-
tention principally  to  agriculture,  and  left  several
works  which  are  the  only  ones  in  existence  on  the
agriculture  of  the  early  stages  of  the  conquest.
They  are  "  Arte  para  criar  gusanos  de  seda  en  la
Nueva  EspaSa "  (Granada.  1581 :  reprinted  in  a
revised  form  as  an  appendix  to  Herrera's  "  Agri-
culture," Madrid,  1690);  '"La  agricultura  de  los
Indios  y  sus  instrumentos  agricolos"  (Madrid,
1596) ;  and  in  manuscript  "  Defensa  de  la  Con-
quista  y  los  conquistadores  de  la  Nueva  Espana  y
como  ha  de  haberse  con  los  naturales  "  and  "  Tra-
tado  de  la  guerra  con  los  Chichimecos."

LAS  HERAS,  Juan  Gregorio  de  (las-air -as),
South  American  soldier,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres.  11
July,  1780 ;  d.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  February,  1866.
He  engaged  in  business  till  the  age  of  twenty-six,
when  he  enlisted  in  the  armv,  taking  part  in  the
struggles  of  1806-7  against  the  English.  In  1808
he  became  sergeant  of  hussars,  and,  when  inde-
pendence was  declared  in  1810,  he  acted  with  the
patriots,  was  appointed  captain  of  militia  in  Cor-
dova, and  in  1812  became  commander  of  the  gar-'
rison  of  that  city.  In  1813  he  offered  to  accom-
pany the  auxiliary  Argentine  division,  of  which  he
became  second  in  command.  After  the  battle  of
Cuchacucha  he  attained  the  rank  of  colonel,  and
after  the  defeat  of  Rancagua.  2  Oct.,  1814,  he  re-
tired in  good  order  and  twice  repulsed  the  enemy.
Afterward  he  was  employed  in  Mendoza  in  the  or-
ganization of  the  Army  of  the  Andes.  In  1817,
•leading  one  column  by  the  pass  of  Cspallata,  he
commanded  in  the  battles  of  Potrerillos,  Guar-
dia,  and  Villa  de  los  Andes.  Together  with  the
forces  of  Gen.  San  Martin  he  took  part  in  the  bat-
tle of  Chacabuco,  12  Feb.,  1817,  and  immediately
afterward  was  sent  to  the  south,  gained  the  victo-
ries of  Curapalihue,  Vegas  de  Talcahuano,  and  Ga-
vilan,  and  was  present  at  both  of  the  sieges  of  Tal-
cahuano under  the  orders  of  Gen.  O'Higgins.  In
1820  he  was  chief  of  staff  of  the  liberating  army  of
Peru,  and  in  the  same  year  was  promoted  brigadier
by  the  Argentine  government,  and  general  of  di-
vision by  the  Chilian  government.  In  Peru  he  had
the  command  of  the  siege  of  the  castles  of  Callao
and  received  the  title  of  grand  marshal.  After  re-
tiring from  Peru  he  went  to  the  Argentine  Repub-
lic, where  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  province
of  Buenos  Ayres  in  May,  1824.  During  his  gov-
ernment the  congress  of  the  united  provinces  met
on  16  Dec,  1824,  and  on  the  restoration  of  the
confederation  and  the  election  of  Rivadavia  to  the
executive,  Las  Heras  delivered  the  government  to
him,  7  March,  1825,  and  in  1826  returned  to  Chili.
He  was  deprived  of  his  rank  on  account  of  the  civil
disturbances  of  1830.  but  it  was  restored  by  con-
gress in  1842  and  by  the  Argentine  congress  in
1855.  From  1862  till  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
inspector-general  of  the  armv.

LASO  DE  LA  VEGA,  Jose"  Silvester  (lah-so-
deh-lah-vay'-gah),  Chilian  statesman,  b.  in  Santiago
in  June,  1779 ;  d.  there  in  1842.  In  1805  he  became
counsel  to  the  royal  audiencia,  and  in  1811  he
received  the  degree  of  doctor  from  the  University
of  San  Felipe.  Toward  the  middle  of  1809  he  in-
tended to  go  to  Spain  to  claim  the  duchy  of  Alba,
but,  having  enlisted  in  the  party  that  worked  for
the  independence  of  Chili,  he  lost  the  fortune  and
honors  that  would  have  come  to  him  with  that
title.  He  was  one  of  the  most  active  in  calling  the
popular  meeting  of  18  Sept.,  1810,  and  also  formed
the  first  governing  junta.  In  1811  he  was  elected
a  deputy  to  the  congress  that  succeeded  to  that
junta.  He  afterward  took  command  of  a  division
that  was paid and maintained by  himself,  and


going  to  the  province  of  Aconcagua,  which  had
declared  in  favor  of  Spain,  he  pacified  it.  After
the  defeat  of  Rancagua  he  was  obliged  to  emigrate
to  the  Argentine  Republic,  where  he  engaged  in
commerce,  and  divided  his  scanty  resources  with
his  companions.  In  the  republic  of  Uruguay  he
was  secretary  of  Gen.  Artigas,  in  which  post  he
greatly  aided  the  expedition  of  San  Martin  to
Chili.  After  the  battle  of  Chacabuco  he  returned
to  Chili  in  1818,  and  in  that  year  was  intrusted
with  the  portfolio  of  justice,  which  was  at  that
time  the  most  influential  post  in  the  republic,  and
which  he  occupied  till  1824.  In  1820  he  was  sent
as  envoy  to  the  Argentine  Republic,  where  he
worked  for  the  independence  of  Peru.  He  was  a
member  of  congress  in  the  years  1824-'6.  and  in
1827  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  supreme
court.  He  died  poor,  having  expended  his  fortune
in  the  cause  of  his  count rv*s  independence.

LASSERRE,  Charles  Louis,  Chevalier  de  (las'-
sair),  West  Indian  naval  officer,  b.  in  Le  Cap,  Santo
Domingo,  in  1762  ;  d.  in  Angouleme  in  1826.  He
entered  the  navy  at  the  time  of  the  war  of  Ameri-
can independence,  served  at  Yorktown,  and  was
wounded  in  an  engagement  with  the  British  fleet.
He  served  afterward  in  Guiana  till  the  French
revolution,  when  he  returned  to  Fiance.  He  emi-
grated in  1790.  and  lived  in  New  Orleans  from
1800  till  1809,  earning  a  living  as  a  teacher  of
mathematics.  At  the  restoration  he  was  com-
missioned rear-admiral,  and  became  president  of
the  naval  college  at  Angouleme.  lie  published
"  Essaishistoriques  et  critiques  sur la  marine  Fran-
chise de  1661  a  1789,  principalement.  durant  sa
lutte  avec  la  marine  Anglaise  en  Amerique  "  (Lon-
don. 1813);  "Impressions  de  voyage,  journal  d'un
ancien  emigre  dans  la  Louisinne  "  (Paris,  1817);
"Del'avenir  des  Etats-Unis"  (Angouleme,  1824);
and  several  other  works.

LASTARRIA,  Jose  Yictorino  (las-tar' -re-a),
Chilian  author,  b.  in  Rancagua  in  1812.  From  his
early  youth  he  applied  himself  to  teaching  and
journalistic  labors,  and  at  the  same  time  composed
political  works  and  text-books  for  the  colleges
where  he  was  employed.  In  1838  he  was  appoint-
ed teacher  of  civil  law  and  literature  in  the  Nation-
al institute.  Associated  with  other  literary  men,
he  was  the  founder  of  the  journals  "  EI  Semana-
rio."  "  El  Crepusculo,"  "  El  Siglo,"  and  "  La  Re-
vista  de  Santiago,"  and  he  has  also  founded  several
literary  societies.  From  1843  he  has  at  different
times  been  elected  deputy  to  the  legislature  and
senator  of  the  republic,  and  has  been  president  of
both  chambers.  He  was  appointed  minister  to
Peru  in  1863.  and  in  1864  to  La  Plata  and  Brazil,
and  has  been  several  times  secretary  of  state.  In
1873  Lastarria  founded  in  Santiago  the  Academy
of  science  and  literature.  His  principal  works  are
directed  to  the  teaching  of  public  law,  of  which
science  he  has  been  one  of  the  founders  in  his
country.  His  books  include  "  Elementos  de  dere-
cho  publico  constitncional ''  (Santiago),  "  Investiga-
ciones  sobre  la  inflnencia  social  de  la  conquista,"
"Juicio  historico  de  Diego  Portales,''  "Bosquejo
historico  de  la  constitucion  del  gobierno  de  Chile
durante  el  primer  periodo  de  la  revolucion,"  '•  Es-
tudios  sobre  los  primeros  poetas  espanolcs,"  "  His-
toria  constitucional  del  medio  siglo,"  "La  Ameri-
ca," "  Recuerdos  de  viaje,"  "  Lecciones  de  geo-
grafia  moderna,"  "El  libro  de  oro  de  las  escue-
las,"  "  Manual  de  testamentos,"  and  "  Lecciones
politicas,"  all  published  in  Santiago.

LASTRA,  Francisco  de  la  (las'-trah),  Chilian
soldier,  b.  in  Santiago,  4  Oct..  1777;  d.  there,  13
May,  1852. He  was  sent  to  Spain  to  pursue  his


624


LATANE


LATHROP


studies,  and  served  in  the  navy  of  that  country  till
1807.  He  returned  to  Chili  in  1811,  enlisted  in  the
revolutionary  army,  and  was  appointed  political
and  military  governor  of  Valparaiso.  He  organ-
ized in  that  port  the  militia  and  naval  reserve,
and  also  established  arsenals  for  its  defence.  In
March,  1814,  he  was  chosen  supreme  director  of
the  state,  which  place  he  held  till  July,  when  he
was  deposed  in  consequence  of  the  treaty  of  Lircai
with  the  Spanish.  After  the  defeat  of  Rancagua,
2  Oct.,  1814,  Lastra  was  taken  prisoner  and  sent  to
the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez,  where  he  suffered
many  privations.  He  was  liberated  after  the  vic-
tory of  Chacabuco,  re-entered  the  service,  and,
after  attaining  the  rank  of  colonel,  was  for  the
second  time  appointed  in  1817  governor  and  gen-
eral commander  of  the  navy  of  Valparaiso.  He
was  nominated  councillor  of  state  in  January,  1823,
and  a  few  days  afterward  intendant  of  the  prov-
ince, of  Santiago,  in  which  place  he  reconciled  the
parties  that  threatened  the  tranquillity  of  the  coun-
try. In  the  same  year  he  was  commissioned  by  the
government  to  arrange  and  organize  the  navy.  In
1825  he  was  appointed  for  the  third  time  governor
of  Valparaiso,  and  attained  the  rank  of  general  of
brigade.  In  1829  he  was  charged  with  the  general
inspection  of  the  army,  and  soon  afterward  ap-
pointed minister  of  war  and  the  navy.  He  then
retired  from  public  life  till  1839,  and  in  1841  be-
came a  member  of  the  court  of  appeals.  In  1843
he  was  elected  deputy  to  congress,  and  one  year
afterward  appointed  councillor  of  state,  which
place  he  held  till  his  death.

LATANE,  James  Allen,  R.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Essex  county,  Va.,  15  Jan.,  1831.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1852  and
studied  law,  but  in  1854  entered  the  Protestant
Episcopal  theological  seminary  near  Alexandria,
Va.,  and  in  1856  was  made  deacon  by  Bishop
Meade  at  Millwood,  Va.  He  was  rector  of  a  church
at  Staunton,  Va.,  from  1857  till  1871,  and  then  at
Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  till  January,  1874,  when  he
formally  withdrew  from  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  and  announced  his  adhesion  to  the  Re-
formed Episcopal  tenets.  Returning  to  his  early
home,  he  founded  a  church  in  Essex  county  and
one  in  King  William  county.  He  declined  a  bish-
opric in  1876  when  elected  to  the  office  at  Chicago,
but  accepted  on  being  again  chosen  in  1879,  and
was  assigned  to  the  southern  jurisdiction.  At  the
general  council  of  the  church  in  Baltimore,  in  1883,
he  was  unanimously  elected  presiding  bishop  of  the
Reformed  Episcopal  church  of  the  United  States.
He  has  resided  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  since  1880,  in
charge  of  the  Bishop  Cumming  memorial  church.

LATHAM,  Milton  Scott,  senator,  b.  in  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  23  May,  1827 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4
March,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  col-
lege in  1845,  removed  to  Alabama,  where  he  taught
in  Russell  county,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1848,  and  appointed  clerk  of  the  circuit
court.  He  went  to  California  in  1850,  became
clerk  of  the  recorder's  court  in  San  Francisco,  dis-
trict attorney  of  Sacramento  and  El  Dorado  coun-
ties in  1850-'l,  and  in  1852  was  elected  to  congress
on  the  Democratic  ticket.  He  declined  a  re-elec-
tion, and  in  1855  was  appointed  collector  of  the
port  of  San  Francisco,  which  office  he  held  two
years.  He  was  elected  governor  in  1859,  but  re-
signed immediately  after  his  inauguration,  having
been  chosen  IT.  S.  senator  in  the  place  of  David  C.
Broderick.  After  the  close  of  his  term,  which
ended  in  March,  1863,  he  engaged  in  business  in
San  Francisco,  and  became  president  of  the  Lon-
don and  San  Francisco  bank.


LATHROP,  Francis,  artist,  b.  at  sea  near  the
Hawaiian  islands,  22  June,  1849.  He  was  educated
in  New  York  city  and  Dresden,  Germany,  and
studied  in  the  Academy  of  art  in  the  latter  place
and  in  the  studios  of  Ford  Madox  Brown  and
Edward  Burne-Jones  in  England.  He  was  also
an  assistant  of  R.  Spencer  Stanhope,  and  spent
some  time  in  William  Morris's  establishment  for
the  mamifacture  of  artistic  household  articles.
He  sent  to  the  first  exhibition  of  the  Society  of
American  artists  in  1878  portraits  of  Ross  R.  and
Thomas  Winans.  He  was  chosen  secretary  of  this
society  in  1879,  and  treasurer  in  1881.  Mr.  La-
throp  has  devoted  himself  chiefly  to  mural  paint-
ing, stained-glass  windows,  and  other  decorative
designs  for  public  and  private  buildings  in  Boston,
New  York,  Baltimore,  and  other  places.  He  has
executed  "  Moses  with  the  Tablets  of  the  Law,"  a
wall-painting  in  Bowdoin  college  chapel  (1877),
and  "  Apollo,"  over  the  proscenium  of  the  Metro-
politan opera-house,  Ne^  York  city  (1883).  He
assisted  in  the  decoration  of  Trinity  church,  Bos-
ton, and  made  the  designs  for  the  chancel.  In
1887  he  designed  "  Widow  and  Orphans,"  a  mar-
ble mosaic  in  the  Equitable  life  insurance  com-
pany's building,  New  York  city,  and  a  stained-
glass  window  for  the  chancel  of  Bethesda  church,
Saratoga.  N.  Y.,  representing  '•  The  Miracle  at  the
Pool  of  Bethesda."  He  also  furnished  the  illus-
trations for  Clarence  Cook's  "  House  Beautiful,"
and  for  other  artistic  publications. — His  brother,
George  Parsons,  author,  b.  in  Honolulu,  Hawaiian
islands,  25  Aug.,  1851,  received  his  education  in
New  York  city  and  in  Dresden,  Germany,  where  he
remained  from  1867  till  1870.  After  his  return  he
attended  Columbia  college  law-school,  New  York
city,  for  one  term,  then  adopted  a  literary  life,
and  again  went  abroad.  In  1871  he  married  in
London,  England,  Rose,  second  daughter  of  Na-
thaniel Hawthorne.  From  1875  till  1877  he  was
assistant  editor  of  the  "Atlantic  Monthly,"  and
then  till  1879  editor  of  the  Boston  "  Courier."  In
1879  he  purchased  Hawthorne's  former  house,
called  the  "  Wayside,"  in  Concord,  Mass.,  and  re-
sided there  till  1883,  when  he  removed  to  New
York  city.  In  that  year  he  founded  the  American
copyright  league,  of  which  he  was  the  secretary
until  the  summer  of  1885.  His  first  published
volume  was  "  Rose  and  Rooftree,"  poems  (Boston,
1875).  In  1876  he  issued  a  "  Study  of  Hawthorne,"
and  the  same  year  appeared  his  first  novel,  en-
titled "  Afterglow."  In  1877  he  edited  "  A  Masque
of  Poets,"  and  contributed  to  its  contents.  He
also  edited  an  edition  of  Nathaniel  Hawthorne's
works,  for  which  he  wrote  a  long  biographical
sketch  and  introductory  notes  (Boston,  1883).  His
other  publications  include  "  An  Echo  of  Passion  "
(Boston,  1882) ;  "  In  the  Distance  "  (1882) ;  u  Span-
ish Vistas"  (New  York,  1883);  "History  of  the
Onion  League  in  Philadelphia "  (Philadelphia,
1883) ;  "  Newport "  (New  York,  1884) ;  and  "  True  "
(1884).  He  is  also  the  author  of  a  dramatic  adap-
tation of  Alfred  Tennyson's  "Elaine,"  in  blank
verse,  which  was  acted  with  success  in  New  York,
Chicago,  and  Boston  in  1887. — His  wife,  Rose
Hawthorne,  author  and  artist,  b.  in  Lenox,  Mass.,
20  May,  1851,  was  the  second  daughter  and  young-
est child  of  Nathaniel  Hawthorne.  Her  childhood
from  1853  to  1860  was  passed  in  England  and  Por-
tugal. She  studied  painting  in  Dresden,  Germany,
and  in  1870  at  South  Kensington,  London,  and
was  married  in  London  in  1871.  She  has  exhib-
ited few  pictures,  her  taste  for  authorship,  devel-
oped in  early  years,  having  led  her  to  devote  her
attention  mainly  to  writing  short  stories  and  po-


LATHROP


LATIMER


625


ems,  which  have  appeared  in  the  magazines,  but
have  never  been  collected  in  book-form.
LATHROP,  or  LOTHROP,  John,  clergyman,

b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  17  May,  1740;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1816.  He  was  a  great-grandson  of
John,  who  was  minister  of  Barnstable  and  Scitu-
ate  in  1634-'53.  He  began  the  study  of  medicine,
but  afterward  chose  the  clerical  profession,  and
entered  Princeton,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1763.
He  taught  in  Dr.  Eleazar  Wheelock's  Indian  school
while  studying  theology  under  that  clergyman,
labored  as  a  missionary  among  the  Indians,  and  in
1768  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  Old  North  church
in  Boston.  While  that  city  was  in  the  possession
of  the  British  he  supplied  a  congregation  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.  Returning  in  1776,  he  found  that  his
•church  had  been  demolished  by  the  enemy.  He
assisted  Dr.  Ebenezer  Pemberton  in  the  New  Brick
church,  and  in  1779,  after  the  latter's  death,  be-
came pastor  of  the  united  congregations.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1768,
and  from  Edinburgh  in  1785.  He  wrote  his  name
Lothrop,  which  spelling  is  followed  by  many  of
his  descendants.  Besides  numerous  sermons  and
papers  in  the  "  Collections "  of  the  American
academy,  he  published  a  "  Biographical  Memoir  of
the  Rev.  John  Lothrop"  (Boston,  1813),  and  a
"Compendious  History  of  the  Late  War "  (1815).
— His  son,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  13
Jan.,  1772:  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C.  30  Jan.,  1820.
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1789,  studied  law,
began  practice  at  Dedham,  Mass.,  in  1797,  and  was
appointed  clerk  of  Norfolk  county,  but  removed
soon  afterward  to  Boston,  where  he  became  the
companion  of  Robert  T.  Paine,  Charles  Prentiss,
and  other  wits,  and  contributed  with  them  to  the
Federalist  Boston  "Gazette,"  neglecting  his  pro-
fession to  indulge  his  literary  tastes.  In  1799  he
embarked  for  Calcutta,  India,  in  the  hope  of  im-
proving his  fortunes.  He  taught  and  wrote  for
the  journals  in  that  city  for  ten  years.  While
there  he  approached  Lord  Wellesley  with  a  scheme
for  a  great  university  for  the  instruction  of  the
natives  in  European  science ;  but  the  governor-
general  condemned  the  projeet  because  it  would
sow  the  seeds  of  independence  among  the  con-
quered race.  He  returned  in  1809  with  the  in-
tention of  establishing  a  literary  journal,  but
abandoned  the  purpose  because  of  the  political
excitement  of  the  time,  and  opened  a  school  in
Boston.  Besides  teaching,  he  wrote  for  the  news-
papers, lectured  on  natural  philosophy,  and  was  a
frequent  orator  on  festive  occasions.  Removing  to
the  south,  he  pursued  his  occupations  of  teacher,
lecturer,  and  writer  for  the  press  in  Georgetown
and  Washington.  He  finally  obtained  a  place  in
the  post-office,  but  his  broken  health  did  not  per-
mit him  to  occupy  it  long.  Pie  published  a  fourth
of  July  oration  that  he  had  delivered  at  Boston  in
1796,  and  one  at  Dedham  in  1798;  also  a  poem  en-
titled "  Speech  of  Caunonicus,  an  Indian  Tradi-
tion "  (Calcutta,  1802 ;  reprinted  in  Boston.  1803).
He  prepared  a  "  Pocket  Register  and  Freemason's
Anthology"  (1813),  and  in  1819  began  a  work  on
the  manners  and  customs  of  India,  but  did  not  com-
plete it. His  shorter  poems  were  never  collected.

LATHROP,  John  Hiram,  educator,  b.  in  Sher-
burne, Chenango  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Jan.,  1799 ;  d.  in
Columbia,  Mo.,  2  Aug.,  1866.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1819,  taught  for  three  years  at  Farming-
ton,  Conn.,  and  was  tutor  at  Yale  from  1822  till
1826,  when  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began
practice  at  Middletown,  Conn. ;  but  after  six
months  he  resumed  teaching  at  Norwich,  Vt.,  took
charge  a  few  months  later  of  a  scientific  school  at
vol.  in. — 40


Gardiner,  Me.,  and  became  in  1829  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Hamilton
college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1835  of  law.  history,
and  political  economy.  He  became  president  of
Missouri  university  in"  1840.  in  1849  first  chancellor
of  Wisconsin  university,  and  in  1859  president  of
Indiana  university,  which  post  he  resigned  in
1860  and  returned  to  Missouri  university  as  pro-
fessor of  English  literature.  He  was  re-elected
president  in  1865,  and  held  that  office  till  his
death.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Hamilton  in  1845.  His  published  addresses  dis-
cuss questions  connected  with  higher  education.

LATHROP,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  20  Oct.,  1731 ;  d.  in  West  Springfield,  Mass.,
31  Dec,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1754,
and  taught  at  Springfield.  Mass.,  at  the  same  time
studying  theology.  In  August,  1756,  he  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in
West  Springfield,  where  he  preached  until  1818.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  I).  from  Yale  in  1791
and  from  Harvard  in  1811.  A  controversy  arose  in
his  congregation  in  1772  on  the  subject  of  baptism,
and  his  discourses  in  refutation  of  the  Baptists
passed  through  several  editions.  His  published
sermons  were  very  numerous.  A  part  of  them
were  issued  in  seven  volumes  (1796-1821),  the  last
of  which,  published  posthumously,  contains  his
autobiography,  which  is  remarkable  for  simplicity
and  candor.  This  collection  contains  two  sermons,
entitled  "  Wolves  in  Sheep's  Clothing,"  that  were
called  forth  by  dissensions  in  his  church,  and
originallv  published  with  others  on  the  same  sub-
ject (Edinburgh,  1781).

LATIMER,  Charles,  engineer,  b.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  7  Sept.,  1827;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  25
March,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  the  naval
academy  in  1848.  having  entered  the  navy  in  1841,
and. after  holding  the  appointments  of  acting  lieu-
tenant and  assistant  professor  in  the  naval  acad-
emy, resigned  in  1854.  He  then  became  axeman
and  roadman  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  railroad,  and
subsequently  until  1857  was  assistant  engineer  on
various  lines.  He  controlled  a  steamboat  line  for
several  years,  but  during  the  civil  war  he  was  as-
sistant and  division  engineer  in  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary railroad  service  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and
Georgia.  Later  he  held  the  office  of  assistant  en-
gineer to  various  companies,  including  the  New
York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Ohio  railroad  company,
of  which  in  1886  he  became  the  engineer.  Mr.
Latimer  invented  a  system  of  naval  signals  by
lights,  from  which  Coston's  signals  were  taken,  a
safety-guard  for  railway  bridges,  and  a  method  of
returning  to  the  track  trains  that  have  been  de-
railed. He  edited  during  1883-'7  the  "  Inter-
national Standard."  a  magazine  devoted  to  the
preservation  of  Anglo-Saxon  weights  and  measures
and  opposing  the  introduction  of  the  metric  sys-
tem, and  he  also  published  the  "  Road-Master's
Assistants"  (New  York,  1878);  "The  Divining
Rod"  (Cleveland,  1876);  and  "Battle  of  Stand-
ards" (Chicago,  1880).

LATIMER,  Georare,  statesman,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1750;  d.  there,  12  June.  1825.  He
was  educated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  (now
University  of  Pennsylvania),  and  entered  the  Con-
tinental army,  serving  till  1777.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Pennsylvania  convention  that  ratified
the  constitution  of  the  United  States  in  1787,  a
member  of  the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in
1792-'9  and  its  speaker  for  five  years,  a  presidential
elector  in  1792,  collector  of  customs  in  1798-1804,
and,  during  the  war  of  1812,  a  member  of  the
Philadelphia  committee  of  defence.


626


LATIMER


LATROBE


LATIMER,  James  Elijah,  educator,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  7  Oct.,  1826:  d.  in  Auburndale,
Mass.,  26  Nov.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Wes-
leyan  university  in  1848,  and  taught  in  various
schools  till  1861,  when  he  was  stationed  as  pastor
of  an  M.  E.  church  in  Ehnira,  having  joined  the
East  Genesee  conference  in  1858.  After  holding
several  pastorates  he  was  chosen  professor  of  his-
toric theology  in  the  theological  school  of  Boston
university.  In  1874  he  became  dean  and  professor
of  systematic  theology.  He  was  a  contributor  to
magazines  and  religious  journals,  and  left  incom-
plete a  work  on  systematic  theology.

LATIMER,  William  Kay,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  1  Sept.,  1794;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  15  March,  1873.  He  was  educated  at  St.
John's  college,  Annapolis,  Md.,  appointed  a  mid-
shipman on  15  Nov.,  1809,  commissioned  as  lieu-
tenant on  4  Feb..  1815,  and  in  1826-'30  was  en-
gaged as  commander  of  the  schooner  "  Grampus"
in  the  pursuit  of  pirates  on  the  coasts  of  the  West
India  islands.  He  was  promoted  captain  on  17
July,  1843,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  was  com-
mandant of  the  navy-yard  at  Pensacola,  Fla.  On
18  Sept.,  1852,  he  was  ordered  on  the  board  of  offi-
cers appointed  to  examine  the  coasts  of  Florida
and  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  river.  He  was
retired  in  1855,  and  made  a  commodore  on  the  re-
tired list  on  16  July,  1862.  On  12  June,  1863,  he
was  ordered  to  special  duty,  and  served  on  courts-
martial  till  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  When  in
command  of  one  of  the  vessels  of  Com.  Hull's
Mediterranean  squadron  at  a  time  when  war  with
England  was  apprehended,  acting  under  a  misap-

Brehension of  orders, Latimer returned to the
Tiited  States  with  his  ship,  for  which  he  was  se-
verely censured.

LATORRE,  Juan  Jose"  (lah-tor'-reh).  Chilian
naval  officer,  b.  in  Santiago,  15  Oct.,  1843.  He
studied  at  the  naval  school  of  Valparaiso,  and  in
1865  served  as  2d  lieutenant  on  the  "  Esmeralda,"
when  she  captured  the  Spanish  corvette  "  Cova-
donga,"  In  the  same  year  he  was  present  at  the
naval  battle  of  Abtao,  in  the  channels  of  Chiloe,  be-
tween the  Spanish  and  Chilian-Peruvian  fleets.  In
April,  1879,  as  brevet  captain,  he  received  the  com-
mand of  the  "  Magallanes,"  and  was  the  first  to
begin  hostilities  against  Peru  and  Bolivia,  sustain-
ing a  running  fight  against  the  Peruvian  corvettes
"  Union  "  and  "  Pilcomayo."  He  bombarded  the
ports  of  Mollendo,  Pisagua,  and  others  in  June,
and  on  9  July,  coming  to  the  aid  of  the  transport
"  Matias  Cousino,"  sustained  an  unequal  battle
against  the  iron-clad  "  Huascar,"  but,  on  account  of
the  proximity  of  one  of  the  large  Chilian  men-of-
war,  the  "  Huascar "  was  finally  forced  to  retire.
Two  months  afterward  he  was  appointed  to  the
command  of  the  iron-clad  "  Cochrane,"  and  on  8
Oct.,  1879,  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Angamos,
where  the  "  Huascar "  was  captured.  After  this
battle  he  was  appointed  post-captain,  and  bom-
barded on  different  occasions  the  town  of  Arica
and  the  forts  of  that  port.  During  the  blockade  of
Callao  in  1880  he  performed  important  service  in
attacking  the  forts.  From  13  till  15  Jan.,  1881,
he  protected  the  army  in  Chorrillos,  San  Juan,  and
Miraflores.  In  1883  he  was  appointed  naval  gov-
ernor of  Valparaiso,  and  soon  afterward  was  pro-
moted to  rear-admiral.  He  went  to  England  in
1884  to  superintend  the  repairs  of  the  iron-clad
"  Blanco  Encalada,"  returned  to  Chili  in  1886,  and
at  the  beginning  of  1887  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  navy.

LA  TOUCHE  TREVILLE,  Louis  Ren6  Vas-
sor,  Viscount  de  (lah-toosh),  French  naval  officer,


b.  in  Rochefort,  3  June,  1745;  d.  in  Toulon,  20
Aug.,  1804.  He  became  a  midshipman  when
scarcely  twelve  years  old.  and  was  sent  to  Canada
and  Santo  Domingo.  In  1780  he  captured  an
English  frigate  off  Newport,  R.  I.,  and  was  made
frigate-captain.  During  the  remainder  of  the  war
for  independence  he  served  under  De  Grasse  and
De  Quichen,  was  wounded  at  Yorktown  in  October,
1781,  and  also  commanded  the  French  forces  in
Guiana.  At  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1782  he
was  commissioned  a  commander  and  knight  of
Saint  Louis,  and  in  1789  was  elected  to  the  states-
general,  where  he  was  a  strong  advocate  of  the
colonies.  He  became  rear-admiral  in  1792,  and
after  his  return  from  a  "cruise  in  South  America
and  in  the  Mediterranean  was  imprisoned,  but
liberated  in  1795.  On  14  Dec.  he  was  given
command  of  the  fleet  at  Aix,  to  co-operate  with
that  of  Villaret  Joyeuse  in  the  campaign  against
Santo  Domingo.  Sailing  on  the  same  day,  he  was
joined  at  sea  by  Admiral  Joyeuse,  who  claimed
the  command,  and,  dissensions  following  between
the  two  admirals,  they  separated  on  arriving  off
Samana  bay,  28  Jan.,  1802,  Villaret  going  with
Leclerc  to  Cape  Francais,  while  La  Touche  Tre-
ville  made  sail  for  Fort  Dauphin,  where  he  landed
Gen.  Rochambeau,  30  Jan.,  and,  going  afterward  to
Port  au  Prince,  landed  the  forces  under  Gen.
Boudet,  and  arrived  just  in  season  to  save  the
city,  which  the  negroes  were  preparing  to  burn.
He  then  fortified  it,  and,  when  Villaret  left  for
France,  he  assumed  the  general  command  of  the
French  navy,  remaining  in  the  West  Indies  till  the
end  of  1803,  re-enforced  the  French  colonies,  and
made  also  several  successful  attacks  on  the  English
possessions  of  Dominique  and  Bahama  islands,
capturing  many  merchant  vessels,  and  caused  alto-
gether to  the  British  trade  a  loss  valued  at
$20,000,000.  When  a  powerful  fleet  was  sent
against  him,  he  eluded  the  pursuit,  and  when  cor-
nered at  last  near  Cuba  he  made  such  a  defence
that  he  compelled  the  enemy  to  retire,  October,
1803.  Two  months  later  he  again  entered  the  har-
bor of  Rochefort,  where  he  found  his  commission
of  vice-admiral  awaiting  him,  and  was  sent  to
command  at  Toulon.  But  he  had  contracted  fever
while  in  the  West  Indies,  and  died  after  a  few
months  of  great  suffering.

LATROBE,  Benjamin  Henry,  architect,  b.
in  Yorkshire,  England,  1  May,  1764;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  3  Sept.,  1820.  His  ancestor,  Henry
Boneval  de  la  Trobe,  emigrated  from  France  to
Holland  after  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of
Nantes,  entered  the  military  service  of  the  Prince
of  Orange,  went  with  him  to  England,  and  was
severely  wounded  in  the  battle  of  the  Boyne.  At
the  age  of  twelve  Benjamin  was  sent  to  a  Moravian
seminary  in  Saxony,  and  completed  his  education
at  the  University  of  Leipsic.  In  1785  he  entered
the  Prussian  army  as  a  cornet  of  Hussars,  and  was
twice  wounded  in  severe  actions.  He  resigned  his
commission  in  1768,  returned  to  England,  and  be-
coming an  architect,  was  made  in  1789  surveyor  of
the  public  offices  and  engineer  of  London.  In-
fluenced by  his  political  views,  he  came  to  this
country  after  declining  a  crown  surveyorship,  and
arrived  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  on  20  May,  1796.  He  was
engineer  of  the  James  river  and  Appomattox  canal,
built  the  penitentiary  in  Richmond,  and  many  pri-
vate mansions.  He  removed  to  Philadelphia  in
1798,  where  he  designed  the  Bank  of  Pennsylvania,
the  old  Academy  of  art,  the  Bank  of  the  United
States,  and  other  buildings,  and  was  the  first  to
supply  Philadelphia  with  water,  pumped  by  steam
from  the  Schuylkill,  in  1800. In  Baltimore  he  was


LATROBE


LATROBE


627


the  architect  of  the  Roman  Catholic  cathedral  and
the  custom-house.  Thomas  Jefferson  appointed
him  surveyor  of  the  public  buildings  in  1803,  to
follow  Thornton,  Hatfield,  and  Hoban,  as  archi-
tect of  the  Capitol,  and  he  perfected  Dr.  Will-
iam Thornton's  designs,  and  altered  those  for  the
interior  construction  of  the  south
wing,  with  the  approval  of  the  presi-
dent. Of  this  the  corridors  and
committee  -  rooms,  the  stairs,  and
the  lobby  with  its  panelled  dome
escaped  the  flames  when  the  Capitol
was  burned  by  the  British  in  1814,
and  still  remain.  In  the  recon-
struction of  the  north  wing  Mr.  La-
trobe  planned  a  vestibule  in  which
are  six  columns,  each  of  which  is
composed  of  Indian  corn  -  stalks
bound  together,  the  joints  forming
a  spiral  effect,  while  the  capitals
are  modelled  from  the  ears  of  the
corn.  This  forms  a  unique  order
of  architecture,  which  he  regarded
as  purely  American.  Jefferson  has
been  considered  by  many  to  be  the
designer  of  these  pillars,  but  that
Latrobe  was  their  originator  is
proved  bv  his  letter  to  Jefferson,
dated  28  Aug.,  1809,  in  which  he
says :  "  These  capitals  during  the
summer  session  obtained  more  ap-
plause from  the  members  of  congress  than  all  the
works  of  magnitude  or  difficulty  that  surround
them.  They  christened  them  '  the  corn-cob  capi-
tals' — whether  for  the  sake  of  alliteration  I  cannot
tell,  but  certainly  not  very  appropriately."  See
illustration.  He  also  designed  the  tobacco-plant
capitals  of  the  columns  in  the  circular  colonnade
in  the  north  wing,  and  left  drawings  of  a  capital
whose  ornamentation  is  designed  from  the  cotton-

Elant.  He  was  the  first  to  utilize  the  Breccia  mar-
ie of  the  Potomac  in  the  columns  of  the  house  of
representatives  and  the  senate  chamber.  His  sug-
gestion as  to  the  use  of  natural  products  as  a  feature
of  architecture  was  followed  by  his  successors.  Mr.
Latrobe  was  also  engaged  as  engineer  in  construct-
ing the  original  plan  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Dela-
ware canal,  residing  alternately  in  New  Castle  and
Wilmington  until  1808,  when  he  removed  to  Wash-
ington with  his  family.  In  1812  he  became  inter-
ested with  Fulton  in  the  introduction  of  steamboats
on  the  western  waters,  and  built  the  "  Buffalo  "  at
Pittsburg,  the  fourth  steamer  that  descended  Ohio
river.  After  the  burning  of  the  Capitol,  Mr.  La-
trobe was  called  to  rebuild  it.  He  resigned  this
post  in  1817,  and  was  succeeded  by  Charles  Bull-
finch, who  executed  Mr.  Lat  robe's  designs  in  chang-
ing the  oblong  hall  of  the  old  Capitol  into  a  semi-
circle. At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged
in  erecting  works  to  supply  New  Orleans  with  wa-
ter.—His  son,  John  Hazlehiirst  Boneval,  law-
yer, b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  4  May,  1803  ;  d.  in  Bal-
timore Md.,  11  Sept.,  1891,  was  appointed  a  cadet
in  the  U.  S.  military  aeademv  in  1818.  but  re-
signed before  graduation.  He'  then  studied  law
with  Robert  O.  Harper,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1825,  and  has  been  in  active  practice  for  sixtv
years.  In  1828  he  was  engaged  by  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad  company  to  secure  the  right  of
way  for  the  road,  and  was  for  years  engaged  as
counsel  for  the  company.  He  was  the  founder
of  the  Maryland  institute,  and  after  its  destruc-
tion by  fire  in  1835  assisted  in  its  reorganization.
He  was  identified  with  the  American  coloniza-
tion society  since  1824,  and  for  many  years  was  its


president,  and  prepared  the  first  map  of  Liberia,
and  united  with  Gen.  Harper  (who  named  the  ter-
ritory Liberia)  in  giving  the  other  names  on  the
map  by  which  the  places  are  now  known.  He
originated  and  devoted  himself  to  the  interests  of
the  colony  of  Maryland  in  Liberia,  founded  by  the
Maryland  state  colonization  society  at  Cape'  Pal-
mass  to  which  the  state  of  Maryland  contributed
$275,000,  and  which  continued,  under  a  charter,
ordinance,  and  instructions  prepared  by  Mr.  La-
trobe, an  independent  and  prosperous  government
of  colored  people  for  more  than  twentv  years,  until
it  united  itself  to  the  elder  government'of  Liberia
proper.  It  was  his  conspicuous  agencv  that  led
to  his  election,  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Clay,  to  be
president  of  the  national  society  in  1853.  '  He  was
also  the  president  of  the  Maryland  historical  so-
ciety at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  invited
by  the  king  of  the  Belgians  to  be  present,  as  his
guest,  at  the  first  meeting  of  the  Association  for
the  exploration  of  Africa,  and  was  the  president  of
the  American  branch.  He  was  the  inventor  of  the
"  Latrobe  stove,"  called  sometimes  the  "  Baltimore
heater,"  or  the  "  parlor  heater,"  of  which  in  1878
there  were  30,000  in
use  in  Baltimore  alone,
and  which  has  since
come  into  general  use
in  the  United  States.
In  1849  he  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of
the  board  of  visitors
to  West  Point,  and  was
chosen  president.  Mr.
Latrobe  was  the  au-
thor of  various  papers
that  he  read  before  the
Maryland  historical  so-
ciety, which  have  been
published  by  that  body,
and  he  delivered  an  ad-
dress on  "  The  Capitol  and  Washington  at  the  Be-
ginning of  the  Present  Centurv,"  in  Washing-
ton. 16  Nov.,  1881  (Baltimore.  *1881).  He  pub-
lished "Biographv  of  Charles  Carroll  of  Carroll-
ton"  (Philadelphia.  1824):  "Justices'  Practice"
(Baltimore,  1825:  7th  ed.,  1880):  "Scott's  Infantry
and  Rifle  Tactics."  condensed  (1828);  "Picture  of
Baltimore"  (1832):  "History  of  Mason  and  Dix-
on's Line  "  (Philadelphia,  1854) ;  "  Personal  Recol-
lections of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad "
(Baltimore,  1858) ;  "  Hints  for  Six  Months  in  Eu-
rope "  (Philadelphia.  1869) ;  "  Odds  and  Ends,"  a
volume  of  poems  (printed  privately.  Baltimore,
1876) ;  "  History  of  Maryland  in  Liberia  "  (Balti-
more. 1885) ;  "  Reminiscences  of  West  Point  in  1818
to  1822  "  (1887) :  besides  a  series  of  children's  books
(1826)  and  four  novelettes. — Another  son,  Benja-
min Henry,  civil  engineer,  b.  19  Dec,  1807:  d.
in  Baltimore,  19  Oct..  1878.  was  graduated  at  St.
Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  in  1825.  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  practising  in  con-
nection with  his  brother,  John,  in  Baltimore.  He
then  entered  the  service  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio
railroad  company,  and  finally  became  its  chief  en-
gineer, building  the  road  from  Harper's  Ferry,
across  the  Alleghanies.  to  Wheeling.  He  also*
built  other  roads,  was  consulting  engineer  of  the
Hoosac  tunnel,  and  one  of  the  advisory  board  to
whom  John  A.  Roebling  submitted  the  plan  of  the
Brooklyn  bridge. — John's  son,  Ferdinand  Clai-
borne, lawyer,  b.  in  Baltimore.  Md.,  14  Oct..  1833,
was  educated  at  the  College  of  St.  James,  in  Wash-
ington county.  Md.  After  serving  as  clerk  in  a
mercantile  house  in  Baltimore,  he  studied  law


JW^/Vc^tet^,


628


LATROBE


LATTIMORE


with  his  father,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1860.  He  was  elected  to  the  Maryland  legislature
in  1867,  served  till  1872,  and  was  speaker  in
1870-'2.  In  1860  he  was  appointed  judge-advocate-
general,  and  assisted  in  reorganizing  the  Maryland
militia  under  the  act  of  1868,  of  which  he  was  the
author.  In  1875  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Balti-
more, serving  three  terms  till  1881,  and  in  1883  he
was  again  elected  to  this  office,  serving  till  1885.
During  his  term  of  office  the  supply  of  water  by
natural  flow  from  Gunpowder  river  through  a  tun-
nel of  seven  miles  inland  in  solid  rock  was  com-
gleted. — Benjamin  Henry's  son,  Charles  Hazle-
urst,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Baltimore,  25  Dec,
1833,  was  educated  at  the  College  of  St.  Mary  in
that  city.  He  entered  the  service  of  the  Balti-
more and  Ohio  railroad  company,  and  was  also  in
the  Confederate  service.  After  the  civil  war  he
returned  to  Baltimore  and  adopted  bridge-building
as  his  specialty.  His  most  remarkable  works  of  this
description,  however,  were  in  Peru,  about  a  dozen
in  all ;  among  them  the  Arequipa  viaduct,  which
was  1,300  feet  long  and  65  feet  high,  and  the  Agua
de  Verrugas  bridge,  575  feet  long  and  263  feet
high.  This  structure  was  built  across  one  of  the
deepest  gorges  in  the  Andes,  and  was,  when  erect-
ed, the  loftiest  structure  of  its  kind  in  the  world.
It  was  framed  in  the  United  States,  taken  apart,
and  shipped  to  Peru,  where  it  was  erected  in  ninety
days.  Latrobe  wrote  an  exhaustive  report  to  the
Baltimore  authorities  upon  sewerage,  which  was
reprinted  and  largely  circulated.

LATROBE,  Charles  Joseph,  traveller,  b.  in
England,  20  March,  1801;  d.  4  Dec,  1875.  He
travelled  in  the  United  States  and  Mexico  in  1832,
and  accompanied  Irving  in  his  tour,  described  in  the
"  Crayon  Miscellanv."  He  was  the  author  of  "  Visit
to  South  Africa  in  1815-16"  (New  York,  1818);
"  The  Alpenstock,  or  Sketches  of  Swiss  Scenery  and
Manners  in  1825-'6"  (London,  1829;  2d  ed.,  1839);
"  The  Pedestrian,  or  Rambles  in  the  Tyrol  in
1830  "  (1832) ;  "  The  Rambler  in  North  America  in
1832-'3  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1835 ;  London,  1836) ;
and  "  The  Rambler  in  Mexico "  (New  York  and
London,  1836),  which  was  highly  commended  by
William  H.  Prescott  and  other  critics.

LATTA,  Alexander  Bonner,  inventor,  b.  in
Ross  county,  Ohio,  11  June,  1821 ;  d.  in  Ludlow,
Ky.,  28  April,  1865.  At  an  early  age  he  worked
in  a  cotton-factory,  and  subsequently  in  the  navy-
yard  in  Washington,  D.  C.  After  becoming  an
expert  mechanic  he  settled  in  Cincinnati,  where  he
operated  the  first  iron  planing-machine  that  ever
was  used  in  that  city.  He  became  foreman  of  a  ma-
chine-shop, and  constructed  for  the  Little  Miami
railroad  the  first  locomotive  that  was  built  west
of  the  Alleghany  mountains.  He  invented  and
patented  a  series  of  improvements  in  railway  ap-
pliances, a  few  of  which  he  succeeded  in  intro-
ducing. In  1852  he  invented  a  steam  fire-engine,
which  he  constructed  in  nine  months,  and  which
was  tried  on  1  Jan..  1853.  In  October,  1853,  he  con-
structed a  second,  which  contained  several  improve-
ments and  received  a  gold  medal  at  the  Ohio
Mechanics'  institute  fair  in  1854.  He  continued  to
build  steam  fire-engines  until  1862,  when  he
retired  from  active  business.  The  boiler  of  Mr.
Latta's  engine  was  constructed  of  two  square
chambers,  one  within  the  other,  the  space  between
which  chambers  was  the  steam  and  water  space
of  the  boiler.  The  inner  chamber,  which  was  the
fire-box,  was  filled  by  a  series  of  horizontal  layers
of  tubes  arranged  diagonally  over  each  other,  but
forming  one  continuous  coil.  The  water  entered
this  coil  at  the  lower  end  and  passed  upward  into


the  annular  space,  where  it  was  evaporated.  Upon
arriving  at  the  scene  of  the  fire,  the  rear  of  the  en-
gine was  raised  off  the  ground  and  supported
by  means  of  screws  on  the  sides  of  the  boiler,  and
the  hind-wheels,  thus  clearing  the  ground,  acted  as
fly-wheels.  In  1863-'5  Mr.  Latta  introduced  the
manufacture  of  aerated  bread  into  Cincinnati.  He
also  made  improvements  in  oil-well  machinery.

LATTA,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1732;  d.  in  Lancaster  county,  Pa.,  29  Jan.,  1801.
At  an  early  age  he  emigrated  to  this  country  with
his  parents,  who  settled  near  Elkton,  Md.  He  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  in  1757,
and  became  tutor  there,  while  he  studied  theology
with  Dr.  Francis  Alison.  He  was  licensed  by  the
presbytery  of  Philadelphia  in  1758,  ordained  in
1759,  and  appointed  to  the  destitute  settlements  of
Virginia  and  Carolina.  In  1761  he  became  pastor
of  a  church  in  Deep  Run,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  but  he  re-
signed in  1770  to  accept  the  charge  of  Chestnut
Level,  Lancaster  co„  Pa.  Here  he  established  a
school,  which  was  acquiring  celebrity  when  its
progress  was  arrested  by  the  Revolution.  During
the  war  he  served  as  soldier  and  chaplain  in  the
American  army.  He  published  several  sermons
and  a  pamphlet  showing  that  the  principal  sub-
jects of  psalmody  should  be  taken  from  the  gospel.

LATTA,  Samuel  Arminius,  clergyman,  b.  in
Muskingum  county,  Ohio,  8  April,  1804;  d.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  28  June,  1852.  His  father  removed
to  Champaign  county,  near  Urbana,  Ohio,  where
his  house  was  a  resort  for  pioneer  Methodist  preach-
ers. The  son  first  studied  medicine,  was  licensed,
and  practised  for  three  years,  during  which  time
he  read  theology.  He  then  became  a  local  preacher
in  the  Methodist  church,  and  for  several  years
practised  both  professions.  In  1829  he  joined  the
Ohio  conference,  and  was  appointed  to  the  mission
of  St.  Clair,  Mich.  In  1830  he  was  stationed  at
Cincinnati,  and  in  1831  he  was  travelling  agent  for
the  American  colonization  society.  In  1837  he  was
agent  for  Augusta  college,  Ohio,  and  in  1840  re-
tired from  active  work  in  the  church,  owing  to
impaired  health.  He  then  removed  to  Cincinnati,
where  he  resumed  his  medical  practice.  The  de-
gree of  M.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Medical
college  of  Ohio  in  1846.  He  was  the  author  of  a
small  medical  work  and  "  The  Chain  of  Sacred
Wonders "  (2  vols.,  Cincinnati,  1851-2).

LATTIMER,  Henry,  senator,  b.  in  Newport,
Del.,  24  April,  1752;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19
Dec,  1819.  He  studied  medicine  in  Philadelphia
and  in  Edinburgh,  and  on  his  return  to  this  coun-
try practised  until  1777,  when  he  was  appointed,
with  Dr.  James  Tilton,  surgeon  of  the  flying  hos-
pital. After  the  war  he  resumed  his  practice,  but
abandoned  it  in  1794.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives,  and  was  elected  to
congress  from  Delaware,  as  a  Federalist,  serving
from  14  Feb.,  1794,  till  28  Feb.,  1795,  when  he  be-
came U.  S.  senator,  in  place  of  George  Read,  and
served  until  3  March,  1801.

LATTIMORE,  Sainnel  Allan,  chemist,  b.  in
Union  county,  Ind.,  31  May,  1828.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Indiana  Asbury  (now  Depauw)  university
in  1850,  and  continued  as  tutor  of  languages  in  that
institution  for  two  years,  becoming  in  1852  profes-
sor of  Greek.  In  1860  he  was  elected  professor  of
chemistry  in  Genesee  college,  and  in  1867  was  called
to  fill  a  similar  chair  in  the  University  of  Roches-
ter, where  he  has  since  remained,  and  now  (1887)
is  director  of  the  Reynolds  laboratory.  Prof.  Lat-
timore  has  also  held  the  offices  of  chemist  to  the
New  York  state  board  of  health  since  1881,  and
to  the  New  York  state  dairy  commission  since  1886,


LATTO


LAUGHL1N


629


in  which  capacities  he  has  accomplished  much
analytical  work  tending  to  the  exposure  of  frauds
in  various  food-products.  He  has  received  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Iowa  Wesleyan  university
and  from  Depauw  university  in  1873,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Hamilton  in  the  same  year.  Prof.
Lattimore  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  but
his  publications  have  been  confined  to  official  re-
ports on  chemical  subjects.

LATTO,  Thomas  Carstairs,  poet,  b.  in  Kings-
barn,  Fifeshire,  Scotland,  1  Dec,  1818.  After  re-
ceiving an  elementary  education  from  his  father,
Alexander  Latto,  the  parish  school-master,  he  en-
tered the  University  of  St.  Andrews,  but  was  not
graduated.  In  1838  he  went  to  Edinburgh,  and
was  employed  as  parliament-house  and  convey-
ancing clerk  in  the  office  of  John  Hunter,  auditor
of  the  court  of  sessions.  After  serving  as  a  clerk  for
several  years  in  Edinburgh  and  Dundee  he  entered
into  business  in  Glasgow  in  1852,  and  then  came
to  New  York,  where  he  was  a  founder  of  the
"  Scottish  American  Journal."  He  was  connected
with  the  publishing-house  of  Ivison  and  Co.,  of
New  York,  for  eleven  years,  and  in  1871  became  a
real-estate  agent  in  Brooklyn,  where  he  now  (1887)
resides.  Mr.  Latto's  principal  work,  "  The  Village-
School  Examination,"  is  still  in  manuscript.  The
poems  that  he  has  contributed  to  periodicals  in-
clude "  When  we  were  at  the  Schule,"  "  The  Blind
Lassie,"  "  The  Grave  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,"  and
"Lines  on  J.  Fenimore  Cooper."  See  Wilson's
"  Poets  and  Poetrv  of  Scotland  "  (New  York,  1876).

L'AUBERIVIERE,  Francis  Louis  de  Pour-
roy  de  (lobe'-ree'-vyair'),  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Attigny,  France,  in  1711 ;  d.  in  Quebec  in  1741.
He  belonged  to  a  noble  family,  and  possessed  very
great  wealth,  which  he  intended  to  spend  in  estab-
lishing institutions  of  religion  and  charity  in  Can-
ada. He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Quebec  in  Paris
in  1739,  and  embarked  for  Canada.  During  the
voyage  a  contagious  disease  broke  out  on  board,  and
his  attendance  upon  the  sick  produced  the  malady
of  which  he  died.  When  he  arrived  in  Quebec
in  1740,  a  report  was  spread  that  he  had  wrought
miracles  on  board  ship,  which  caused  him  to  be
received  with  great  enthusiasm.  Before  he  had
time  to  become  acquainted  with  his  flock  he  was
attacked  by  the  fever  that  proved  fatal.  It  was
claimed  that  miracles  were  wrought  at  his  tomb,
which  is  still  visited  by  Canadian  Catholics,  who
have  faith  in  the  power  of  his  intercession.

LAUDERDALE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
about  1780 ;  d.  near  New  Orleans,  La.,  23  Dec,
1814.  Early  in  this  century  he  removed  to  west
Tennessee.  He  became  major  in  Gen.  John  Cof-
fee's cavalry  regiment  of  volunteers  in  1813,  and
lieutenant-colonel  in  his  brigade  of  mounted  gun-
men. While  serving  under  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson
in  the  battle  of  Talladega,  Ala.,  with  the  Creek
Indians,  he  was  wounded.  In  1814  he  became  a
colonel  and  was  killed  in  the  first  battle  of  New
Orleans.  Several  counties  and  towns  in  the  south-
ern states  are  named  in  his  honor.

LAUDONNIERE,  Rene"  de  (lo'-don-yair),
French  colonist,  b.  in  France  in  the  16th  century ;
d.  there  after  1586.  He  professed  the  Reformed
religion  and  accompanied  Ribault,  who  was  sent  by
Coligny  in  1562  to  found  a  colony  in  Florida,  which
might  serve  as  an  asylum  for  the  French  Hugue-
nots. This  expedition  failed,  and  Laudonniere  was
charged  in  1564  with  the  direction  of  a  new  one.
Three  vessels  were  given  to  him,  and  Charles  IX.
made  him  a  present  of  50,000  crowns.  He  took
with  him  skilful  workmen  and  several  young  gen-
tlemen, who  asked  permission  to  follow  him  at


their  own  expense.  He  landed  in  Florida  on  22
June,  and  was  well  received  by  the  natives.  The
next  day  he  sailed  up  the  river  Mai,  and  began  the
erection  of  a  fort,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of
Caroline,  in  honor  of  King  Charles.  The  young
gentlemen  that  had  accompanied  him  voluntarily
soon  complained  of  being  forced  to  labor  at  the
fortifications  like  ordinary  workmen.  Fearing  that
they  would  excite  a  mutiny,  he  sent  the  most  tur-
bulent of  them  back  to  France  on  one  of  his  ves-
sels. But  the  spirit  of  revolt  increased  among  the
new  colonists,  and  he  removed  part  of  them  from
the  fort  and  sent  them  to  explore  the  country
under  the  orders  of  his  lieutenant.  A  few  days
afterward  some  sailors  fled,  taking  with  them  the
two  boats  that  had  been  employed  in  procuring
provisions,  and  finally  others,  who  had  left  France
solely  with  the  view  of  making  their  fortunes  rap-
idly, seized  one  of  his  ships  and  went  cruising  in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  In  this  condition  of  affairs
Laudonniere  could  no  longer  count  on  securing
the  possession  of  Florida  to  France.  Moreover,
the  savages,  who  had  been  rendered  discontented
by  deserters,  refused  to  supply  the  colonists  with
provisions  any  longer,  and  they  were  soon  threat-
ened with  famine.  They  lived  for  some  time  on
acorns  and  roots,  and  when  they  were  at  the  last
extremity  they  were  saved  by  the  arrival  of  Capt.
John  Hawkins,  3  Aug.,  1565.  He  supplied  them
with  provisions,  and  sold  one  of  his  ships  to  Lau-
donniere, in  which  the  latter  purposed  returning
to  France.  He  was  waiting  for  a  favorable  wind
to  set  sail,  when  Jean  Ribault  arrived  with  seven
vessels,  and  informed  Laudonniere  that  his  loyalty
was  suspected  by  the  French  court,  and  that  he
had  been  deprived  of  the  governorship  of  Florida.
This  intelligence  only  made  him  the  more  eager  to
reach  France  in  order  to  justify  himself.  His  de-
parture, however,  was  delayed  by  the  appearance
of  a  Spanish  fleet,  under  the  command  of  Don
Pedro  Menendez.  Ribault  sailed  out  to  meet  the
Spanish  fleet,  leaving  Laudonniere,  who  was  sick,
in  the  fort  with  about  a  hundred  men,  scarcely
twenty  of  whom  were  capable  of  bearing  arms.
The  Spaniards  who  succeeded  in  landing  above  the
fort  profited  by  the  departure  of  Ribault,  and
carried  it  by  storm.  They  massacred  all  the  sick,
as  well  as  the  women  and  children,  and  hanged
such  of  the  soldiers  as  fell  into  their  hands.  Lau-
donniere, after  vainly  trying  to  delay  the  capture
of  the  fort,  cut  his  way  through  the  Spaniards  and
plunged  into  the  woods,  where  he  found  some
of  his  soldiers  that  had  escaped  the  massacre  of
their  companions.  He  revived  their  courage,  and,
putting  himself  at  their  head,  led  them  to  the  sea-
shore during  the  night.  Here  he  found  a  son  of
Ribault  with  three  vessels.  Laudonniere  embarked
on  board  of  one  of  them  with  the  intention  of  join-
ing Ribault,  but  his  ship  was  driven  on  the  English
coast.  He  stayed  some  time  in  Bristol  to  recruit
his  health,  and  then  returned  to  France  in  1566.
He  was  coldly  received  at  court,  and  spent  the  rest
of  his  life  in  retirement.  He  wrote  "L'histoire
notable  de  la  Floride,  contenant  les  trois  voyages
faits  en  icelles  par  des  capitaines  et  pilotes  fran-
cais"  (Paris,  1586).

LAUGHLIN,  James,  donor,  b.  in  Belfast.  Ire-
land, in  1806 ;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  18  Dec,  1882.
He  came  to  this  country  in  his  youth,  and  en-
tered mercantile  life,  in  which  he  was  successful.
For  many  years  he  was  an  elder  in  the  Presbyte-
rian church,  and  gave  largely  to  its  charities.  He
was  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Penn-
sylvania female  college  from  its  foundation  in
1869,  and  was  one  of  its  liberal  patrons. He  con-


LAUGHLIN


LAURENS


tributed  about  $50,000  to  the  Western  theological
Seminary  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.

LAUGHLIN,  James  Laurence,  political  econo-
mist, b.  in  Deerfield,  Ohio,  2  April,  1850.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  with  the  highest  honors
in  1873,  after  which  he  taught  in  Boston  for  five
Vears.  In  1878  he  was  appointed  instructor  in  po-
litical economy  in  Harvard,  and  in  1883  he  became
Srofessor  of  this  branch.  In  1876  he  received  the
egree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Harvard,  presenting  a  the-
sis on  "  Anglo-Saxon  Legal  Procedure,"  which  was
■published  in  "  Essays  of  Anglo-Saxon  Law  "  (Bos-
ton, 1876).  He  is  a  member  of  the  International
institute  of  statistics,  and  other  societies,  and  is
correspondent  for  the  ''Vierteljahrschrift  fur  Volks-
wirthschaft,"  of  Berlin.  He  has  contributed  reviews
and  papers  upon  economic  and  political  subjects  to
periodicals,  and  published  a  new  edition  of  John
Stuart  Mill's  "  Principles  of  Political  Economy,"
abridged,  with  bibliographical, explanatory,  and

"critical  notes,  and  a  sketch  of  the  history  of  politi-
cal economy  (New  York,  1884 ;  3d  ed.,  18*86) ;  "  The
Study  of  Political  Economy :  Hints  to  Students
'and  Readers "  (1885) ;  "  The  Historv  of  Bimetal-
lism in  the  United  States  "  (1885) ;  and  "  The  Ele-
ments of  Political  Economy,  with  Some  Applica-
tions to  Questions  of  the  Day  "  (1887).

L AUM AN,  Jacob  Gartner,  soldier,  b.  in  Taney-
town,  Md.,  20  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Burlington,  Iowa,
in  February,  1867. His  early  days  were  spent  in

"York  county,  Pa.,  and  he  was  educated  at  the
academy  there.  In  1844  he  removed  to  Burling-
ton, Iowa,  where  he  engaged  in  commerce.  He
was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  7th  Iowa  regi-
ment in  July,  1861,  served  under  Gen.  Grant  in
Missouri,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Belmont,  7

'-Nov.,  1861.  At  Port  Donelson,  where  he  com-
manded a  brigade,  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  storm

'and  enter  the  enemy's  works.  For  his  services  on
this  occasion  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers on  21  March,  1862.  Gen.  Lauman  com-
manded a  brigade  in  Gen.  Hurlbut's  division  at  the
battle  of  Shiloh,  6  and  7  April,  1862,  and  a  division

•at  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  He  was  relieved  by
Gen.  William T.  Sherman  after  the  capture  of

^Jackson,  Miss.,  16  July,  1863,  and  returned  to  Iowa.

. LAUNITZ,  Robert  Eberhard,  sculptor,  b.  in

•'Riga,  Russia,  4  Nov.,  1806 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
13  Dec,  1870. His  father,  a  German  sculptor,

^studied  under  Thorwaldsen,  whom  he  assisted  in
restoring  the  ./Eginetan  marbles. The  son also

•studied  under  Thorwaldsen,  and,  settling  in  New
York  in  1828,  became  the  first  instructor  of  Thomas

iCrawford. He  was  made  a  member  of  the  National

•academy,  and  has  been  called  the  father  of  monu-
mental art  in  America. Among:  his  productions

Jare  the  Pulaski  monument  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  the
Battle  monument  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  the  monu-

'ment  to  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,

•and  other  similar  works,  many  of  which  are  in

•  Greenwood  cemetery.

LAURENS,  Henry,  statesman,  b.  in  Charleston,
-S.  C.,  in  1724;  d.  there,  8  Dec,  1792.  His  ances-
tors were  Huguenots,  who  had  left  France  at  the

•  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Charleston  and  became  clerk  in  a  count-

•  ing-house  there,  from  which  he  was  transferred  to  a
similar  house  in  London  in  order  to  acquire  a
thorough  business  education. Upon  his  return  he

■engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  and  acquired  a

•  fortune.  He  was  conspicuous  in  his  opposition  of
British  aggression,  and  had  frequent  contests  with

•  the  crown  judges,  especially  in  respect  to  their  de-
cisions in  marine  law  and  in  the  courts  of  admi-
ralty, and  the  pamphlets  that  he  published  against


°~?7


these  measures  gave  evidence  of  great  legal  ability.
He  also  served  in  a  military  campaign  against  tile
Cherokees,  of  which  he  left  a  diary  in  manuscript.
Retiring  from  business,  he  went  to  England  in  1771
to  superintend  the  education  of  his  sons,  and
travelled  through  Great  Britain  and  on  the
continent.  While  in  London  he  was  one  of  the
thirty-eight  Americans  who  signed  a  petition  in
1774  to  dissuade  parliament  from  passing  the  Bos-
ton port  bill.  He
returned  to  Charles-
ton in  that  year,  was
a  member  of  the  1st
Provincial  congress
there  in  1775,  and
drew  up  a  form  of
association  to  be
signed  by  all  the
friends  of  liberty.
He  also  became  pres-
ident of  the  council
of  safety.  In  1776
he  was  made  vice-
president  of  South
Carolina  under  the
new  constitution  and
elected  a  delegate  to
the  Continental  con-
gress, of  which  he  became  president  after  the  resig-
nation of  John  Hancock,  serving  from  1  Nov.,
1777,  till  10  Dec,  1778.  In  1779  he  was  appointed
minister  to  Holland  to  negotiate  a  treaty  that  had
been  unofficially  proposed  to  William  Lee  by  Van
Berckel,  pensionary  of  Amsterdam.  He  sailed
on  the  packet  "  Mercury,"  which  was  captured  by
the  British  frigate  "  Vestal,"  of  twenty-eight  guns,
off  Newfoundland.  Mr.  Laurens  threw  his  papers
overboard ;  but  they  were  recovered,  and  gave
evidence  of  his  mission.  The  refusal  of  Holland
to  punish  Van  Berckel,  at  the  dictation  of  Lord
North's  ministry,  was  instantly  followed  by  war  be-
tween Great  Britain  and  that  country.  Mr.  Lau-
rens was  taken  to  London,  examined  before  the
privy  council,  and  imprisoned  in  the  Tower,  on  6
Oct.,  1780,  on  "  suspicion  of  high  treason."  for
nearly  fifteen  months,  during  which  his  health  was
greatly  impaired.  He  was  ill  when  he  entered,
but  no  medical  attendance  was  provided,  and  it
was  more  than  a  year  before  he  was  granted  pen
and  ink  to  draw  a  bill  of  exchange  to  provide  for
himself.  But  he  obtained  a  pencil,  and  frequent
communications  were  carried  by  a  trusty  person
to  the  outside  world,  and  he  even  corresponded
with  American  newspapers.

When  his  son  John  appeared  in  Paris  in  1781
to  negotiate  a  loan  with  France,  Mr.  Laurens  was
informed  that  his  confinement  would  be  the  more
rigorous  because  the  young  man  had  openly  de-
clared himself  an  enemy  to  the  king  and  his  coun-
try. It  was  suggested  that  if  Mr.  Laurens  would
advise  his  son  to  withdraw  from  his  commission,
such  action  would  be  received  with  favor  at  the
British  court ;  but  he  replied  that  his  son  was  a
man  who  would  never  sacrifice  honor,  even  to
save  his  father's  life.  Laurens  received  attention
from  many  friends,  among  whom  was  Edmund
Burke.  Twice  he  refused  offers  of  pardon  if  he
would  serve  the  British  ministry.  While  a  pris-
oner he  learned  of  his  son  John's  death  in  a  skir-
mish in  South  Carolina,  and  on  1  Dec,  1781,  he
addressed  a  petition  to  the  house  of  commons,  in
which  he  said  that  he  had  striven  to  prevent  a
rupture  between  the  crown  and  colonies,  and
asked  for  more  liberty.  He  was  soon  afterward
exchanged  for  Lord  Cornwallis  and  commissioned


LAURENS


LAURENT


631


.


by  congress  one  of  the  ministers  to  negotiate  peace.
He  then  went  to  Paris,  where,  with  John  Jay  and
Benjamin  Franklin,  he  signed  the  preliminaries  of
the  treaty,  30  Nov..  1782,  and  was  instrumental  in
the  insertion  of  a  clause  prohibiting,  on  the  British
evacuation,  the  "carrying  away  any  negroes  or
other  property  of  the  inhabitants."  On  his  return
to  Charleston  he  was  welcomed  with  enthusiasm
and  offered  many  offices,  which  his  impaired
health  forced  him  to  decline.  He  retired  to  his
plantation  near  Charleston  and  devoted  his  life  to
agriculture.  His  will  concluded  with  this  request :
"  I  solemnly  enjoin  it  on  my  son,  as  an  indispensable
duty,  that,  as  soon  as  he  conveniently  can,  after
my  decease,  he  cause  my  body  to  be  wrapped
in  twelve  yards  of  tow-cloth  and  burned  until  it
be  entirely  consumed,  and  then,  collecting  my
bones,  deposit  them  wherever  he  may  think  prop-
er." This  was  the  first  cremation  in  this  country.
Some  of  Laurens's  political  papers  have  been  pub-
lished in  the  collections  of  the  South  Carolina  his-
torical society,  and  his  rebus  letter  to  Lord  George
Gordon  is  reprinted  in  the  "  Magazine  of  American
History  "  (December,  1884). — His  son,  John,  sol-
dier, b.  in  South  Carolina  about  1756 ;  d.  there,  27
Aug.,  1782,  was  educated  in  England.  At  the
opening  of  the  Revolution  he  returned  home,
joined  the  army,  and  becoming  aide  to  Washing-
ton, was  frequently  his  secretary,  and  his  chief
medium  of  communication  with  the  foreigners  in
the  service.  His  first  essay  in  arms  was  at  Brandy-
wine,  11  Sept.,  1777,  and  it  is  said  that  he  partici-
pated in  every  action  of  the  army  that  Washington
commanded.  After  the  battle  of  Monmouth.  28
June,  1778,  he  shot  Gen.  Charles  Lee  in  a  duel  for
disrespectful  language  to  his  commander.  Lee
afterward  said  of  his  opponent :  "  How  hand-
somely the  young  fellow  behaved !  I  could  have
hugged  him."  At  the  battle  of  Germantown  he
was  severely  wounded  in  the  attempt  to  expel  the
British  from  the  Chew  house.  On  the  appearance
of  the  enemy  in  the  south  he  repaired  to  Charleston
and  became  attached  to  the  militia  force  of  Gen.
Moultrie,  who  was  watching  the  movements  of  the
British  in  Georgia,  and  when  Gen.  Prevost  made  a
demonstration  against  Charleston  with  a  force  of
5,000  men,  Laurens  did  good  service  in  skirmishing
and  covering  defiles.  At  the  pass  of  Coosa whatchie.
at  the  head  of  about  20  regulars  and  200  militia,  he
met  Prevost,  and  was  again  wounded,  escaping
with  his  life  by  the  gallantry  of  a  subordinate
officer.  Subsequently,  when  the  combined  French
and  American  forces  under  D'Estaing  and  Lincoln
attempted  to  take  Savannah,  Laurens  led  the
light  infantry  and  was  one  of  the  first  to  mount
the  British  works.  He  was  also  active  in  the  de-
fence of  Charleston  when  it  was  besieged  by  Sir
Henry  Clinton.  After  its  fall  he  rejoined  Gen.
Washington,  and  was  sent  by  him  to  France  to  ob-
tain money  and  supplies,  arriving  there  early  in
the  spring  of  1781.  Impatient  of  the  delay  of  the
French  ministry,  lie  finally,  in  defiance  of  precedent,
demanded  and  obtained  an  audience  with  the  king
in  person,  and  on  the  next  day  was  officially
informed  that  the  required  aid  would  be  given.
He  returned  to  this  country  in  August  and  re-
ceived a  vote  of  thanks  from  congress  for  his  ser-
vices. In  three  days  after  he  reached  Philadelphia
he  finished  his  business  with  congress,  and  had  re-
joined the  American  army.  With  Dr.  Franklin,
the  Count  de  Vergennes,  and  the  Marquis  de  Cas-
tries, he  arranged  a  plan  for  the  campaign  of
1781.  At  the  siege  of  Yorktown  he  captured  one
of  the  two  redoubts  that  were  stormed,  receiving
in  person  the  sword  of  the  commander. When


operations  had  ceased  in  the  north  he  joined  the
army  of  the  south  under  Greene,  and  by  his  ac-
tivity checked  every  effort  of  the  British  garrison
in  Charleston,  and  confined  them  for  many  months
to  the  walls  of  the  city.  Hearing  of  an  enter-
prise against  a  strong  marauding  force  of  the
British,  who  were  engaged  in  ravaging  the  planta-
tions along  the  Combahee,  Laurens,  who  had  been
ill,  eagerly  sought  its  command.  By  hard  riding
he  overtook  the  brigade,  and  on  the  next  day  led
his  troops  to  a  point  where  the  British  lay  in  am-
bush, having  been  advised  of  the  proposed  attack.
Laurens  was  slain  at  their  first  fire.  "  Poor  Lau-
rens ! "  wrote  Gen.  Greene,  "  has  fallen  in  a  paltry
little  skirmish.  You  knew  his  temper,  and  1  pre-
dicted his  fate.  The  love  of  military  glory  made
him  seek  it  upon  occasions  unworthy  his  rank.
The  state  will  feel  his  loss."  "  He  had  not  a  fault
that  I  could  discover,"  wrote  Washington,  "  unless
it  were  intrepidity  bordering  upon  rashness."  He
was  also  an  intimate  friend  of  Alexander  Hamil-
ton. His  daring  won  for  him  from  his  comrades
the  title  of  the  "  Bayard  of  the  Revolution."  He
once  refused  an  unusual  advance  of  grade  that
was  offered  him  by  congress,  lest  it  should  awaken
jealousy  and  injure  the  service.  He  urged  upon  his
father  the  employment  of  negroes  in  the  army  of
the  south,  but  the  latter  opposed  the  policy  in  a
letter  that  is  still  extant.  His  correspondence  was
published  for  the  Bradford  club,  with  a  memoir
bv  William  Gilmore  Simms  (New  York,  1867).

LAURENT,  Cornelius  Bald  inn  (also  called
De  Graff),  Dutch  buccaneer,  b.  in  Dordrecht,
Holland,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  17th  century.
He  was  at  first  in  the  Spanish  service  and  fought
against  the  buccaneers,  but.  having  been  captured
by  the  latter,  joined  them  and  soon  became  one  of
their  chiefs.  He  excited  such  terror  in  the  Span-
ish-American colonies  that  a  prayer  was  inserted
in  the  public  service  asking  to  be  delivered  from
the  wrath  of  "  Laurencilio,"  the  name  by  which  he
was  known  among  the  Spaniards.  In  1683  there
were  about  1.200  buccaneers  under  the  joint  com-
mand of  Laurent  and  Van  de  Horn  (q.  v.).  They
had  altogether  seven  vessels  fully  armed.  Laurent
and  Horn  commanded  each  a  frigate  of  fifty  guns.
With  this  force  they  sailed  to  Vera  Cruz,  sur-
prised the  city  during  the  night,  took  the  princi-
pal inhabitants  prisoners,  and  held  them  for  ran-
som. A  rescue  was  attempted  by  forces  from  the
interior,  and  the  buccaneers  were  forced  to  aban-
don some  of  their  captives,  though  they  succeeded
in  getting  more  than  1.000  on  board  their  vessels.
Then  a  dispute  arose  on  the  subject  of  a  division
of  the  booty,  which  amounted  to  over  $1,000,000,
and  a  duel  was  fought  between  Horn  and  Laurent,
resulting  in  the  wounding  of  the  former.  The
quarrel  of  the  chiefs  soon  spread  among  the  sail-
ors, who  would  have  come  to  blows  if  Laurent  had
not  hastened  to  share  the  booty  and  prisoners
among  them.  He  then  set  sail  with  the  greater
part  of  the  ships  and  arrived  at  Goave.  on  the  west
coast  of  Santo  Domingo.  The  expedition  to  Vera
Cruz  having  taken  place  in  spite  of  the  prohibition
of  the  French  government,  Laurent,  although  well
received  by  the  inhabitants  of  Santo  Domingo,  was
not  allowed  to  appear  in  public.  He  resumed  his
operations  in  1684,  and  took  two  frigates  and  a
sloop  off  Carthagena  on  23  Dec.  He  was  then  in-
trusted by  the  governor  of  Santo  Domingo  with
the  task  of  transporting  the  royal  commissioner  to
the  Windward  islands.  From  1685  till  1688  he  was
engaged  in  various  enterprises  both  in  the  Antilles
and  on  the  Atlantic  coast.  The  king  of  France
made  him  governor  of  Avache  island,  and  he  also


632


LAURIE


LAUSSAT


received  orders  to  attack  the  pirates  that  were
ravaging  the  southern  coast  of  Santo  Domingo.
He  discharged  this  duty  with  a  firmness  and  jus-
tice that  gained  hiin  the  respect  of  the  Spaniards
and  English,  and  in  a  short  time  the  territory  un-
der his  control  grew  populous  and  prosperous.  In
1691  trouble  arose  in  the  colony  of  Santo  Domingo,
and  Laurent  was  summoned  to  its  defence  in  1692.
He  raised  a  body  of  over  2,000  of  his  followers,  and
the  mere  rumor  of  his  approach  caused  the  Span-
iards to  retreat  after  advancing  within  fifteen
leagues  of  the  cape.  In  1693  he  rendered  still
more  important  services  to  the  colony,  which  was
again  threatened  by  the  Spaniards.  When  Jamai-
ca was  attacked  in  1694,  Laurent,  sword  in  hand,
carried  the  important  post  of  Ouatirou  and  was
instrumental  in  the  success  of  the  French.  The
English  now  united  with  the  Spaniards,  and,  a
united  attack  being  made  on  several  points  in  San-
to Domingo,  Laurent,  who  was  now  lieutenant  of
the  king,  was  charged  with  the  defence  of  Port-du-
Paix  and  the  interior  of  the  country.  On  this  oc-
casion he  exhibited  an  indolence  by  which  his  ene-
mies profited.  The  cape  was  taken  and  the  French
army  obliged  to  retreat  from  Port-du-Paix.  Lau-
rent's wife  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards,
who  held  her  prisoner  for  many  years  in  Santo
Domingo,  and  released  her  only  on  the  reiterated
demands  of  the  court  of  France.  Although  Lau-
rent was  intrusted  with  other  missions,  his  con-
duct in  the  affair  of  Port-du-Paix  finally  lost  him
his  post ;  but  he  was  appointed  captain  of  a  frigate,
and  was  frequently  employed  in  piloting  fleets  in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  Antilles  on  account  of
his  knowledge  of  these  seas.

LAURIE,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  11  Feb.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
18  April,  1853.  He  was  educated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Edinburgh  and  licensed  to  preach  in  1800.
About  1802  the  Rev.  John  M.  Mason,  who  was  then
in  Scotland,  urged  him  to  emigrate  to  the  United
States  and  enter  the  service  of  the  Associate  Re-
formed church.  This  denomination  had  formed  a
new  congregation  in  Washington,  D.  C,  of  which
Mr.  Laurie  was  installed  pastor  in  June,  1803.  For
several  years  he  preached  in  the  old  treasury  build-
ing, which  was  burned  by  the  British  in  1814.  He
labored  to  build  a  church,  and  travelled  from  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  to  Savannah  to  solicit  aid  with  such
success  that  in  1807  a  brick  edifice  was  opened  for
service,  which  was  the  second  Protestant  church  in
Washington.  He  held  charge  of  this  pastorate  for
forty-six  years,  and  was  also  employed  in  the  treas-
ury, holding  office  till  his  death.  Williams  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1815.

LAURIE,  James,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Bells
Quarry,  Scotland,  9  May,  1811;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  16  March,  1875.  He  was  a  maker  of  philo-
sophical instruments,  and  followed  that  business
abroad  until  1832,  when  he  came  to  the  United
States  with  James  P.  Kirkwood,  and  was  associated
with  him  in  the  location  of  various  railroads.  Sub-
sequently he  became  chief  engineer  in  charge  of
the  construction  of  the  Norwich  and  Worcester
railroad,  and  later  of  the  New  Jersey  Central  rail-
road. Mr.  Laurie  was  employed  on  surveys  of  rail-
roads in  Nova  Scotia,  and  as  consulting  engineer
for  the  state  of  Massachusetts  on  the  Hoosac  tun-
nel. He  then  turned  his  attention  to  bridge-con-
struction, and  built  the  wrousjht-iron  bridge  across
the  Connecticut  river  at  Windsor  Locks,  which
was  one  of  the  first  of  its  kind  in  the  United  States.
Thereafter  he  was  employed  chiefly  as  a  consulting
engineer  concerning  bridges,  on  which  he  was  re-
garded as  the  highest  authority  in  this  country  up


to  the  time  of  his  death.  Mr.  Laurie  was  active  in
promoting  the  formation  of  the  American  society
of  civil  engineers  in  1852,  and  he  was  elected
the  first  president  of  that  society,  which  office  he
held  continuously  until  1867.

LAURIE,  John  Wimbnrn,  British  soldier,  b.
in  London,  1  Oct.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Royal  military  college  at  Sandhurst  in  1853.  He
entered  the  army  as  an  ensign  in  September,  1853,
was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  in  1860,  colonel  in
1862,  and  major-general  in  September,  1882.  He
was  inspector  and  commander  of  the  military  dis-
trict of  Nova  Scotia  in  1862-'80,  and  of  the  district
of  British  Columbia  in  1880-1.  Gen.  Laurie  served
through  the  Crimean  campaign  in  1854-'6,  and  was
twice  wounded,  and,  as  a  staff  officer,  was  with  the
field  force  in  central  India  during  the  Sepoy  rebel-
lion in  1858-60.  He  also  served  in  the  Transvaal
campaign  in  South  Africa  in  1881,  in  the  north-
west Canadian  half-breed  rebellion,  was  major-
general  commanding  lines  of  communication  in
1885,  and  as  Red  cross  commissioner  in  the  Servo-
Bulgarian  war  of  1885-6.  Gen.  Laurie,  in  addition
to  other  decorations,  has  received  the  Turkish  order
of  Medjidie,  the  Servian  order  of  St.  Gava,  and  the
Red  cross  of  Servia  for  saving  life.  He  owns  a
large  landed  property  at  Oakfield,  Halifax  co..
Nova  Scotia,  and  in  the  intervals  of  his  military
career  has  been  an  experimenter  on  a  large  scale  in
agricultural  science  and  practice,  and  lectures  fre-
quently on  agricultural  and  military  subjects.

LAURIE,  Thomas,  missionary,  b.  in  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  19  May,  1821.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1830  and  sailed  from  Boston  as  mission-
ary to  the  Mountain  Nestorians,  returning  in  1846
on  account  of  impaired  health.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Dr.  Grant  and  the  Mountain  Nestorians  "  (Bos-
ton, 1853  ;  2d  ed.,  1856).

LAURIER,  Wilfrid,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  St.  Lin,  Quebec.  20  Nov.,  1841.  He  was  edu-
cated at  L'Assomption  college,  graduated  in  law  at
McGill  university  in  1864,  and  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Lower  Canada  in  1865.  He  represented  Drum-
mond  and  Arthabaska  in  the  Quebec  assembly
from  1871  till  January,  1874,  when  he  resigned.,
and  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament.  He
was  appointed  minister  of  inland  revenue  in  the
Mackenzie  government  in  September,  1877,  which
place  he  held  till  the  resignation  of  the  government
in  1878.  He  was  defeated  in  Drummond  and
Arthabaska  upon  appealing  to  his  constituents,
but  was  elected  immediately  afterward  for  Quebec,
East.  He  was  re-elected  in  1878,  1882,  and  at  the
last  general  election.  22  Feb.,  1887.  Soon  after  this
election  Edward  Blake  retired  from  the  leadership
of  the  Liberal  party  in  Canada,  and  M.  Laurier  was
chosen  to  succeed  him.  The  choice  did  not  prove
satisfactory  to  many  of  the  Liberals,  and  by  the
majority  of  the  party  it  was  regarded  as  merely
temporary.  He  was  violently  outspoken  in  his  de-
nunciation of  the  execution  of  Louis  Riel,  and  de-
manded the  latter's  exemption  from  punishment,
not  upon  the  plea  of  his  innocence  or  irresponsi-
bility, but  simply  on  the  ground  of  his  nationality.
M.  Laurier  is  the  leader  of  the  "Rouge  "  or  French
Canadian  section  of  the  Liberal  party  in  the  Do-
minion. He  at  one  time  edited  "Le  Defricheur,"
is  an  earnest  advocate  of  temperance,  and  was  a
delegate  to  the  Dominion  prohibitory  convention
at  jVlontreal  in  1875.

LAUSSAT,  Antony,  lawver,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1806 ;  d.  there,  2  Nov.,  1833.  His  parents,
Pierre  Antoine  and  Jane  de  Laussat,  were  from
Navarre.  When  the  father  became  a  citizen  of
the  United  States,  he  dropped  the  prefix  from  his


LAUTARO


LAVAL


633


name.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1821,  studied  law  under  Peter
Duponeeau,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  1  Feb.,
1827.  Before  this  he  had  become  a  member  of  the
law  academy  of  Philadelphia,  where  most  of  the
young  lawyers  of  that  day  were  trained.  While
yet  a  student,  he  wrote  "  An  Essay  on  Equity  in
Pennsylvania"  (Philadelphia,  1826),  which  at-
tracted much  attention,  was  published  by  order  of
the  academy,  and  received  high  praise  from  Chan-
cellor Kent  and  Chief-Justice  Marshall.  Judge
George  Sharswood,  in  an  address  before  the  law
academy,  said  he  had  heard  that  Lord  Brougham
once  remarked  to  an  American  lawyer :  "  If  your
law  students  produce  such  masterly  treatises,  your
lawyers  must  be  men  of  unusual  learning."  Mr.
Laussat  also  edited  Fonblanque's  "  Equity  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1831 ;  Brookfield,  1835).

LAUTARO,  or  LATUR  (low-tah'-ro),  Arauca-
nian  chief,  b.  in  the  valley  of  Tucapel  in  1537 ;  d.
in  Mataquito  in  December,  1556.  He  belonged  to
the  noble  order  of  Ulmenes.  In  one  of  the  hostile
incursions  of  Gen.  Valdivia  he  was  taken  prisoner,
employed  as  Valdivia's  page,  and  baptized  with
the  name  of  Felipe  Diaz.  On  3  Dec,  1553,  the
toqui  Caupolican  was  in  great  peril  of  losing  the
battle  of  Tucapel,  but  at  the  moment  when  his
army  was  almost  defeated,  young  Lautaro,  who
was  with  the  Spanish  garrison,  deserted  their  lines.
and,  grasping  a  lance,  turned  against  them,  shout-
ing to  his  countrymen  to  follow  him  to  victory.
The  Spaniards  were  defeated  and  the  fort  of  Tuca-
pel destroyed.  As  soon  as  Valdivia,  who  was  in
Concepcion,  heard  this  news  he  marched  with  all
the  forces  he  could  gather,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1554,  en-
countered the  Araucanians  near  the  ruins  of  Tu-
capel. The  Vidians,  by  the  advice  of  Lautaro,  at-
tacked Valdivia  with  different  bodies  successively,
so  that  they  always  presented  fresh  forces.  The
Spaniards  were  defeated,  Valdivia  made  prisoner,
and,  notwithstanding  the  entreaties  of  Lautaro,
killed,  after  suffering  cruel  tortures.  After  this
victory  the  Araucanian  national  assembly  appoint-
ed Lautaro  lieutenant-toqui.  and  commander  of  a
second  army,  with  which  he  intrenched  himself  in
the  mountains  of  Mariguenu.  In  1554,  in  this
place,  he  defeated  Gen.  Villagra  and  captured  a
large  number  of  prisoners,  horses,  and  six  pieces
of  artillery.  In  the  same  year  he  took  possession
of  the  fortress  of  Concepcion,  plundered  it,  set  the
city  on  fire,  and  levelled  its  forts,  and  in  1555  he
destroyed  the  city  a  second  time.  In  1556,  at  the
head  of  600  picked  men,  he  set  out  for  Santiago
with  the  intention  of  taking  possession  of  it.  On
the  banks  of  the  river  Claro  he  defeated  the  Span-
ish forces  four  times ;  but  toward  the  end  of  the
year  he  met  his  death,  Gen.  Villagra,  who  was
guided  by  a  friendly  Indian  over  an  obscure  and
generally  unknown  road,  having  surprised  and
defeated  him  at  night  in  his  camp.

LAUZON,  Jean  de,  governor  of  New  France,
b.  in  France  in  1582.  He  was  the  intendant  of  the
company  of  the  Cent  associes  in  1627.  In  1642  he
was  engaged  in  furthering  the  restoration  of  Que-
bec to  France,  and  he  subsequently  procured  the
cession  of  Montreal  to  M.  de  la  Dauversiere.  In
1651  he  became  the  fourth  governor  of  New
France,  continuing  in  office  for  five  years.  The
chief  events  of  his  administration  were  the  nego-
tiation of  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the  Iroquois,  es-
pecially with  the  Mohawks,  the  arrival  of  a  strong
re-enforcement  for  Montreal,  and  the  establishment
of  a  mission  among  the  Onondagas.  He  was  the
friend  and  protector  of  the  Jesuits,  and  confided
to  them  the  conversion  of  the  savages.


LAUZUN, \  mm  ml  Louis  de  Gontaut,  Due

de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Paris,  15  April,  1747;  d.
there,  31  Dec,  1793.  In  consequence  of  his  having
published  a  pamphlet  entiled  •'  L'etat  de  defense
de  l'Angleterre,"  he  was  given  the  command  of  an
expedition  against  Senegal,  Gambia,  and  other
English  settlements  on
the  African  coast,  which
he  captured  early  in
1779.  Greatly  reduced
in  pecuniary  resources
through  dissipation,  he
determined  to  join  La-
fayette and  enlist  in  the
American  army.  On
his  arrival  in  the  United
States,  he  was  warmly
welcomed  by  the  Con-
tinental leaders,  and
given  the  command  of
a  troop  of  500  cavalry,
which  became  known
as  "  Lauzun's  legion."
He  took  part  in  the
siege  of  Yorktown  and
in  the  attack  on  New
York  in  1781.  His
handsome  face  and  fine
figure,  his  talents,  his
wit,  and  his  bravery
won  him  the  friend-
ship of  those  who  ab-
horred his  profligacy.
He  returned  to  France  in  1783.  became  Due  de
Biron  in  1788,  was  a  delegate  to  the  states-gen-
eral, and  a  confidant  and  secret  agent  of  Philippe
Egalite.  On  9  July,  1792,  he  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine.  In
1793,  on  account  of  the  machinations  of  secret
agents,  who  incited  his  troops  to  insubordina-
tion, he  laid  his  resignation  before  the  committee
of  public  safety.  The  latter  refused  to  accept  it,
and  appealed  to  his  patriotism.  He  withdrew  it
for  the  time,  captured  Saumur.  and  defeated  the
Vendean  army  under  the  walls  of  Parthenay,  but
afterward  insisted  that  he  should  be  relieved  of
his  command.  Various  charges,  including  that
of  being  too  lenient  with  the  Vendeans,  were  then
brought  against  him.  and  he  was  removed  from
his  command  without  being  allowed  a  hearing,
imprisoned  at  Abbaye,  brought  before  the  revo-
lutionary tribunal  on  31  Dec.  and  condemned
to  death  on  the  pretext  that  he  had  conspired
against  the  republic.  On  the  scaffold  Lauzun  pro-
fessed to  be  thoroughly  disgusted  with  life.  A
moment  before  his  execution  he  said,  turning  to
his  companions  in  misfortune :  "  All  is  over,  gentle-
men ;  I  am  about  to  start  on  the  long  journey."
Then,  handing  a  glass  of  wine  to  the  executioner,
"  Take  it."  he  said :  "  you  need  courage  in  prosecut-
ing a  trade  like  yours."  See  "  Memoires  de  M.  le
due  de  Lauzun  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1822).

LAVAL,  Antony  J.  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ly-
ons, France,  in  the  17th  century;  d.  in  France  in
1758.  He  was  a  Jesuit,  and  appears  to  have  been
for  some  time  a  missionary  in  Louisiana.  He  wrote
"  Voyage  de  la  Louisiane,  en  1720-1728.  dans  lequel
on  traite  plusieurs  matieres  de  physique,  astrono-
mie,  geographie  et  marine."

LAVAL.  Jacint,  soldier,  b.  about  1762 ;  d.  in
Harper's  Ferry,  Va.,  2  Sept.,  1822.  He  came  to
this  country  as  cornet  of  dragoons  in  Rocham-
beau's  army.  Subsequently  he  was  sheriff  of
Charleston,  S.  C,  and  was  appointed  captain  of
dragoons  in  the  U.  S.  army,  3  May,  1809. He  be-


634


LAVALETTE


LAVAL-MONTMORENCY


came  major,  15  Feb.,  1809,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
1st  light  dragoons,  7  June,  1813,  and  colonel,  1
Aug.,  1813.  From  21  May,  1821,  until  his  death
he  held  the  post  of  military  storekeeper.

LAVALETTE,  Antoine  de,  clergyman,  b.  in
France,  21  Oct.,  1707.  The  place  and  date  of  his
death  are  unknown.  He  became  a  member  of  the
Society  of  Jesus  in  Toulouse,  10  Oct.,  1725,  was  or-
dained priest  in  1740,  and  in  1741  sent  as  mission-
ary to  the  island  of  Martinique.  In  1754  he  was
named  superior-general  of  all  the  Jesuit  missions
in  the  French  possessions  in  Central  and  South
America.  He  was  accused  about  the  same  time  of
engaging  in  commerce,  contrary  to  the  canon  law,
and  summoned  to  Paris  for  trial ;  but  his  defence
was  undertaken  by  the  authorities  in  Martinique,
and  the  matter  was  allowed  to  drop  for  the  time.
His  conduct  afterward  was  one  of  the  causes  that
led  to  the  downfall  of  his  order.  His  mission  was
heavily  in  debt,  and  to  restore  it  to  financial
prosperity  he  made  extensive  purchases  of  land  in
Dominica,  and  engaged  in  various  commercial  ven-
tures, borrowing  large  sums  of  money  when  these
proved  unsuccessful.  When  Ricci,  the  Jesuit  gen-
eral, was  informed  of  this,  in  1757,  he  sent  three
visitors  to  Maitinique,  all  of  whom  met  with  mis-
haps that  prevented  them  from  arriving.  At  last,
in  the  spring  of  1702,  the  fourth  visitor,  Father  de
la  Marche,  reached  the  island,  and  organized  a
tribunal  of  the  principal  fathers  of  the  mission,
before  whom  Lavalette  appeared.  He  was  con-
demned and  suspended  from  all  ecclesiastical
functions  until  their  report  was  laid  before  the
general  of  the  order  in  Rome.  Lavalette  signed  a
confession  declaring  that  he  alone  was  guilty,  and
after  his  confession  he  went  to  England,  where  he
was  notified  of  his  expulsion  from  the  society  by
the  Jesuit  general.  Lavalette  gave  information  to
his  superiors  by  which  it  appeared  his  debts
amounted  to  2,400,000  livres.  The  French  Jesuits
were  making  an  effort  to  settle  with  the  creditors
when  the  case  was  brought  before  the  courts,  the
whole  society  was  held  responsible  for  the  debt,
and  a  decree  was  issued  for  the  seizure  of  all  their
property.  This  rendered  the  society  in  France
bankrupt,  and  led  to  the  royal  edict  of  November,
1764,  which  abolished  the  order  in  that  country.

LA  VALETTE,  Elie  A.  F.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Virginia  about  1790;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18
Nov.,  1862.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  sailing-
master  on  25  June,  1812,  was  commissioned  as  a
lieutenant  on  9  Dec,  1814,  promoted  commander
on  3  March,  1831,  and  became  a  captain  on  23
Feb.,  1840.  He  was  a  favorite  with  Com.  Isaac
Hull,  and  accompanied  that  officer  when  he  took
command  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron  in  1837.
In  accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  the  re-
tiring-board he  was  made  a  rear-admiral  on  the
retired  list  on  16  July,  1862.

LAVALLE,  Juan  (lah-val'-yeh),  Argentine  sol-
dier, b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  16  Oct.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Jujuy,
9  Oct.,  1841.  He  entered  the  army  at  the  age  of
sixteen,  fought  in  1814  and  1815  against  Jose
Artigas,  and  in  1817— '18  in  the  battles  of  Chacabuco
and  Maipu.  In  1820  he  embarked  for  Peru  with  the
forces  that  were  sent  by  Buenos  Ayres  to  aid  the
revolutionists.  He  was  promoted  major  for  gal-
lantry in  action,  took  command  of  his  regiment  at
Moquegua,  where  its  colonel  was  wounded,  and
effectively  protected  the  retreat  of  the  army.  He
returned  to  Buenos  Ayres  in  1823,  and  shared  in
the  campaign  against  Brazil  from  1825  up  to  the
conclusion  of  peace  in  1828.  His  conduct  at  the
battle  of  Ituzaingo  gained  him  the  grade  of  coronel
mayor. About  this  time  he  began  to  take  part  in


politics,  headed  a  revolt  against  Col.  Dorrego,  gov-
ernor of  Buenos  Ayres  and  chief  of  the  Federal-
ists, and  overturned  his  government,  1  Dec,  1828.
The  governor  was  again  defeated  at  Navarro,  and
Lavalle,  obtaining  possession  of  his  person  by
treachery,  had  him  immediately  shot.  On  26
April,  1829,  Lavalle  was  defeated  by  Estjinislo
Lopez  y  Santa-Fe,  and  forced  to  withdraw  i'rom
Buenos  Ayres.  In  1838  a  French  expedition  was
sent  out  against  the  dictator  Juan  Manuel  de  Rosas,
and  the  city  of  Buenos  Ayres  was  declared  block-
aded. Lavalle  was  chosen  commander-in-chief  of
the  forces  of  Uruguay,  united  to  those  of  Corrien-
tes,  and  marched  on  Buenos  Ayres;  but  when  within
sight  of  the  city  he  suddenly  gave  orders  to  re-
treat to  Sante-Fc  Rosas,  who  had  been  much
alarmed  by  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  sent  his
lieutenant,  Oribe,  to  attack  that  city,  and  mean-
while Lavalle  learned  that  a  treaty  of  peace  had
been  signed  between  the  French  and  the  governor
of  Buenos  Ayres,  29  Oct.,  1840.  He  rejected  the
offer  of  an  asylum  and  a  pension  that  was  made
him  by  the  French  representative,  and  determined
to  continue  the  war  against  Rosas  unaided.  But
he  was  pursued  by  a  superior  force,  defeated  at
Quebracho-Herrado  on  28  Nov.,  and  again  on  the
plains  of  Famailla,  19  Sept.,  1841.  With  great
difficulty  he  reached  the  capital  of  the  province  of
Jujuy,  escorted  by  about  100  soldiers,  when  he  met
a  party  of  the  enemy  and  was  killed  in  a  house
where  he  had  taken  refuge.

LAVALLEJA,  Juan  Antonio  (lah-val-yay'-
hah),  Uruguayan  soldier,  b.  in  Montevideo,  18  July,
1795;  d.  there,  23  Oct.,  1853.  He  served  in  the
army  of  his  country  during  the  war  for  independ-
ence ;  but  little  is  known  of  his  career  during
those  years.  On  19  April,  1825,  a  company  of  pa-
triots of  Uruguay,  under  the  command  of  Col.
Lavalleja,  landed  in  Boca  de  Gutierrez,  Uruguay,
with  the  intention  of  freeing  their  country  from
Brazilian  control.  Four  days  afterward  they  de-
feated the  Brazilian  forces  under  Gen.  Laguna  in
San  Salvador.  On  29  May  of  the  same  year  with
other  forces  he  surprised  Gen.  Rivera,  who  with
all  his  men  joined  the  popular  side.  On  12  Oct.
he  gained  the  battle  of  Sarandi,  and  on  23  May,
1826,  the  congress  of  the  provinces  of  Rio  de  la
Plata  rewarded  him  and  his  comrades  with  pensions
for  life.  In  the  battle  of  Ituzaingo,  20  Feb.,  1827,
he  commanded  a  brigade  of  cavalry  under  Gen.
Alvear  and  routed  the  left  wing  of  the  Brazilian
army.  In  1832  Gen.  Lavalleja  headed  a  revolu-
tion against  the  first  government  of  Uruguav,  but
was  defeated  and  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  Brazil
on  20  Sept.  of  that  year.  He  continued  his  plot-
ting, and  on  19  March,  1834,  landed  in  Punta
Gorda,  but  was  defeated  and  again  obliged  to  take
refuge  in  Brazil.  He  then  retired  from  politics
until  the  year  1853,  when  he  was  the  chief  member
of  the  triumvirate  that  was  appointed  to  govern
the  republic  after  the  deposition  of  President  Giro.

LAVAL-MONTMORENCY,  Francis  Xavier
de,  first  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Laval,  France,
30  April,  1623 ;  d.  in  Quebec,  6  May,  1708.  He
studied  in  the  College  of  La  Fleche,  and  received
the  tonsure  at  the  age  of  nine.  The  death  of  his
eldest  brother  left  him  heir  to  the  title  and  estates
of  his  family,  but  he  persevered  in  his  intention  of
becoming  a  priest,  resigned  his  rights  in  favor  of  a
younger  brother,  and,  after  finishing  his  theologi-
cal course  in  Paris,  was  ordained  in  1646.  He  en-
tered the  Congregation  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  and
during  a  visit  to  Paris  in  the  interests  of  this  order
he  attracted  the  favorable  notice  of  the  queen
mother. He  was  nominated  by  the  king  in  1657


LAVAL-MONTMORENCY


LAVIALLE


635


for  the  see  of  Quebec ;  but  his  consecration  was  de-
layed, partly  by  the  hostility  of  the  archbishop  of
Rouen,  who  claimed  jurisdiction  over  New  France,
and  partly  by  the  desire  of  the  pope  to  establish  a
vicariate  apostolic,  depending  immediately  upon
himself.  A  compromise  was  effected,  and  Laval
was  consecrated  vicar  apostolic  of  Quebec  and
bishop  of  Petraea  in  partibus,  8  Dec,  1658.  He
reached  Quebec,  16  June,  1659,  and  his  authority
was  generally  acknowledged.  He  organized  par-
ishes in  Quebec  and  the  neighborhood,  and  as
more  priests  continued  to  arrive  he  relieved  the
Jesuits  of  their  charges  as  pastors  of  parishes,  and
sent  them  to  the  Indian  missions,  lie  travelled
through  his  vicariate  shortly  after  his  arrival,  and
in  the  journey  he  contracted  the  seeds  of  the  dis-
ease that  finally  forced  him  to  resign  his  bishop-
ric. Learning  that  there  were  hitherto  unknown
tribes  north  and  west  of  Lake  Huron,  he  took
measures  for  supplying  them  with  priests.  Laval
was  for  some  time  powerless  to  prevent  the  sale  of
liquor  to  the  Indians  by  the  French  traders.  At-
tributing his  want  of  success  in  dealing  with  this
and  other  evils  to  the  fact  that  Quebec  was  a  vica-
riate apostolic  and  not  a  titular  bishopric,  he  went
to  France  and  laid  the  matter  before  the  king,  also
asking  that  a  chapter  should  be  instituted  and  a
seminary  established,  and  proposing  that  a  civil
council  should  be  formed  for  the  protection  of  in-
dividuals from  the  arbitrary  power  of  the  governor-
fenerals.  The  king  accepted  these  proposals,  but
is  negotiations  with  the  pope  for  the  erection  of
Quebec  into  a  titular  bishopric  did  not  succeed
until  some  years  afterward.  Laval  sailed  for
Canada  in  1663  in  company  with  Augustine  de
Mezy,  who  was  appointed  governor  at  his  request.
On  his  arrival  he  at  once  set  about  building  the
church  of  Quebec  on  the  site  of  the  chapel  that
had  been  erected  by  Champlain.  It  was  finished
in  1664.  The  new  governor  now  quarrelled  with
Laval,  and  the  latter  procured  his  recall  in  1665.
Having  founded  a  "grand  seminaire"  for  the  edu-
cation of  priests,  Laval  opened  a  "  petit  seminaire  "
as  a  preparatory  college.  9  Oct.,  1668.  On  the  rec-
ommendation of  Jean  Baptist  Colbert  he  made  an
effort  to  erect  schools  and  a  college  for  the  educa-
tion of  Indian  children,  but  did  not  meet  with  suc-
cess. In  1669  the  liquor  traffic  with  the  Indians
was  renewed,  and  Laval  excommunicated  all  that
engaged  in  it  or  favored  it.  The  governor.  Daniel
de  Courcelles,  believed  himself  included  in  the
anathema,  and  complained  bitterly  of  the  bishop,
but  the  latter  was  sustained  by  the  French  court.
In  1670  the  vicariate  of  Quebec  was  erected  into  a
titular  bishopric,  and  Laval  returned  to  France  in
1672  to  obtain  the  bulls  of  consecration.  He  re-
turned to  Canada  toward  the  end  of  1675.  and
found  that,  notwithstanding  his  efforts,  the  liquor
traffic  with  the  Indians  was  carried  on  more  open-
ly than  ever.  Frontenac,  the  governor,  had  per-
suaded Colbert  that  it  aided  the  French  in  exer-
cising an  influence  among  the  Indian  tribes.  After
two  years  of  protest  Laval  succeeded  in  obtaining
a  decree  that  regulated  but  did  not  prohibit  it.  In
1678  Laval  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Seminary  of
the  holy  family,  which  was  to  take  the  place  of  the
two  seminaries  that  he  had  founded  before,  and  he
gave  all  his  property  for  its  support.  In  1682  he
engaged  in  a  dispute  with  the  Recollets,  which  was
ended  by  the  recall  of  the  more  violent  members
of  that  order  from  Canada.  These  disorders  and
his  feeble  health  decided  him  to  resign  his  see,
which  he  did  in  1684.  going  to  France  for  that
purpose.  Notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  his  family
to  retain  him  at  home,  he  sailed  in  1688  for  Canada,


where  he  retired  into  the  seminary  that  he  had
erected.  His  personal  influence  was  still  great,
and,  during  the  absence  of  Bishop  Saint  Vallier  in
1691-2  and  1700-'ll,  he  co-operated  with  those
that  were  intrusted  with  the  administration  of  the
diocese.  His  seminary  was  burned,  15  Nov.,  1701,
and  again  in  October,  1705,  after  it  had  been  re-
built, and  he  passed  his  last  days  in  a  part  of  the
building  that  the  flames  had  spared.  lie  was  ven-
erated as  a  saint  after  his  death,  and  miracles  were
ascribed  to  his  intercession.  The  Roman  Catholic
church  in  Canada  has  petitioned  the  pope  for  his
canonization,  and  Laval  university,  Quebec,  is
named  after  him.  His  life  has  been  written  by
Louis  Bertrend  (Cologne.  1751),  and  by  an  anony-
mous author  (Quebec,  1845).

LAYAL-  MONTMORENCY,  Mathien  Panl
Louis,  Due  de,  soldier,  b.  in  1748;  d.  in  Paris,
France,  27  Dec,  1809.  He  was  the  son  of  the
Comte  de  Laval-Montmorency,  who  became  a  mar-
shal of  France  in  1747.  The  son  commanded  in
the  American  Revolution,  under  Rochambeau,  the
"  D'Auvergne "  regiment,  which  was  remarkable
for  the  severity  of  its  discipline. — His  son.  Mathieu
Jean  Felicity  soldier,  b.  in  1767:  d.  in  1826,
served  under  his  father's  orders  in  this  country,
and  was  wounded  in  a  naval  action  near  Chesa-
peake bay  in  1781.  In  1821  he  became  minister
of  foreign  affairs  in  the  French  government.

LAYERDIERE,  Charles  Honore,  Canadian
educator,  b.  in  Chateau-Richer,  Canada.  23  Oct.,
1826 :  d.  in  Quebec,  27  March,  1873.  He  was  or-
dained as  a  Roman  Catholic  priest  in  August,  1851,
became  professor  in  the  Seminary  of  Quebec,  and
was  appointed  librarian  of  Laval  university  on  the
establishment  of  that  institution.  While  a  stu-
dent he  founded  and  edited  for  several  years
"L'Abeille,"  a  college  journal,  to  which  he  con-
tributed many  historical  articles.  He  aided  in  the
publication  of  three  volumes  of  "  Jesuit  Relations  "
concerning  early  missions  in  Canada  (Quebec,
1858) ;  edited  the  voyages  of  Champlain,  with
notes  and  a  biography  (5  vols.,  1870) :  the  "  Jour-
nal des  Jesuites"  (1871);  wrote  a  '-Histoire  du
Canada  "  for  schools ;  an  account  of  '•  Notre  Dame
de  Recouvrance  d'Quebec  " :  and  "  A  la  memoire  du
R.  P.  Ennemond  Masse,  S.  J.,"  one  of  the  earliest
Jesuit  missionaries,  whose  grave  at  Sillery  he  dis-
covered and  marked  with  a  fine  monument.  He
also  edited  several  books  of  songs  and  hymns,  in-
cluding '•  Chansonniers  des  colleges,"  "Cantiques
a  l'usage  des  maisons  d'education,"  three  editions
of  the  "  Chants  liturgique,"  "  La  semaine  sainte,"
and  "  Le  rituel  Romain. '

LAYIALLE.  Peter  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Lavialle,  Auvergne,  France,  in  1820;  d.  in  Naza-
reth, Ky..  11  May.  1867.  He  studied  for  the  min-
istry under  the  Sulpitian  fathers,  but,  before  he  had
reached  the  age  for  ordination,  he  was  persuaded
by  his  relative,  Bishop  Chabret,  to  come  to  Ken-
tucky. He  reached  Louisville  in  1841,  and  soon
afterward  entered  the  diocesan  seminary  of  St.
Thomas  near  Bardstown.  He  was  ordained  priest
in  1844,  and  from  that  time  till  1849  was  attached
to  the  pastorate  of  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Louis,
Louisville.  He  was  then  appointed  professor  in
the  Seminary  of  St.  Thomas,  was  president  of  St.
Mary's  college,  Marion  county,  from  1856  till  24
Sept.,  1865,  when  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of
Louisville.  Bishop  Lavialle  examined  into  the
condition  of  every  congregation,  religious  house,
and  educational  establishment  under  his  juris-
diction. He  built  four  churches  in  the  city  of
Louisville  alone,  and  allowed  himself  no  rest  un-
til his  health  was  ruined.


636


LAVRADIO


LAW


LAVRADIO,  Antonio  de  Almeida  Soares  e
Portugal  (Lah-vrah'-dyo),  Marquis  de,  governor  of
Brazil,  b.  in  Lisbon,  27  June,  1729;  d.  in  Oporto,
2  March,  1790.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1747,  and
served  in  South  America.  In  1760  he  became  gov-
ernor-general of  Brazil,  and  during  his  administra-
tion of  twenty  years  he  greatly  improved  the  coun-
try. He  developed  the  culture  of  indigo  and  rice,
and  introduced  the  first  coffee-trees  into  the  coun-
try. He  also  endeavored  to  civilize  the  Indians  in-
stead of  persecuting  them  like  most  of  his  prede-
cessors, and  founded  villages  in  countries  where
formerly  no  European  had  dared  to  travel.  Un-
der his  administration  Brazil  grew  rich  and  pros-
perous.. He  first  conceived  the  idea  of  making  the
culture  of  the  ipecacuanha-tree  a  source  of  profit
to  the  country,  and  had  thousands  of  them  planted,
thus  opening  to  Brazil  a  new  branch  of  trade.  He
also  did  much  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the
poorer  classes  and  to  check  the  insolence  of  the
aristocracy  toward  the  people.  Alfonso  de  Varn-
hagen,  in  his  "  Historia  geral  do  Brazil,"  praises
him  as  a  benefactor  of  the  country,  and  his  name
has  been  given  recently  to  one  of  the  principal
streets  of  Rio  Janeiro.  In  1781  he  was  relieved  of
his  command  in  Brazil  and  appointed  vice-admiral.
In  1782  he  commanded  the  Portuguese  fleet  in
South  America,  and  in  the  following  year  became
president  of  the  admiralty  and  privy  councillor  of
the  king,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death.

LAW,  Andrew,  psalmodist,  b.  in  Cheshire,
Conn.,  in  1748 ;  d.  there  in  July,  1821.  About  the
beginning  of  the  19th  century  he  began  the  issue  of
a  periodical,  the  "  Art  of  Singing."  It  was  in  three
parts,  entitled,  respectively,  "  Musical  Primer,"
"  Christian  Harmony,"  and  "  Musical  Magazine,"
and  is  thought  to  be  the  first  musical  periodical
that  was  issued  in  this  country.  He  endeavored
to  introduce  a  new  system  of  notation  without  the
five  lines,  and,  failing  in  this,  modified  the  system
by  restoring  the  five  lines  in  a  broken  manner.
The  heads  of  the  notes  had  peculiar  shapes — square,
diamond,  half-diamond,  and  quarter-diamond,  ac-
cording to  their  value.  He  published  "  Musical
Primer"  (1780);  "A  Collection  of  the  Best  and
most  Approved  Tunes  and  Anthems  known  to  ex-
ist "  (Cheshire,  1782),  which  was  subsequently  com-
bined with  a  second  volume  entitled  "  Christian
Harmony  "  ;  "  Original  Collection  of  Music  "  (Bal-
timore, 1786) ;  and  "  Rudiments  of  Music."

LAW,  (xeorge,  financier,  b.  in  Jackson,  Wash-
ington co.,  N.  Y.,  25  Oct.,  1806 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  18  Nov.,  1881.  He  left  his  father's  farm  at
the  age  of  eighteen  to  seek  his  fortune,  walked  to
Troy,  and  applied  for  work  in  vain  until  he  saw  a
hod-carrier  fall  from  a  high  ladder,  and  took  the
place  of  the  disabled  man.  He  learned  the  trades
of  mason  and  stone-cutter  while  working  on  a
house  in  Hoosic,  obtained  employment  On  the  Dela-
ware and  Hudson  canal  in  1825,  superintended  the
making  of  canal-locks  at  High  Falls,  went  to  the
York  mountains  of  Pennsylvania  to  quarry  stone
for  locks,  and  was  employed  as  a  mechanic  on
canals  till  June,  1829,  when  he  obtained  a  contract
for  a  small  lock  and  aqueduct  on  the  Delaware
and  Hudson  canal.  Though  his  only  early  educa-
tion had  been  obtained  in  the  winter  night-school,
he  employed  all  his  leisure  hours  in  study,  and
made  himself  a  good  engineer  and  draughtsman.
He  soon  became  a  large  contractor  for  the  con-
struction of  railroads  and  canals.  In  August,
1837,  he  went  to  New  York  city,  where  one  of  his
brothers  was  engaged  in  the  construction  of  the
Croton  water-works.  He  obtained  contracts  for
sections  of  the  aqueduct,  and  in  1839  that  for  the


High  Bridge,  by  which  it  crosses  Harlem  river.
In  1842  he  undertook  the  management  of  the  Dry
Dock  bank,  and  subsequently  purchased  and  ex-
tended the  Harlem  and  Mohawk  railroads,  lie
bought  the  steamer  "  Neptune  "  in  1843,  built  the
"  Oregon  "  in  1845,  assumed  the  contract  to  carry
the  L.  S.  mails  to  California,  had  the  "  Ohio  "  and
the  "  Georgia"  built,  and  in  1849  carried  the  first

fassengers  by  steamship  to  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.
n  the  same  year  High  Bridge  was  completed.
When  the  Pacific  mail  steamship  company  estab-
lished a  competing  line  between  New  York  and
Chagres,  Mr.  Law  placed  an  opposition  line  of  four
steamers  on  the  Pacific.  In  April,  1851,  the  rivalry
was  ended  by  his  purchasing  their  steamers  on  the
Atlantic  side,  ana  selling  to  them  his  new  line
from  Panama  to  San  Francisco.  In  1852  he  ac-
quired a  large  interest  in  the  projected  Panama
railroad,  went  to  the  isthmus  to  examine  the  route,
and  located  the  terminus  at  Aspinwall,  where  he
began  to  build  the  railroad  and  steamship  wharf
and  depot.  In  1852  he  purchased  from  the  incor-
porators the  franchise  of  the  Eighth  avenue  street-
railroad  in  New  York  city,  and  completed  it  within
thirty  days.  He  sold  his  interest  in  the  Panama
railroad  in  the  winter  of  1853.  He  also  built  the
Ninth  avenue  road,  and  purchased  the  steam  ferry
to  Staten  island,  and  Grand  and  Roosevelt  street
ferries  between  New  York  city  and  Brooklyn.  In
1852  he  had  a  contest  with  the  Cuban  captain-
general,  which  brought  him  prominently  into  pub-
lic notice.  The  Spanish  official  was  incensed  be-
cause the  purser  of  one  of  his  vessels  had  published
an  offensive  statement  in  a  New  York  newspaper,
and  refused  entrance  to  any  vessel  having  him  on
board.  The  American  government  refused  to  sus-
tain Mr.  Law  in  his  determination  to  send  the
"  Crescent  City "  to  Havana  with  the  purser  on
board,  and  withdrew  the  mail  when  he  persisted.
He  nevertheless  despatched  the  steamship,  and  the
captain-general  failed  to  carry  out  his  threat  to
fire  on  her.  Mr.  Law,  who  after  this  was  called
'•  Live-Oak  George,"  from  a  nickname  bestowed  on
him  by  the  workmen  in  his  ship-yard,  assailed  the
administration,  which  he  accused  of  pusillanimity,
in  newspaper  articles,  and  for  his  bold  demonstra-
tion of  American  prestige  he  was  placed  in  nomi-
nation in  February,  1855,  by  the  Pennsylvania
legislature,  as  the  Native  American  or  Know-
Nothing  candidate  for  the  presidency.  He  was
supported  by  several  journals,  but  the  National
convention  in  Philadelphia  in  1856  chose  Millard
Fillmore,  the  president  whom  Law  had  attacked,
to  be  the  party  candidate.

LAW,  John,  Scotch  financier,  b.  in  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  in  April,  1671 ;  d.  in  Venice,  Italy,  21
May,  1729.  He  inherited  the  estate  of  Lauriston,
applied  himself  to  abstruse  studies,  especially
finance,  and  at  the  same  time  became  skilled  in
games  of  dexterity  and  hazard.  After  squander-
ing his  property  he  went  to  London,  and  gained  a
footing  in  fashionable  society,  but  killed  an  an-
tagonist in  a  duel  in  1695,  and  escaped  to  France
after  sentence  of  death  had  been  pronounced.  He
investigated  the  financial  methods  of  Jean  Baptiste
Colbert,  spent  some  time  in  Holland  studying  the
mercantile  system  of  that  republic,  and  about  1700
returned  to  Scotland  and  proposed  a  system  of
credit-banking  and  paper  money  for  the  develop-
ment of  the  agriculture  and  industry  of  the  coun-
try. His  plan  was  presented  in  a  publication  en-
titled "  Money  and  Trade  Considered,  with  a  Pro-
posal for  Supplying  the  Nation  with  Money"
(Edinburgh,  1705).  The  court  party  favored  his
scheme,  but  parliament  passed  a  resolution  against


LAW


LAW


637


-^^


the  establishment  of  any  kind  of  paper  credit.  He
thereupon  went  to  Paris,  gained  the  favor  of  the
Duke  of  Orleans,  and  sought  to  introduce  his  pro-
ject to  the  attention  of  the  government,  but  was
expelled  as  a  gambler.  Then  he  broached  the
scheme  in  Genoa,  Turin,  Vienna,  and  at  various

German  courts ;
but  it  was  every-
where rejected.
His  fascinating
manners  gained
him  admission
to  court  circles,
and  his  success
at  the  gaming-
table supplied
him  with  means.
When  the  Duke
of  Orleans  suc-
ceeded to  the
regency,  Law  re-
turned to  France
with  a  private
fortune  of  $500,-
000  that  he  had
made  by  gam-
bling and  specu-
lation. The  gov-
ernment was  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  and  the
debasement  of  the  currency  had  produced  disorder
in  mercantile  business.  The  council  of  finance
rejected  his  project  of  a  national  bank,  and  the
replacement  of  the  metallic  currency  by  an  irre-
deemable one  of  paper.  He  was  authorized,  how-
ever, to  establish  a  private  bank  of  issue,  which
was  chartered  in  May,  1716,  and  soon  obtained  a
vast  business.  Law  then  conceived  the  project  of
raising  the  credit  of  the  state  and  satisfying  a  part
of  its  creditors,  and  at  the  same  time  developing
the  resources  of  the  recently  explored  Mississippi
valley,  by  transferring  that  region  to  a  company
whose  shares  should  be  made  exchangeable  at  par
for  government  stock.  In  August,  1717,  the  Com-
pany of  the  west,  or  West  India  company,  was
formed,  and  was  endowed  by  the  king  with  sover-
eign and  proprietary  rights  over  the  Mississippi
valley,  with  power  to  construct  forts,  raise  troops,
fit  out  ships  of  war,  establish  courts  of  justice,  and
develop  mines.  The  regent  presented  the  company
with  the  vessels,  forts,  and  factories  that  Antoine
Crozat  had  constructed,  and  gave  it  a  monopoly  of
the  fur-trade  with  Canada  for  twentv-five  vears.
The  capital  of  the  company  was  fixed  at  100,000,000
francs,  divided  into  shares  of  500  francs  each.
The  government  funds,  which  had  fallen  to  one
third  of  their  face  value,  on  being  made  exchange-
able for  the  new  stock,  immediately  rose  to  par.
Subscribers  were  required  to  pay  for  one  quarter
of  their  stock  in  money,  while  for  the  remainder
government  bills  of  credit  were  accepted  at  their
face  value.  The  colonization  of  Louisiana  was  be-
gun on  a  prodigal  scale.  Three  vessels  arrived
with  800  emigrants  on  25  Aug.,  1718,  and  other
bands  followed ;  yet  few  could  endure  the  climate
except  hardy  pioneers  from  Canada.  The  capital
was  named  New  Orleans,  after  the  regent.  Large
sections  of  rich  land  were  granted  by  the  western
company  to  corporations  and  individuals.  Law
received  a  prairie  in  Arkansas,  and  invested  1,500,-
000  francs  in  the  colony.  The  regent,  on  4  Dec,
1718,  issued  a  decree  transforming  Law's  banking
establishment  into  a  state  bank,  and  guaranteeing
its  circulation.  Bank-notes  were  issued  until  there
were  1,000,000,000  francs  in  circulation  in  Decem-
ber, 1719. The  Company  of  the  west  in  May,  1719,


obtained  the  new  monopoly  of  the  commerce  with
Asia,  Africa,  and  the  South  sea.  whereupon  the
name  was  changed  to  the  India  company,  and
new  stock  was  issued,  the  total  number  of  shares
in  November,  1719,  being  624,000.  Law  hoped  to
complete  his  system  by  having  the  company  as-
sume the  financial  administration  of  the  state  and
pay  off  the  public  debt,  and  engaged  with  the  pro-
ceeds of  the  new  shares  to  lend  the  king  1,600,000,-
000  francs  at  3  per  cent.  The  payment  of  the  state
debt  with  this  loan,  and  the  inflation  of  the  cur-
rency, caused  a  mania  for  speculation  to  take  pos-
session of  the  people  of  Paris.  Land  and  all  com-
modities rose  rapidly  in  price,  and  the  shares  of
the  India  company  at  the  end  of  November,  1719,
sold  for  thirty-six  or  forty  times  their  nominal
value. The  crisis  lasted  from  the  end  of  October,

1719,  till  the  beginning  of  February,  1720.  When
the  panic  began,  Law.  who  was  appointed  comp-
troller-general on  5  Jan.,  1720.  attempted  to  sus-
tain the  inflated  values  by  edicts  declaring  the
value  of  the  paper  money  to  be  five  per  cent,  above
that  of  specie,  forbidding  the  payment  of  large
sums  in  metallic  money,  and  requiring  holders  of
coin  in  excess  of  a  certain  amount  to  exchange  it
for  bills.  The  prices  of  all  things  rose  with  the
emission  of  additional  paper  money,  but  the  shares
in  Law's  company  fell  in  the  market. On  21  May,

1720,  he  acknowledged  partial  bankruptcy  by  pro-
claiming the  gradual  reduction  of  the  value  of
bank-notes  to  one  half  of  their  face  value,  which
corresponded  with  their  actual  exchange  value.
The  system  of  inflated  currency  and  fictitious
stock,  by  which  he  had  sought  to  relieve  the
French  government  of  its  great  burden  of  debt,
finally  collapsed,  its  author  was  dismissed  from  his
ministerial  post,  and  in  December,  1720,  fled  from
France.  He  lived  for  some  time  in  London,  a  pen-
sioner on  his  friends,  and  passed  his  last  years  in
poverty  in  Venice.  With  the  downfall  of  Law,  ex-
penditures in  Louisiana  ceased.  But  the  colony
survived  the  loss  of  such  aid,  as  well  as  subsequent
dangers  and  disasters.  See  "  Histoire  du  systeme
des  finances  sous  la  minorite  de  Louis  XV."  (the
Hagxie,  1739):  John  P.  Wood's  "Memoirs  of  the
Life  of  John  Law  "  (Edinburgh,  1824) ;  "  Law.  son
systeme  et  son  epoque."  by  Andre  Cochut  (Paris,
1853):  and  "The  Mississippi  Bubble,"  from  the
French  of  Adolphe  Thiers  (New  York.  1859).

LAW,  Jonathan,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  Mil-
ford,  Conn.,  6  Aug.,  1674 ;  d.  9  Nov.,  1750.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1695,  studied  law,  and
opened  an  office  in  Milford.  In  1715  he  was  ap-
pointed a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Connecti-
cut, and  in  1725  chief  justice  and  lieutenant-gov-
ernor. In  1741  he  was  chosen  governor,  and  filled
that  office  till  his  death.  He  opposed  the  preach-
ing of  George  Whitefield  and  other  revivalists,  and
signed  an  act  prohibiting  any  itinerating  clergy-
man or  exhorter  from  preaching  in  a  parish  with-
out the  express  desire  of  the  pastor  or  people,  un-
der which  Rev.  Samuel  Finley  and  others  were
driven  out  as  vagrants. — His  son,  Richard,  jurist,
b.  in  Milford,  Conn.,  17  March,  1733;  d.  in  New
London,  Conn..  26  Jan.,  1806,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1751,  studied  law  with  Jared  Ingersoll,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  New  Haven  in  1754,  and
practised  in  New  London.  He  won  reputation  in
his  profession,  and  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
county  court.  He  sat  in  the  general  assembly,  was
a  member  of  the  council  from  1776  till  1786,  and
in  1777-8  and  1781-4  was  a  delegate  to  the  old
congress.  After  the  return  of  peace  he  and  Roger
Sherman  revised  and  codified  the  statute  laws  of
Connecticut. In  1784  he  was  elevated  to  the  su-


638


LAWLER


LAWRENCE


preme  bench  of  the  state,  and  in  May,  1786,  was
appointed  chief  justice.  On  the  organization  of
the  Federal  Union,  President  Washington  in  1789
appointed  him  U.  S.  district  judge  for  Connecticut,
which  office  he  held  till  his  death.  He  was  also
mayor  of  New  London  from  the  adoption  of  the
city  charter  in  1784.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in  1802. — Richard's  son,
Lyman,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  19
Aug.,  1770 ;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,  1842,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1791,  studied  law  with  his  father,  and
became  an  eminent  counsellor  in  New  London.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Connecticut  legislature,
chosen  speaker  for  one  session,  and  afterward
elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving  from
4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,  1817.— Lyman's  son,
John,  jurist,  b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  in  1796 ;
d.  in  Evansville,  Ind.,  7  Oct.,  1873,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1814,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1817,  and  the  same  year  emigrated  to  Indi-
ana and  began  practice  at  Vincennes.  He  was
elected  prosecuting  attorney  soon  after  his  arrival,
and  in  1823  was  sent  to  the  legislature.  He  served
again  as  district  attorney  till  1830,  and  then  for
eight  years  as  circuit  court  judge.  In  1838-'42  he
was  receiver  at  the  land-office  in  Vincennes.  In
1851  he  removed  to  Evansville.  In  1855-'7  he
served  as  judge  of  the  court  of  land-claims,  which
was  created  for  the  adjudication  of  the  claims  of
the  early  settlers  in  Indiana  and  Illinois.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  for  two  succes-
sive terms,  serving  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,
1865.  He  drew  up  a  bill  that  was  unanimously
passed,  giving  the  twelve  surviving  veterans  of  the
Continental  army  $100  per  annum.  He  was  the
attorney  of  Col.  Vigo  in  his  case  against  the  gov-
ernment, involving  a  claim  for  supplies  that  had
been  furnished  to  Gen.  George  R.  Clarke  in  1779,
which  was  paid  in  1877  after  the  original  claimant
and  his  lawyer  were  both  dead.  Judge  Law  was  a
student  of  the  local  history  of  the  west,  and  before
entering  congress  was  long  president  of  the  Indi-
ana historical  society.  He  delivered  an  address  at
Vincennes  in  1839  on  the  early  history  of  that
place,  which  was  published  at  the  time  and  re-
issued in  an  enlarged  form  under  the  title  of  "  Co-
lonial History  of  Vincennes."

LAWLER,  Joab,  clergyman  and  politician,  b.
in  North  Carolina,  12  June,  1796:  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  8  May,  1838.  He  removed  to  Tennessee
with  his  father,  crossed  over  into  Alabama  about
1815,  and  in  1820  settled  in  Shelby  county,  where
he  became  judge  of  the  county  court,  and  in
1826-'31  was  in  the  legislature,  at  the  same  time
officiating  as  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church,  having
received  ordination  in  1826.  He  was  elected  to
the  state  senate  in  1831,  but  resigned  in  1832  in
order  to  accept  the  appointment  of  receiver  of  pub-
lic moneys  for  the  Coosa  land  district.  While  liv-
ing at  Mardisville,  Talladega  co.,  where  the  land-
office  was,  he  founded  two  churches,  and  was  their
pastor  until  he  was  elected  to  congress  in  August,
1835.  He  was  re-elected  in  1837,  but  died  during
the  first  session  of  that  congress.

LAWLER,  Michael  K.,  soldier,  b.  in  Illinois
about  1820.  He  raised  an  independent  company
of  volunteers  at  Shawneetown,  111.,  in  August,
1846,  and  served  as  its  captain  during  the  re-
mainder of  the  Mexican  war.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  joined  the  Union  army,  and  was
commissioned  colonel  of  the  18th  Illinois  infantry
on  20  May,  1861.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-
general  on  14  April,  1863.

LAWRANCE,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Cornwall,
England,  in  1750 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  Novem-


ber, 1810.  He  came  to  New  York  in  1767,  and  in
1772  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  where  he  attained
eminence.  In  1775  he  was  appointed  to  a  commis-
sion in  the  1st  New  York  regiment,  of  which  his
father-in-law,  Gen.  Alexander  McDougall,  was
colonel.  He  became  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Wash-
ington in  October,  1777,  and  as  judge-advocate-
general  presided  at  the  trial  of  Maj.  John  Andre.
After  the  war  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  the
law.  In  1785-'7  he  was  a  delegate  to  congress  un-
der the  confederation,  but  was  superseded  in  1788
in  consequence  of  his  advocacy  of  the  adoption  of
the  new  Federal  constitution.  In  1789,  when  he
was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  he  became  the
first  representative  from  New  York  city  in  the
first  U.  S.  congress.  He  also  served  in  the  second,
and  at  its  termination  in  1794  was  the  first  of  the
judges  that  were  appointed  for  the  U.  S.  district
court  of  New  York.  In  1796  he  resigned  on  being
chosen  U.  S.  senator,  and  served  as  such  until
1800,  presiding  over  the  senate  in  1798.  He  was
an  ardent  patriot  and  the  personal  friend  of  Wash-
ington and  Hamilton.  He  married  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Gen.  Alexander  McDougall,  in  1775,
and  Elizabeth  Livingston,  widow  of  James  Allen,
of  Philadelphia,  in  1791.

LAWRENCE,  Amos,  merchant,  b.  in  Groton,
Mass.,  22  April,  1786 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  31  Dec,
1852.  He  was  the  son  of  Samuel,  a  Revolutionary
officer,  and  was  educated  in  the  Groton  academy,
which  was  founded  by  his  father.  Amos  became  a
clerk  in  a  country  store  in  Dunstable  in  1799,  and
soon  afterward  in  Groton.  In  April,  1807,  he  went
to  Boston,  and,  upon  the  failure  of  his  employers
there,  began  business  upon  his  own  account  in  De-
cember, 1807,  as  a  dry-goods  merchant.  On  1  Jan.,
1814,  he  entered  into  a  partnership  with  his  brother
Abbott,  who  for  the  previous  five  years  had  been
his  chief  clerk,  which  continued  uninterruptedly
until  the  death  of  Amos.  The  business  operations
of  the  firm  were  conducted  with  great  success,  and
both  brothers  aided  in  the  establishment  of  manu-
factures in  New  England,  especially  the  cotton  in-
dustry of  Lowell,  where  they  established  a  factory
in  1830.  After  a  serious  illness  in  1831,  Amos  was
compelled  to  retire  from  active  participation  in  the
affairs  of  his  firm,  and  devoted  the  remaining  years
of  his  life  to  acts  of  beneficence.  From  1829  till
his  death  he  expended,  according  to  his  books,
$639,000  for  charitable  purposes.  Among  the  pub-
lic objects  of  his  bounty  were  Williams  college,  to
which  he  gave  nearly  $40,000;  the  academy  in
Groton,  the  title  of  which  was  changed  in  1843  to
Lawrence  academy,  on  which  he  expended  at  dif-
ferent times  $20,000 ;  Wabash  college,  Kenyon  col-
lege, the  theological  seminary  at  Bangor,  Me.,  and
several  others.  He  sent  collections  of  books  to
many  literary  institutions  and  deserving  persons.
He  established  and  for  some  time  maintained  a
child's  infirmary  in  Boston,  and  gave  $10,000  for
the  completion  of  the  monument  on  Bunker  hill.
His  private  benefactions  were  almost  innumerable,
and  several  rooms  in  his  house  were  used  as  the  re-
ceptacles of  articles  for  distribution.  At  his  death
his  fortune  was  estimated  at  $1,000,000.  See  "Ex-
tracts from  the  Diary  and  Correspondence  of  the
late  Amos  Lawrence,  with  a  Brief  Account  of  some
Incidents  in  his  Life,"  edited  by  his  son,  William
R.  Lawrence,  M.  D.  (Boston,  1855). — His  brother,
Abbott,  merchant,  b.  in  Groton,  Mass.,  16  Dec,
1792;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1855,  was
bound  an  apprentice  to  Amos  at  the  age  of  fifteen,
and  in  1814  became  one  of  the  firm  of  A.  and  A.
Lawrence,  which  for  many  years  conducted  a
prosperous  business  in  the  sale  of  foreign  cotton


LAWRENCE


LAWRENCE


639


and  woollen  goods  on  commission.  After  the  con-
clusion of  peace  in  1815  the  import  trade  greatly
expanded,  and  in  that  year,  and  regularly  there-
after, Abbott  visited  England  to  buy  goods.  Sub-
sequent to  1830  they  were  largely  interested  as  sell-
ing agents  for  the  manufacturing  companies  of

Lowell,  and  in  the  I
latter  part  of  his  I
life  Abbott  partici-  |
pated  extensively
in  the  China  trade.
In  1834  he  was
elected  a  represen-
tative in  congress
as  a  Whig,  and  was
appointed  a  mem-
ber of  the  commit-
tee on  ways  and
means.  He  de-
clined an  election
to  the  next  con-
gress, but  served
for  a  brief  period  in
1839-40.  In  1842
he  was  appointed  a
commissioner  for  the  settlement  of  the  northeast-
ern boundary  question,  and  arranged  with  Lord
Ashburton  the  basis  of  an  arrangement  that  was
satisfactory  to  both  the  American  and  English  gov-
ernments. He  was  president  of  the  Essex  com-
pany, which  was  organized  in  1844  to  build  the
manufacturing  town  of  Lawrence  on  the  Merri-
mack river.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  presi-
dential canvass  of  1844  as  a  supporter  of  Henry
Clay,  as  he  had  done  four  years  previously  in  the
election  of  Gen.  Harrison,  and  was  a  presidential
elector  in  that  year.  In  the  Whig  national  con-
vention of  1848  he  was  a  candidate  for  vice-presi-
dent, lacking  but  six  votes  of  a  nomination.  In
1849  President  Taylor  offered  him  a  seat  in  the
cabinet,  first  as  secretary  of  the  navy,  and  then  as
secretary  of  the  interior,  which  he  declined :  but
he  accepted  the  post  of  minister  to  Great  Britain,
which  he  occupied  until  October.  1852,  when  he
was  recalled  at  his  own  request.  He  took  up  the
negotiations  that  had  been  begun  by  his  predeces-
sor, George  Bancroft,  relative  to  the  projected
Nicaragua  canal,  and  discovered  in  the  archives
documents  that  invalidated  Great  Britain's  terri-
torial claims  in  Central  America:  but,  much  to  his
disappointment,  the  negotiations  were  transferred
to  Washington.  He  performed  an  important  ser-
vice in  the  settlement  of  the  fishery  question,  which
threatened  to  lead  to  a  serious  complication.  The
remainder  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  his  private
business.  In  1847  he  gave  to  Harvard  university
$50,000  to  found  the  scientific  school,  bearing  his
name,  that  is  connected  with  that  institution,  and
he  bequeathed  a  like  sum  in  aid  of  the  same  object.
He  also  left  $50,000  for  the  erection  of  model  lodg-
ing-houses, the  income  to  be  forever  applied  to
certain  public  charities.  See  "  Memoir  of  Abbott
Lawrence,"  by  Hamilton  A.  Hill  (Boston.  1884). —
Amos's  son,  William  Richards,  philanthropist,  b.
in  Boston,  3  May,  1812;  d.  in  Swampseott.  Mass.,
20  Sept.,  1885.  "  After  studying  in  the  Dummer
academy  at  Byfield  and  at  Gardiner,  Me.,  he  went
to  Europe  in"  1829  and  spent  five  years  in  travel
and  study.  He  was  living  in  France  at  the  time
of  the  French  revolution  of  July,  1830.  and  was
at  the  storming  of  the  barricades  in  Paris.  He
then  engaged  for  a  short  time  in  business,  but
afterward  studied  medicine  both  at  home  and
abroad,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  medical
school in 1845. Having engaged for a short


time  in  private  practice,  he  established,  with  his
father's  aid,  a  hospital  for  poor  children  in  Boston,
to  the  management  of  which  he  devoted  much  of
his  time.  Dr.  Lawrence  was  for  about  twenty
years  a  manager  of  the  Boston  dispensary,  a  mem-
ber of  the  original  board  of  trustees  of  the  Boston
city  hospital,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Church
home  for  orphans  and  destitute  children,  and  of  the
Boston  provident  association,  a  trustee  of  the  In-
dustrial school  for  girls  at  Lancaster,  and  presi-
dent of  the  Young  men's  benevolent  society.  He
was  an  active  member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  was  interested  in  the  foundation  of  several
parishes,  and  with  his  brother  built  the  Church  of
our  Saviour,  Longwood.  His  father's  "  Diary  and
Correspondence "  was  at  first  printed  by  hiin  for
private  distribution  ;  but,  being  urged  to  publish
it,  he  did  so,  and  the  work  obtained  a  circulation
of  22,000  copies  within  six  months,  and  has  been
many  times  republished.  He  was  the  author  also
of  a  "  History  of  the  Boston  Dispensary  "  (1859) ;
and  "  The  Charities  of  France  "  (1867). — Another
son.  Amos  Adams,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  31  Julv,
1814;  d.  in  Nahant,  Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1886,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1835,  entered  mercantile
life,  invested  capital  in  cotton-manufactories,  and
became  president  or  director  of  many  banks  and
industrial  corporations  in  Massachusetts;  also  an
officer  in  numerous  charitable  institutions.  In
1853-'4  he  associated  himself  with  Eli  Thayer  and
others  in  the  colonization  of  Kansas  and  its  develop-
ment into  a  free  state,  and  was  the  treasurer  and
principal  manager  of  the  Emigrant  aid  association,
which  sent  out  parties  of  settlers  from  New  Eng-
land during  the  Kansas  struggle.  He  was  twice
nominated  by  the  Whigs  and  Unionists  for  gover-
nor of  Massachusetts.  In  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  aided  in  recruiting  the  2d  Massachusetts
cavalry  regiment.  He  built  Lawrence  hall,  the
Episcopal  theological  school  in  Cambridge,  and
was  its  treasurer  for  many  years.  In  1857-'60  he
was  treasurer  of  Harvard  college,  and  in  1880  was
chosen  an  overseer.  The  town  of  Lawrence,  Kansas,
and  Lawrence  university,  at  Appleton,  Wisconsin,
were  named  in  his  honor.  A  "  Memoir  "  of  him  has
been  prepared  by  his  son  William  (Boston,  1888).

LAWRENCE,  Charles,  British  general,  d.  in
Halifax.  Nova  Scotia,  19  Oct.,  1760.  He  was  a  ma-
jor in  the  British  army  when  he  was  appointed,  19
Oct.,  1749.  a  member  of  the  council  of  Nova  Scotia.
The  following  spring  he  led  a  force  against  the
French  at  Chignecto,  but  they  withdrew  into  the
woods  after  burning  their  town.  In  the  summer
he  returned,  and  built  Fort  Lawrence  at  the  head
of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  He  administered  the  gov-
ernment after  the  retirement  of  Gov.  Hopson  in

1753,  and  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  in

1754,  and  governor  in.  1756.  He  was  promoted
colonel  in  September,  1757.  and  in  Loudon's  cam-

Eaign of  1757  commanded the reserve. On 31
tec.,  1757,  he  was  commissioned  as  a  brigadier-
general,  and  was  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg.

LAWRENCE,  Cornelius  Van  Wyck,  congress-
man, b.  in  Flushing.  N.  Y.,  28  Feb.,  1791  ;  d.  there,
20  Feb.,  1861.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, and  was  brought  up  on  a  farm.  He  went
to  New  York  city  in  1812,  engaged  in  mercantile

gursuits,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Jackson
•emocrat,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1833,  till  May,
1834.  when  he  resigned  in  order  to  enter  on  the
office  of  mayor  of  New  York  city,  to  which  he  was
the  first  person  chosen  by  popular  suffrage.  He
served  as  mayor  for  two  successive  terms,  and  in
1836  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Van  Buren
ticket. He  was  also  collector  of  the  port  of  New


640


LAWRENCE


York  for  two  years.  For  twenty  years  he  was
president  of  the  Bank  of  the  state  of  New  York,
and  an  officer  in  various  insurance  companies.  In
1856  he  retired  to  his  country-seat  at  Flushing.

LAWRENCE,  Eugene,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  10  Oct.,  1823.  He  was  educated  in  part  at
Princeton,  and  graduated  at  New  York  university,
studied  law  at  Harvard,  and  practised  for  some
time  in  New  York  city,  but  abandoned  law  for
literature,  and  spent  some  time  in  the  libraries  of
London  and  Paris.  He  has  contributed  to  cyclo-
paedias and  magazines,  presented  papers  before  the
New  York  historical  society,  and  published  "Lives
of  the  British  Historians"  (New  York,  1855);
"  Historical  Studies  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Literary  Prim-
ers "  (1880).  Among  his  contributions  to  periodi-
cal literature  are  many  articles  advocating  the  ex-
tension of  the  public-school  system  and  a  higher
range  of  gratuitous  instruction.  For  many  years
he  has  been  engaged  on  a  "  History  of  Rome.'

LAWRENCE,  George  Washington,  physician,
b.  in  Plymouth,  Pa.,  4  July,  1823.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1846,  and  then  went  to  Balti-
more, Md.,  but  later  removed  to  Nicholas,  Cal.
Subsequently  he  returned  to  Maryland  and  located
in  Catonsville,  but  in  1859  settled  in  Hot  Springs,
Ark.,  where  he  was  made  medical  examiner  and
resident  physician.  While  in  the  west  he  was  ap-
pointed assistant  surgeon-general  of  California,
and  during  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  Confed-
erate army  as  inspector  of  hospitals  in  the  Central
Army  of  Kentucky,  then  as  medical  director  of  the
3d  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  and  finally
as  chief  surgeon  of  the  bureau  of  conscription  in
the  trans-Mississippi  department.  Dr.  Lawrence
has  made  a  specialty  of  chronic  blood  and  nervous
diseases  and  skin  affections.  He  is  a  member  of
several  medical  societies,  and,  besides  papers  in
professional  journals,  has  published  a  "  Report  on
the' Climatology  of  Arkansas."

LAWRENCE,  James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  1  Oct.,  1781 ;  d.  at  sea,  6  June,  1813.
He  receWed  an  appointment  as  midshipman  in
1798,  and  was  made  acting  lieutenant  in  two  years,
though  he  did  not  receive  his  commission  until
1802.  He  joined  the  squadron  that  was  engaged
in  the  war  with  Tripoli,  and  distinguished  himself
while  commanding  a  gun-boat,  and  also  as  second
in  command  of  Decatur's  daring  and  successful

expedition  to  de-
stroy the  captured
frigate  "Philadel-
phia" under  the
walls  of  Tripoli.
Lawrence  spent
nearly  five  years  in
desultory  warfare
on  the  Barbary
coast.  In  1808  he
was  1st  lieuten-
ant of  the  "  Con-
stitution." and
then  in  command
of  the  "Argus,"
"  Vixen,"  and
"  Wasp."  He  was
promoted  to  cap-
tain in  1811,  and
placed  in  com-
mand of  the  "Hor-
net." After  war  with  Great  Britain  was  declared,
he  made  a  cruise  on  the  coast  of  Brazil.  He
blockaded  the  British  man-of-war  "  Bonne  Cito-
yenne"  in  the  port  of  San  Salvador,  and  chal-


(se-t-cz''  e^^c-e^


LAWRENCE

lenged  her  captain  to  meet  him  at  sea,  but  failed
to  bring  on  an  action,  and  was  driven  off  at  the
end  of  a  fortnight  by  a  ship  of  the  line.  Irrita-
tion at  having  been  passed  over  by  the  recent  pro-
motion of  Capt.  Charles  Morris  may  have  led  Law-
rence to  seek  for  distinction  in  this  manner.  A
few  weeks  later  he  fell  in  with  the  "  Peacock  "  brig-
of-war  off  Demerara.  Both  vessels  manoeuvred  for
the  weather-gage.  Finding  that  he  could  weather
the  enemy,  Lawrence  tacked,  and  broadsides  were
exchanged  at  short  range.  The  "Peacock"  at-
tempted to  wear,  and  the  "  Hornet,"  running  down
on  her  quarter,  poured  in  a  heavy  fire,  which  crip-
pled her  and  compelled  a  surrender  in  less  than
fifteen  minutes.  She  soon  sank,  drowning  several
of  her  crew  and  three  men  of  those  that  were  sent
from  the  "  Hornet."  Lawrence  had  a  slight  ad-
vantage in  weight  of  metal,  and  a  greater  in  the
superior  accuracy  of  his  fire,  as  shown  by  the  con-
dition of  his  opponent.  The  "  Peacock  "  lost  her
captain  and  nearly  one  third  of  her  crew,  while
the  "  Hornet  "  had  only  one  man  killed  and  two
wounded.  Lawrence  gained  considerable  reputa-
tion by  this  victory,  and  was  sent  to^Boston  to  take
command  of  the  frigate  "  Chesapeake."  A  few
days  after  his  arrival  a  challenge  was  sent  in  by
Capt.  Broke  (q.  v.),
of  the  British  frig-
ate "  Shannon,"
which  was  then
cruising  in  the  of-
fing. A  fair  meet-
ing was  promised,
and  it  was  pointed
out  that  he  could
not  hope  to  get
to  sea  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  Brit-
ish squadron.  In
view  of  his  previ-
ous action  in  chal-
lenging a  British  ship,  and  his  imperative  orders
to  proceed  to  sea,  Lawrence  was  unable  to  de-
cline a  combat  when,  on  1  June,  1813,  he  sighted
the  "  Shannon  "  and  ran  out  to  meet  her.  About
thirty  miles  off  Boston  he  came  up  with  her,  and
went  into  action  in  gallant  style.  After  a  few
broadsides,  the  "  Chesapeake"  fouled  her  opponent,
Lawrence  fell  mortally  wounded,  and  nearly  every
officer  with  him  was  soon  shot  down.  Broke  saw
that  the  men  were  flinching  from  their  guns,  and
led  his  boarders  to  the  "  Chesapeake's  "  deck.  The
crew  of  the  "  Chesapeake "  could  not  be  brought
up  to  repel  them.  Those  stationed  on  deck  fought
desperately,  but  in  disorder,  and  the  ship  was  soon
in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Several  incidents  of
the  action  show  that  the  crew  of  the  "  Chesapeake  "
lacked  discipline.  They  were  newly  shipped  and
imperfectly  trained.  The  "  Shannon  "  was  noted
for  excellent  gunnery  practice,  and  her  captain
had  supplied  sights  for  the  guns  at  his  own  ex-
pense. In  size  and  armament  there  was  not  much
disparity  between  the  ships.  Neither  was  much
injured  during  the  brief  action,  but  the  "  Chesa-
peake's "  loss  was  47  killed  and  99  wounded,  while
the  "  Shannon's  "  total  loss  was  only  85.  Of  the
"  Chesapeake's "  wounded,  14  died  in  a  few  days,
among  them  Capt.  Lawrence,  and  Ludlow,  his  1st
lieutenant.  Both  ships  were  taken  to  Halifax,  where
Lawrence  was  buried  with  military  honors.  There
was  much  exultation  in  England  over  a  victory
that  seemed  to  restore  the  prestige  of  the  British
navy.  Capt.  Broke,  who  had  been  severely  wounded
in  boarding  the  "  Chesapeake,"  was  made  a  baro-
net, and  received  other  marks  of  distinction. The


LAWRENCE


LAWRENCE


641


remains  of  Lawrence  and  Ludlow  were  restored  to
the  I'nited  States,  and  received  with  public  honors
at  Salem.  Judge  Joseph  Story  delivered  an  ora-
tion there,  and  they  were  buried  in  state  in  Trinity
church-yard,  New  York  city,  where  there  is  a  monu-
ment to  Lawrence's  memory,  represented  in  the
illustration.  The  intense  disappointment  that  was
caused  by  the  loss  of  the  "Chesapeake"  might
have  led  the  public  to  criticise  the  conduct  of
Lawrence  in  accepting  a  contest  for  which  he  was
so  poorly  prepared,  had  it  not  been  for  the  mem-
ory of  his  tragic  fate  and  his  dying  injunction,
*  Don't  give  up  the  ship."  If  he  erred  in  admit-
ting ehivalric  traditions  into  modern  warfare,  it
should  not  be  forgotten  that  he  associated  with
them  courtesy  and  humanity  in  the  highest  degree.

LAWRENCE,  Jonathan,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  19  Nov.,  1807;  d.  26  April,  1833.  He
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1823,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  where  he  gave  great
promise.  His  writings  in  prose  and  verse  were
collected  by  his  brother  (New  York,  1833).

LAWRENCE,  Joseph  Wilson,  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,  28  Feb.,  1818.
He  became  a  manufacturer  of  furniture  in  St.
John  in  1835,  and  for  more  than  twenty-five  years
continuously  was  a  director  of  the  Mechanics'  in-
stitute, of  which  he  has  been  president.  He
strongly  opposed  confederation,  and,  when  the
electorate  of  New  Brunswick  in  1805  pronounced
against  the  proposed  union  of  that  province  to  the
Dominion,  and  a  new  administration  came  into
power,  Mr.  Lawrence  was  appointed  president  of
the  European  and  North  American  railway  com-
mission, which  place  he  held  till  the  defeat  of  the
government  on  the  question  of  confederation  in
1866.  During  the  Mackenzie  administration  he
was  one  of  a  commission  to  report  on  the  practica-
bility of  the  construction  of  the  Baie  Verte  canal.
He  has  attained  note  as  an  antiquarian,  and  has

fublished  a  pamphlet  relative  to  the  route  of  the
ntercolonial  railway,  and  "  Foot-Prints,  or  Inci-
dents in  Early  History  of  New  Brunswick "  (St.
John.  1883);  and  has  in  preparation  "The  Judges
of  New  Brunswick  in  the  first  Fifty  Years."'

LAWRENCE,  William  jurist,  b.  in  Mount
Pleasant.  Jefferson  co.,  Ohio,  20  June,  1819.  He
was  graduated  at  Franklin  college,  Ohio,  in  1838,
and  two  years  later  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He
was  appointed  commissioner  of  bankruptcy  for
Logan  county  in  1842,  in  1845  prosecuting  attor-
ney for  the  same  county,  and  from  1845  till  1847
was  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Logan  Gazette,"
subsequently  conducting  the  "  Western  Law  Jour-
nal." He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1846-'7,  in  1848
a  member  of  the  state  senate,  in  1851  was  elected
reporter  for  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  and  in
1853  again  elected  to  the  state  senate,  where  he  ad-
vocated and  carried  bills  to  quiet  land  titles.  He
was  elected  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for
five  years  in  1856,  and  re-elected  in  1801,  but  re-
signed in  1864.  He  served  as  colonel  of  the  84th
Ohio  regiment  at  Cumberland  and  New  Creek  in  I
1862,  and  in  1863  was  tendered  a  U.  S.  judgeship  j
in  Florida,  which  he  declined.  He  was  then  elected
to  congress  from  Ohio  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  4  Dec,  1865,  till  3  March,  1871 :  and  from  1
Dec,  1873,  till  3  March,  1877.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Philadelphia  loyalist  convention  in  1866,  and
in  1880  was  appointed  first  comptroller  of  the  U.  S.
treasury,  which  post  he  resigned,  20  March,  1885.
Judge  Lawrence  is  the  only  one  of  the  first  comp-
trollers whose  decisions  were  regularly  published.
After  his  resignation  he  engaged  in  the  practice  of
law  in  Bellefontaine,  Ohio,  and  Washington.  In
vol.  in. — 41


tir-/3^


addition  to  monographs  and  speeches  on  political
and  literary  topics,  he  is  the  author  of  "  Reports  of
Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Ohio"  (Colum-
bus, 1852):  "The  Treaty  Question "  (Washington.
1871) ;  "  The  Law  of  Religious  Societies  and  Church
Corporations"  (Philadelphia,  1873-'4);  "The  Law
of  Claims  against  the  Government"  (Washington,
1875) ;  "  The  Organization  of  the  Treasury  Depart-
ment of  the  United  States  "  (1880) ;  and  "Decisions
of  the  First  Comptroller  in  the  Department  of  the
Treasury  of  the  United  States"  (6  vols.,  1881-5).

LAWRENCE,  William  Beach,  jurist,  b.  in
New  York  city.  23  Oct..  1800;  d.  there,  26  March,
1881.  His  ancestor  came  from  England  about  the
middle  of  the  17th  century,  and  received  a  patent
of  land  on  Long
Island.  His  father,
Isaac, was  a  wealthy
merchant  of  New
York.  Beach  was
graduated  at  Co-
lumbia in  1818,
studied  law,  went
to  Europe  in  1821,
andon  his  return  to
the  United  States
in  1823  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar.  In
1826  he  was  ap-
pointed secretary
of  legation  in  Lon-
don, and  in  1827  he
was  charge  d'af-
faires there. From

London  he  went  to  Paris,  and  on  his  return  to
New  York,  after  an  absence  of  four  years,  he
formed  a  law  partnership  with  Hamilton  Fish,
and  delivered  in  Columbia  college  lectures  on  po-
litical economy,  which  were  repeated  before  the
Mercantile  library  association,  and  published.  He
attained  eminence  at  the  bar  of  New  York,  and
promoted  the  construction  of  the  Erie  railway,
being  a  member  of  the  executive  committee.
About  1845  he  purchased  Ochre  Point,  at  New-
port, R.  I.,  erected  on  it  a  summer  residence,  and
resided  there  permanently  after  1850.  He  was
elected  lieutenant-governor  of  Rhode  Island  in
1851,  soon  afterward  became  acting  governor  of
the  state,  and  in  1853  was  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention.  During  his  term  as
governor  he  exerted  himself  to  procure  the  aboli-
tion of  imprisonment  for  debt,  and  was  instru-
mental in  defeating  the  passage  by  the  legislature
of  the  Maine  liquor  law.  Gov.  Lawrence  achieved
distinction  in  appearing  before  the  British  and
American  international  tribunal  at  Washington
in  1873  in  the  case  of  the  "  Circassian,"  involving
more  than  half  a  million  dollars.  He  won  the
suit,  obtaining  for  his  clients  the  reversal  of  a  de-
cision of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  the  only  instance
of  that  character  that  lias  occurred  in  the  country's
history.  Lawrence's  argument  in  the  case,  on
which  the  decision  was  rendered,  is  regarded,  both
in  this  country  and  in  Europe,  as  an  authoritative
exposition  of  several  important  points  of  interna-
tional law.  He  was  a  lecturer  on  international
law  in  1872-'3  in  the  law-school  of  Columbian
college,  Washington,  D.  C.  and  was  an  original
member  of  the  "  Institute  of  the  Law  of  Nations."
For  thirty  years  he  was  noted  for  the  generous
hospitality  that  he  dispensed  at  Ochre  Point,  where
he  had  collected  one  of  the  most  valuable  private
libraries  in  the  land.  He  was  an  active  member
of  the  New  York  historical  society,  and  from  1836
till  1845  its  vice-president. At  the  annual  meet-


642


LAWRIE


LAWSON


ing  on  3  Jan.,  1882,  James  Grant  Wilson  delivered
an  address  on  Gov.  Lawrence,  at  the  same  time
presenting  to  the  society  a  marble  bust  by  Dun-
bar, the  gift  of  his  eldest  son,  Isaac ;  and  also  an
unfinished  address  on  "  The  Life,  Character,  and
Public  Services  of  Albert  Gallatin,"  which  had
been  prepared  for  the  society.  Mr.  Lawrence  pub-
lished "  Address  to  the  Academy  of  Pine  Arts "
(New  York,  1825) ;  "  The  History  of  Louisiana,"
by  Barbe  Marbois,  translated,  with  notes  (Philadel-
phia, 1830);  "  Bank  of  the  United  States"  (Boston,
1831);  ''Institutions  of  the  United  States  "(New
York,  1832) ;  "  Lectures  on  Political  Economy  "
(1832) ;  "  Discourses  on  Political  Economy  "  (1834) ;
" Inquiry  into  the  Causes  of  the  Public  Distress"
(1834);  "History  of  the  Negotiations  in  Reference
to  the  Eastern  and  Northeastern  Boundaries  of
the  United  States"  (1841);  " Biographical  Memoir
of  Albert  Gallatin  "  (1843) ;  "  The  Law  of  Chari-
table Uses"  (1845);  a  new  edition  of  Wheaton's
"Elements  of  International  Law,"  with  annota-
tions and  a  notice  of  the  author  (1855) ;  "  Visita-
tion and  Search  "  (Boston,  1858) ;  "  Coinmentaire
sur  les  elements  du  droit  international "  (4  vols.,
Leipsic,  1868-'80) ;  "  Etude  de  droit  international
sur  le  mariage  "  (Ghent,  1870) ;  "  The  Treaty  of
Washington  "  (Providence,  1871) :  "  Disabilities  of
American  Women  married  Abroad"  (New  York,
1871) ;  "  The  Indirect  Claims  of  the  United  States
under  the  Treaty  of  Washington  of  May  8,  1871,
as  submitted  to  the  Tribunal  of  Arbitration  at
Geneva"  (Providence,  1872);  "Belligerent  and
Sovereign  Rights  as  regards  Neutrals  during  the
War  of  Secession"  (Boston,  1873);  "Administra-
tion of  Equity  Jurisprudence  "  (1874) ;  and  "  Etudes
sur  la  juridiction  consulaire  et  sur  l'extradition  "
(Leipsic,  1880). — His  son,  Albert  Gallatin,  sol-
dier, b.  in  New  York  city  in  1834 ;  d.  there,  1  Jan.,
1887,  received  his  early  education  at  the  Anglo-
American  academy,  Vevay,  Switzerland,  entered
Harvard  on  his  return,  and  was  graduated  in  1850.
He  then  studied  in  the  law-school  at  Harvard,
and,  after  graduation  in  1858,  entered  the  office  of
a  New  York  attorney,  but  soon  afterward  went  to
Vienna  as  an  attache  of  the  U.  S.  legation.  When
the  civil  war  began  he  returned,  joined  the  volun-
teer army,  was  commissioned  as  lieutenant  in  the
54th  New  York  infantry,  and  served  through  the
Maryland  and  Virginia  campaigns.  In  1804  he
was  made  a  captain  in  the  2d  U.  S.  colored  cavalry.
He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  bravery  at
Fort  Fisher,  where,  in  leading  the  forlorn  hope,
he  lost  his  right  arm,  and  on  25  March,  1805,  was
given  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general.  He  was
appointed  minister  to  Costa  Rica  on  2  Oct.,  1800,
but  was  recalled  in  1808  in  consequence  of  a  duel
that  he  fought  with  a  Prussian  attache  who  had
disparaged  the  United  States.  He  subsequently
served  as  a  commissioner  to  investigate  the  griev-
ances of  Sitting  Bull  and  his  tribe  and  other  dif-
ficulties with  the  Indians.

LAWRIE,  Alexander,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1828.  He  studied  in  the  National  academy
of  design  and  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine
arts,  and  subsequently  went  to  Europe,  where  he
became  a  pupil  of  Leutze  at  Diisseldorf,  and  of
Picot  at  Paris.  His  professional  life  has  been
passed  chiefly  in  New  York.  Mr.  Lawrie  was
elected  a  member  of  the  National  academy  in  1800,
and  is  also  a  member  of  the  Artists'  fund  societies
of  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  He  has  made  up-
ward of  a  thousand  crayon  heads,  including  like-
nesses of  Richard  H.  Stoddard  and  Thomas  Bu-
chanan Read.  One  of  his  best  oil  portraits  is  the
likeness  of  Judge  Sutherland,  painted  for  the  New


York  bar  association.  Among  his  best  landscapes
are  "  A  Valley  in  the  Adirondacks,"  and  "  Autumn
in  the  Hudson  Highlands  "  (1800).

LAWSON,  Alexander,  engraver,  b.  in  Raven-
struthers,  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  19  Dec,  1772;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  22  Aug.,  1840.  He  was  left  an
orphan  at  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  in  1792  came
to  this  country,  settling  in  Philadelphia,  where  he
became  an  engraver.  His  first  important  works
were  four  plates  for  Thomson's  "Seasons,"  exe-
cuted for  Thomas  Dobson,  bookseller,  which  at-
tracted much  favorable  notice.  In  1798  Mr.  Law-
son  formed  a  friendship  with  Alexander  Wilson,
for  whose  work  on  ornithology  he  engraved  the  best
plates,  and  he.  contributed  to  the  continuation  of
this  work  by  Charles  Lucien  Bonaparte.  He  also
engraved  plates  for  a  work  on  quadrupeds  by
George  Ord,  and  a  work  on  conchology  by  Prof.
Samuel  S.  Haldeman.  His  works  are  numerous,
and  include  plates  for  annuals,  maps,  charts,  and
illustrations  of  works  on  chemistry,  botany,  and
mineralogy. — His  son,  Oscar  A.,  engraver,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  7  Aug.,  1813;  d.  there  0  Sept.,  1854,
entered  the  office  of  the  U.  S.  coast-survey,  at
Washington,  D.  C,  and  remained  there  till  1851,
when  ill  health  compelled  him  to  return  to  Phila-
delphia. His  engravings,  chiefly  book-plates,  were
executed  with  taste  and  ability. — His  daughter,
Mary  Lockhart,  poet,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  pub-
lished poems  in  the  "  Knickerbocker  "  and  "  Gra-
ham's Magazine  "  that  were  characterized  by  ten-
der feeling  and  pleasing  fancy.  She  occasionally
wrote  in  the  Scottish  dialect.

LAWSON,  George,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Maryton,  Forfarshire,  Scotland,  in  1827.  He  studied
law  for  some  time  in  Dundee,  but  devoted  most  of
his  time  to  natural  history  and  zoology.  After  re-
moving to  Edinburgh  he  was  elected,  in  the  spring
of  1849,  assistant  secretary  and  curator  to  the
Botanical  society,  and  was  also  chosen  a  fellow
and  subsequently  assistant  secretary  of  the  Royal
physical  society.  He  aided  in  establishing  the
Scottish  arboricultural  society  in  1854,  in  1855  be-
gan a  class  in  practical  histology,  and  in  1851  gave  a
course  of  lectures  on  botany  in  Church  college.
In  1858  he  was  elected  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  history  in  Queen's  college,  Kingston,  Ont.,
and  subsequently  became  a  professor  in  Dalhou-
sie  college,  Halifax,  N.  S.,  where  he  now  is  (1887).
Besides  numerous  other  writings  he  has  published
a  volume  on  "  Water-Lilies  "  (Edinburgh,  1850).

LAWSON,  James,  author,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scot-
land. 9  Nov.,  1799  ;  d.  in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  20  March,
1880.  He  was  educated  at  Glasgow  university,
came  to  the  United  States  in  1815,  and  entered  the
counting-house  of  a  maternal  uncle  at  New  York.
On  the  failure  in  1820  of  a  mercantile  house  in
which  Mr.  Lawson  had  become  a  partner,  he  turned
his  attention  to  literature,  wrote  for  the  New  York
"  Literary  Gazette,"  and  was  associate  editor  of  the
"  Morning  Courier  "  in  1827-9,  and  of  the  "  Mer-
cantile Advertiser"  in  1829-33.  He  afterward
pursued  the  business  of  marine  insurance  in  New
York.  Mr.  Lawson  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Ed-
win Forrest  and  William  Gilmore  Simms.  He
published  "  Tales  and  Sketches  by  a  Cosmopolite '
(New  York,  1830);  "Poems"  (1857);  "Giordano,"
a  tragedy  that  was  first  performed  at  the  Park
theatre  in  November,  1828 ;  and  contributed  many
criticisms,  essays,  tales,  and  verses  to  periodicals.
See  Wilson's  "  Poets  and  Poetry  of  Scotland "  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1870).

LAWSON,  John,  historian,  b.  in  Scotland ;  d.  on
the  river  Neuse,  N.  C,  in  1712.  He  came  to  this
country  as  surveyor-general  of  North  Carolina,  and


LAWSON


LAY


643


began  his  surveys  in  1700,  but  fell  a  victim  to  the
jealousy  of  the  Tuscarora  Indians,  who  confounded
the  surveyor  of  their  territory  with  those  that  de-
spoiled them  of  it.  He  was  captured  while  he  was
exploring  North  Carolina  in  1712,  in  company  with
a  Swiss  named  Graffenried  (q.  v.).  The  latter  was
permitted  to  buy  himself  free,  but  Lawson  was
put  to  death,  probably  in  the  manner  he  thus  de-
scribes in  his  book :  "  Their  cruelties  to  their  pris-
oners are  such  as  none  but  devils  out  of  hell  could
invent.  .  .  .  Others  keep  their  enemy's  teeth  which
are  taken  in  war,  while  others  split  pine  into  splint-
ers and  stick  them  into  the  prisoner's  body,  yet
alive,  then  they  light  them,  which  burn  like  so
many  torches,  and  in  this  manner  they  make  him
dance  around  a  great  fire,  every  one  buffeting  and
deriding  him  till  he  expires."  Lawson  left  one  of
the  most  valuable  of  the  early  histories  of  the  Caro-
linas,  entitled  "  A  New  Voyage  to  Carolina,  con-
taining the  Exact  Description  and  Natural  History
of  that  Country,  together  with  the  Present  State
thereof;  and  a  Journal  of  a  Thousand  Miles  trav-
elled through  Several  Nations  of  Indians,  giving  a
Particular  Account  of  their  Customs.  Manners,
etc."  (London,  1700:  new  eds.  in  1709,  1711,  1714,
and  1718).  The  volume  is  a  quarto  of  258  pages,
well  illustrated  with  one  of  the  best  maps  of  the
time,  and  with  various  other  engravings,  chiefly  in
natural  history.  The  original  edition  is  now  very
rare ;  it  was  reprinted  at  Raleigh,  N.  C,  in  1860.

LAWSON,  Leonidas  Moreau,  physician,  b.  in
Nicholas  county,  Ky.,  10  Sept.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Cincin-
nati. Ohio,  24  Jan.,  1864.  His  father,  a  pioneer
Methodist  clergyman,  went  to  Kentucky  from  Vir-
ginia. The  son  was  graduated  at  Transylvania
university  in  1837,  made  professor  of  anatomy  and
physiology  there  in  1843,  and  was  sent  to  Europe
in  1846  to  investigate  the  progress  of  medical
science  in  England,  France,  and  Germany.  While
there,  he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  before  the
medical  department  of  University  college,  London.
On  his  return  in  1847,  he  became  professor  of  ma-
teria medica  and  pathology  in  Ohio  medical  col-
lege, Cincinnati,  and  was  transferred  in  1852  to
the  chair  of  the  principles  and  practice  of  medi-
cine. He  accepted  in  1854  the  professorship  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  Kentucky
school  of  medicine  at  Louisville,  but  resumed  his
chair  in  Ohio  medical  college  in  1857. He  became

Erofessor  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  University  of
louisiana  at  New  Orleans  in  1S60,  but  in  1861
returned  to  Ohio  medical  college,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death.  He  was  the  earliest  writ-
er of  acknowledged  ability  on  medical  subjects
in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi.  He  founded
the  "  Western  Lancet "  in  1847  and  contributed
abundantly  to  its  pasres,  conducting  it  till  1864.
He  published  an  edition  of  Dr.  James  Hope's
"  Morbid  Anatomy  "  (1844) :  and  "  Practical  Trea-
tise on  Phthisis  Pulmonalis,"  which  was  highly
praised,  and  became  a  standard  both  in  the  United
States  and  abroad  (Cincinnati.  1861).— His  daugh-
ter, Louise,  b.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  in  1861,  began
her  study  of  art  under  the  professor  of  sculp-
ture in  the  Cincinnati  school  of  art.  afterward  stud-
ied in  New  York  and  Boston,  and  then  went  to
Paris,  where  she  was  a  pupil  of  Rhodin.  She
went  to  Italy  in  1884  and  pursued  her  studies  in
Rome  and  Perugia.  The  directors  of  the  Academy
of  fine  arts  of  Perugia  have  conferred  upon  her
their  diploma  of  merit.  Among  her  works  are  the
"  Rhodian  Bov."  "  Avaconara."  and  "  II  Pastore."

LAWSON,  Robert,  soldier,  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  in  April,  1805.  He  became  major  of  the  4th
Virginia  regiment,  13  Feb.,  1776,  colonel  in  1777,


and  commanded  a  brigade  of  Virginia  militia  un-
der Gen.  Greene  at  the  battle  of  Guilford.

LAWSON,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  about
1781 :  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  15  May,  1861.  He  was
appointed  surgeon's  mate  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  1
March,  1809,  but  resigned  in  1811  to  take  a  similar
place  in  the  army.  In  May,  1813,  he  became  sur-
geon of  the  6th  infantry;  surgeon-general,  with
rank  of  colonel,  30  Nov.,  1836;  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  a  regiment  of  Louisiana  volunteers  in
the  Florida  war  in  1837  ;  and  commanded  a  battal-
ion of  New  York  and  Pennsylvania  volunteers  till
May,  1838.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
"for  meritorious  conduct"  as  chief  medical  officer
of  the  U.  S.  forces  in  the  Mexican  war,  30  May,
1848.  He  was  author  of  a  "  Report  on  Sickness  and
Mortality,  U.  S.  Army,  1819-39"  (1840);  and  of  a
"  Meteorological  Register,  1826-'30 ;  and  Appen-
dix for  1822-'5  "  (Philadelphia,  1840).

LAWTON,  Alexander  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in
Beaufort  county,  S.  C,  about  1818.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1839,  com-
missioned 2d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  artillery,  and
stationed  on  the  northern  frontier  till  1841,  when
he  resigned.  He  then  studied  law  at  Harvard,  and
in  1842  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Savannah,  Ga.
He  was  president  of  the  Savannah  and  Augusta
railroad  in  1849-'54,  state  senator  in  1854-'61,  and
president  of  the  Georgia  Democratic  convention  in
1860.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  colonel  of
the  only  volunteer  regiment  in  Georgia,  and  seized  .
Fort  Pulaski  under  Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown's  orders.
He  retained  command  at  Savannah  till  April,  1861,
when  he  became  brigadier-general  in  the  pro-
visional Confederate  army,  and  was  put  in  com-
mand of  the  coast  of  Georgia.  In  June,  1862,  he
was  transferred  to  Virginia,  and  served  in  several
campaigns.  He  received  the  command  of  a  divis-
ion, was  severely  wounded  at  Antietam,  and  after
his  recovery  served  as  quartermaster-general  till  the
close  of  the  war.  Afterward  he  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  law  in  Savannah,  and  was  in  the  legislature
in  1875.  In  1885  he  was  appointed  by  President
Cleveland  minister  to  Russia,  but  the  disabilities
that  he  had  incurred  by  taking  part  in  the  civil
war  against  the  United  States  government  had
not  been  removed,  and  the  appointment  could  not
be  confirmed.  Subsequently  he  was  appointed
United  States  minister  to  Austria.

LAY,  Benjamin,  philanthropist,  b.in  Colchester,
England,  in  1681 :  d.  in  Abington,  Pa.,  in  1760.  In
1710  he  settled  in  Barbadoes  as  a  merchant,  but,  be-
coming obnoxious  to  the  people  by  his  abolition  prin-
ciples, he  removed  to  the  British  colonies  and  settled
at  Abington,  Pa.,  where  he  was  one  of  the  earliest
and  most  zealous  opponents  of  slavery.  He  was
originallv  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  but
left  it  in'1717,  because  slave-holding  was  permitted
to  its  members.  Afterward  he  returned  to  the  so-
ciety when  it  assumed  an  attitude  that  was  similar
to  his  own.  Mr.  Lay  was  little  over  four  feet  in
height,  wore  clothes  of  his  own  manufacture,  and
was  distinguished  scarcely  less  for  his  eccentricities
than  for  his  philanthropy.  At  one  time  he  at-
tempted to  fast  for  forty  days,  but  long  before  the
expiration  of  that  time  his  abstinence  nearly
proved  fatal.  To  show  his  indignation  against
slave-holders  he  carried  a  bladder  filled  with  blood
into  a  meeting,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  congre-
gation thrust  a  sword,  which  he  had  concealed
under  his  coat,  into  the  bladder,  and  sprinkling  the
blood  on  several  Friends  exclaimed.  "  Thus  shall
God  shed  the  blood  of  those  who  enslave  their  fel-
low-creatures." Upon  the  introduction  of  tea  into
Pennsylvania  he  delivered  a  lecture  against  its  use


644


LAY


LAZARUS


from  the  balcony  of  the  court-house  in  Philadel-
phia, and  scattered  the  tea  and  broke  the  cups  and
saucers  that  his  wife  had  purchased  a  short  time
before.  In  1737  he  wrote  a  treatise  entitled  "All
Slave-Keepers,  that  keep  the  Innocent  in  Bondage.
Apostates."  It  was  printed  by  Benjamin  Franklin,
who  told  the  author,  when  the  manuscript  was
brought  to  him,  that  it  was  deficient  in  arrange-
ment. "  It  is  no  matter,"  said  Mr.  Lay,  "  print  any
part  thou  pleasest  first."  He  was  the  pioneer  of
the  abolitionists  in  the  colonies,  and  in  his  bold,
defiant  denunciation  of  slave-holding,  was  in
marked  contrast  to  Anthony  Benezet.  his  successor
in  this  work,  who  achieved  probably  greater  suc-
cess by  gentler  methods.

LAY,  Henry  Champlin,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  6  Dec,  1823 ;  d.  in  Easton,  Md.,
17  Sept.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Virginia  in  1842,  and  at  the  Episcopal
theological  seminary  in  Alexandria  in  1846.  He
was  ordained  deacon  by  Bishop  Meade  in  Christ's
church,  Alexandria,  10  July,  1846.  During  part
of  his  diaconate  he  served  in  Lynnhaven  parish,
Va.,  but  in  1847  he  removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.,
where  he  assumed  charge  of  the  Church  of  the
Nativity.  He  was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop
Cobbs,  12  July,  1848,  became  rector  of  the  Church
of  the  Nativity,  and  held  that  post  for  eleven
years.  Having  been  elected  missionary  bishop  of
Arkansas  and  Indian  territory,  he  was  consecrated
in  St.  Paul's  church,  Richmond,  Va.,  23  Oct.,  1859.
In  1868  the  diocese  of  Maryland  was  divided,  and
a  new  one  formed  on  the  eastern  shore,  under
the  title  of  the  diocese  of  Easton.  It  being  the
privilege  of  a  missionary  bishop  to  accept  the
oversight  of  an  organized  diocese  when  elected
thereto,  Bishop  Lay  was  translated  to  Easton,  1
April,  1869.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Hobart  college  in  1857,  and  from  William  and
Mary  in  1873,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Cambridge,
England,  in  1867,  at  the  time  of  the  Lambeth
conference.  Bishop  Lay  published  numerous  sin-
gle sermons  on  special  occasions,  also  "  Letters
to  a  Man  Bewildered  among  many  Counsellors  " ;
"  Tracts  for  Missionary  Use  " ;  "  Studies  in  the
Church  "  (New  York,  1872) ;  "  Ready  and  Desirous  "
(1885) ;  and  "  The  Church  and  the  Nation  "  (1885).

LAY,  John  L.,  inventor,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  14
Jan.,  1832.  He  entered  the  United  States  navy  as
2d  assistant  engineer  in  July,  1862,  and  designed
the  torpedo  by  means  of  which  Lieut.  William
B.  Cushing  (q.  v.)  destroyed  the  Confederate  ram
"Albemarle."  In  October,  1863,  he  was  promoted
to  1st  assistant  engineer,  and  in  1865,  after  the  fall
of  Richmond,  he  was  sent  up  James  river  in  ad-
vance of  Admiral  Porter's  fleet  to  remove  ob-
structions. Subsequently  he  entered  the  Peruvian
service,  and  was  engaged  in  preparing  fixed  mines,
and  in  placing  suspended  torpedoes  in  the  harbor
of  Callao,  in  order  to  prevent  the  Spanish  fleet
from  entering.  At  this  time  he  conceived  the
idea  of  a  locomotive  torpedo,  and  on  his  return
to  the  United  States  in  1867  he  invented  the  sub-
marine torpedo  that  bears  his  name,  which  has
since  become  the  property  of  the  U.  S.  government.
It  consists  of  a  cylindrical  boat  with  conical  ends,
carrying  a  spar  torpedo  or  containing  in  its  for-
ward end  about  100  pounds  of  some  explosive.
The  motive  power  is  obtained  from  an  engine  that
is  worked  by  carbon  -  dioxide  gas,  and  drives  a
screw  propeller.  The  carbon  dioxide,  in  a  liquid
form,  is  stored  in  the  forward  section  of  the  cylin-
drical body.  There  is  a  coil  of  rope  in  the  in-
terior that  connects  it  with  the  point  from  which
it  has  been  despatched,  and  the  torpedo  can  be


launched  from  shore  as  well  as  from  a  ship.  All
its  movements  are  within  the  control  of  the  open*!
tor,  who  steers  it,  regulates  its  machinery,  and  ex-
plodes it  by  means  of  a  compact  electric  battery
and  key-board.  The  course  of  the  boat  is  shown
to  the  operator  by  a  small  flag,  which  rises  above
the  surface  of  the  water,  and  a  speed  of  nine  miles
an  hour  has  been  attained  in  experiments.

LAY,  Oliver  Ingraham,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1845.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Thomas  Hicks,
studied  at  the  Cooper  institute  and  the  National
academy,  and  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  latter
in  1876.  His  works  include  portraits  of  Edwin
Booth  as  Hamlet  (1883),  Cyrus  W.  Field,  Miss
Fidelia  Bridges,  Henry  A.  Ferguson,  and  Winslow
Homer,  N.  A.:  "Watching  the  Snow"  (1879);
and  "  The  Two  Friends."

LAYE,  Francis,  British  soldier,  b.  about  1753;
d.  in  Newcastle,  England,  29  Jan.,  1828.  He  was
ordered  to  New  York  as  a  lieutenant  of  artillery
in  1773,  wounded  at  Bunker  Hill,  took  part  in
numerous  battles,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Alexander
Leslie's  expedition  to  Virginia.  He  was  severely
wounded  at  Camden,  under  Lord  Rawdon,  received
the  special  thanks  of  that  officer  for  his  services,
and  then  sent  home.  He  commanded  the  artil-
lery in  the  West  Indies  in  1800,  aiding  in  the
capture  of  the  islands  by  the  expeditions  under
Sir  John  Duckworth  and  Gen.  Trigge.

LAZARUS,  Emma,  poet,  b.  in  New  York  city,
22  July,  1849 ;  d.  there,  19  Nov.,  1887.  She  was
educated  privately  and  turned  her  attention  to  po-
etry. Her  "  Poems
and  Translations  "
(New  York,  1867),
were  followed  by
"  Admetus  and  oth-
er Poems"  (1871),
and  were  received
with  favorable  criti-
cism on  both  sides
of  the  Atlantic.
Her  first  impor-
tant prose  work  was
"  Alide,  an  Epi-
sode of  Goethe's
Life"  (Philadelphia,
1874),  after  which
she  contributed  her
poems,  including
numerous  transla-
tions from  Heine,  principally  to  "  Scribner's  Month-
ly." Her  translations  were  collected  and  published
as  "Poems  and  Ballads  of  Heine"  (New  York,
1881),  and  her  miscellaneous  poems  under  the  title
of  "  Songs  of  a  Semite  "  (1882).  Miss  Lazarus  was
a  Jewess,  and  wrote  for  "  The  Century "  several
very  striking  essays  on  topics  relating  to  the  con-
dition of  her  race,  notably  "  Was  the  Earl  of  Bea-
consfield  a  Representative  Jew?"  and  "Russian
Christianity  versus  Modern  Judaism."  She  also
wrote  critical  articles  on  Salvini,  Emerson,  and
others,  for  the  same  periodical.  During  the  win-
ter of  1882  thousands  of  Russian  Jews  came  to
New  York  to  escape  the  brutal  treatment  suffered
in  Russia,  and  it  became  necessary  to  devise  means
for  their  employment.  Miss  Lazarus  published
articles  in  the  "American  Hebrew,"  indicating  a
system  of  technical  education,  solving  the  diffi-
culty, and  the  project  was  soon  put  into  exe-
cution. During  this  year  her  "In  Exile,"  "The
Crowing  of  the  Red  Cock."  and  "  The  Banner  of
the  Jew"  were  written.  Her  last  writings,  a  se-
ries of  prose  poems,  appeared  in  1887.  She  also
translated  poems  from  the  mediaeval  Hebrew  writ-


LAZCANO


LEA


645


ers  Judah  Halevy,  Ibn  Gabirol,  and  Moses  ben
Esra,  several  of  which  have  been  incorporated  in
the  ritual  of  many  American  synagogues.

LAZCANO,  Francis  Xavier,  Mexican  author,
b.  in  Puebla,  Mexico,  22  Oct.,  1702;  d.  there,  15
May,  1762.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus,  22
Oct.,  1717.  and  taught  rhetoric  and  theology  in
Mexico  and  philosophy  in  Puebla.  Among  his
works  are  "  Vida  y  Virtudes  de  los  PP.  Keler  y
Provincial  Mateo  Ansaldo,  de  la  Compania  de
Jesus"  (Mexico,  1756);  "Brevis  notitia  appariti-
onis  mirabilis  B.  Marias  Virginis  de  Guadalupe  "
(Rome,  1757);  "Zodiaco  Guadalupano  "  (Mexico,
1776);  and  "Dos  tratados  de  los  Privilegios  espi-
rituales  de  los  Jesuitas  ye  de  los  Indianos."

LAZELLE,  Henry  Martyn,  soldier,  b.  in  En-
field, Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855,  assigned  to  the
infantry,  served  on  the  frontiers  of  Texas  and  New
Mexico  against  the  Apaches,  and  in  February,
1859,  was  severely  wounded  in  a  skirmish  with  the
latter  in  the  Sacramento  mountains.  While  sta-
tioned at  Fort  Bliss,  Tex.,  he  was  captured  by  the
Confederates  on  8  May,  1861,  and  held  as  a  prisoner
of  war  until  he  was  exchanged  on  28  July,  1862.  He
was  promoted  captain  on  11  June,  1861,  and  served
in  1862-3  as  assistant  commissary  of  prisoners  at
Washington,  D.  C,  and  in  August,  1862,  was  agent
for  the  exchange  of  prisoners  of  war  in  the  west.
He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  16th  New  York
cavalry  on  23  Oct.,  1863,  commanded  that  regi-
ment in  operations  against  Mosby's  guerillas,  and
was  afterward  placed  in  command  of  a  cavalry
brigade.  He  was  brevetted  major  in  the  regular
army  on  19  Sept.,  1864,  for  gallantry  in  the  action
near  Culpeper,  Va.,  resigned  his  volunteer  com-
mission on  19  Oct.,  1863,  and  served  subsequently
as  provost-marshal-general  of  the  military  division
of  west  Mississippi.  He  took  part  in  the  Yellow-
stone expedition  against  the  Sioux  Indians  in  1872,
being  engaged  in  the  action  on  Powder  river,
Dakota ;  also  in  the  Yellowstone  expedition  of  the
autumn  of  1873,  and  in  the  operations  against  the
Sioux  in  1874,  and  was  promoted  major  on  15  Dec,
1874.  In  1877  he  served  in  the  field  against  the
Indians  in  Montana.  He  was  commandant  of
cadets  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1879-82,
was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  on  26  June,  1882,
represented  the  United  States  at  the  military  ma-
noeuvres in  India  in  1885,  and  served  as  assistant
inspector -general  of  the  department  of  the  Co-
lumbia till  June,  1887,  when  he  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  bureau  of  publication  of  war  records
at  Washington,  D.  C,  succeeding  Col.  Robert  N.
Scott.  Lieut.-Col.  Lazelle  has  contributed  to  vari-
ous magazines,  and  has  published  "  One  Law  in
Nature "  (New  York,  1872),  and  a  prize  essay  on
"  Improvements  in  the  Art  of  War"  (1882).

LAZENBY,  William  Rane,  horticulturist,  b.
in  Benton,  N.  Y.,  5  Dec,  1852.  He  was  graduated
at  Cornell  in  1874,  and  subsequently  became  botan-
ist to  the  New  York  state  horticultural  society
and  horticultural  editor  of  the  "  Husbandman."
Later  he  was  appointed  assistant  professor  of  horti-
culture in  Cornell,  and  secretary  of  the  Cornell
experiment  station.  In  1881  he  was  called  to  the
chair  of  botany  and  horticulture  in  the  Ohio  state
university,  and  in  1883  he  received  the  additional
appointment  of  director  of  the  Ohio  experiment
station.  Prof.  Lazenby  was  the  author  of  the  bills
that  established  the  New  York  and  the  Ohio  ex-
periment stations.  He  has  also  held  the  office  of
lecturer  to  the  New  York  state  grange,  and  was
secretary  of  the  National  association  of  teachers  of
agriculture  and  horticulture  in  1883-7 ;  also  of  the


Society  for  the  promotion  of  agricultural  science.
Prof.  Lazenby  is  a  member  of  other  scientific
societies,  and  has  written  various  papers  on  cross-
fertilization,  forest-tree  culture,  and  similar  sub-
jects, which  he  has  contributed  to  the  proceedings
of  the  various  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member,
and  to  official  reports.

LEA,  Luke,  congressman,  b.  in  Surry  county,
N.  C,  26  Jan.,  1782;  d.  near  Fort  Leavenworth,
Kan.,  17  June,  1851.  He  removed  with  his  father
to  Tennessee  in  1790,  was  clerk  of  the  state  house  of
representatives,  and  commanded  a  regiment  under
Gen.  Jackson  during  the  Indian  wars  in  Florida.
From  1833  till  1837  he  was  a  representative  in  con-
gress from  Tennessee,  having  been  chosen  first  as
a  Democrat  and  afterward  as  a  Union  Democrat.
For  thirty  years  he  was  cashier  of  the  state  bank
of  Tennessee,  and  in  1849  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Taylor  Indian  agent  at  Fort  Leavenworth.
He  met  his  death  by  being  thrown  from  his  horse
while  returning  from  a  visit  to  1  he  tribes  near  that
place. — His  son.  John  M.,  jurist,  b.  in  Knoxville,
Tenn.,  25  Dec.  1818,  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Nashville  in  1837,  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1840,  and  began  the  same  year  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  Nashville.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.
district  attorney  in  1842.  and  in  1850  elected  mayor
of  Nashville.  During  a  cholera  epidemic  in  the  fol-
lowing year  he  was  constantly  among  the  sick  and
the  dying  in  the  hospitals,  and  by  his  judicious
measures  contributed  largely  to  the  stay  of  the
pestilence.  He  was  an  ardent  Unionist,  and  when
Nashville  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  government
troops  he  was  able,  from  his  influence  with  the
authorities,  to  do  much  to  lighten  the  hardships
which  were  necessarily  felt  by  the  families  of  the
refugee  Confederates.  In  1865.  at  the  urgent  re-
quest of  the  bar  of  Nashville,  he  accepted  from
Gov.  William  G.  Brownlow  the  appointment  of
judge  of  the  circuit  court,  but  resigned  in  the  fol-
lowing year,  and  also  declined  a  seat  on  the
supreme  bench  of  the  state.  When  a  bill  to  re-
mand Tennessee  to  military  control  was  before  the
reconstruction  committee  of  congress,  his  oppo-
sition prevented  a  report  in  its  favor,  and  secured
the  defeat  of  the  measure.  In  1875  he  was  elected
to  the  state  senate,  where  he  opposed  every  sug-
gestion for  repudiation  of  the  public  debt.  He  has
been  a  liberal  benefactor  to  the  Tennessee  school
for  the  blind,  the  Woman's  mission  home,  and
other  public  charities,  and  is  president  of  the
Tennessee  historical  society.

LEA.  Thomas  Gibson,  botanist,  b.  in  Wil-
mington, Del.,  14  Dec,  1785 ;  d.  in  Waynesville,
Ohio.  25  Sept.,  1844.  He  was  of  Quaker  descent,
and  his  ancestors  were  among  those  who  accom-
panied William  Penn  to  this  country.  He  was
occupied  with  business  pursuits  until  1827,  when
he  withdrew  from  all  mercantile  occupations  and
devoted  himself  to  botany.  He  was  an  industri-
ous collector,  and  left  at  his  death  an  extensive
herbarium  with  the  synonyms  and  description  of
many  new  species,  and  an  unfinished  catalogue.
There  was  published  posthumously  from  his  pa-

?ers,  by  William  S.  Sullivan,  a  "Catalogue  of
'lants,  Native  and  Naturalized,  collected  in  the
Vicinity  of  Cincinnati,  Ohio"  (Philadelphia,  1849).
— His  brother.  Isaac,  naturalist,  b.  in  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  4  March,  1792;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
8  Dec,  1886,  showed  in  early  youth  great  fondness
for  natural  history.  This  was  fostered  bv  his
mother,  who  was  familiar  with  botany,  and  was
developed  by  his  association  with  Lardner  Va-
nuxem,  who  encouraged  his  interest  in  mineralogy
and  geology. His  birthright  in  the  Society  of


646


LEA


LEACII


Friends  was  forfeited  by  his  joining  a  company
that  was  raised  for  the  defence  of  the  United  States
in  1814,  although  the  organization  was  never  called
into  service.  In  1815  he  was  elected  a  member  of
the  Academy  of  natural  sciences  in  Philadelphia,
and  soon  afterward  published  an  account  of  the
minerals  that  he  had  observed  in  the  vicinity  of
Philadelphia. This  was  his  first  paper,  and  ap-

E eared  in  the  "Journal  of  the  Academy."  lie
ecame  in  1821  a  member  of  the  publishing-firm
of  Mathew  Carey,  whose  daughter  he  had  mar-
ried, and  continued  as  such  until  1851.  Mean-
while his  leisure  was  devoted  to  science,  and  in
1825  he  began  a  series  of  memoirs  on  new  forms  of
fresh-watar  and  land  shells,  which  he  maintained
throughout  his  life.  The  genus  Unio  received  his
special  attention,  and  in  1827  he  published  his
first  paper  on  it,  afterward  issuing  a  synopsis  of  this
genus  (1836 ;  4th  ed.,  1870).  The  separate  papers
collected  under  the  title  of  "Observations  on  the
Genus  Unio"  (Philadelphia,  1827-74)  form  thirteen
quarto  volumes  magnificently  illustrated.  His
"Contributions  to  Geology"  (1833)  was  the  best
illustrated  paleontological  work  that  had  appeared
in  the  United  States.  In  his  "  Fossil  Footmarks
in  the  Red  Sandstones  of  Pottsville"  (1852)  he
described  his  discovery  of  the  saurian  footprints
in  the  sandstone  700  feet  below  the  conglomerate
of  the  coal-formation.  This  discovery  was  of
great  interest,  for  the  existence  of  an  air-breath-
ing animal  as  low  as  the  coal-measures  had  not
at  that  time  been  definitely  accepted.  Subse-
quently the  first  bones  and  teeth  ever  found  in
this  stratum  in  the  United  States  were  described  by
him,  and  he  named  the  animal  clepsysaurus  Penn-
sylvanicus.  The  number  of  new  forms,  recent
and  fossil,  that  were  made  known  by  him  amount
to  nearly  2,000.  These  descriptions  he  communi-
cated to  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences  in  Phila-
delphia. His  collection  of  fresh-water  shells,
marine  and  land  shells,  minerals,  fossils,  and  geo-
logical specimens  were  bequeathed  to  the  National
museum  in  Washington,  on  condition  that  a  room
be  devoted  exclusively  to  them  and  the  whole
called  the  "  Isaac  Lea  Collection."  Mr.  Lea  re-
ceived the'degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1852,
and  was  a  member  of  many  scientific  societies  in
the  United  States  and  Europe.  He  was  elected
president  of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural
sciences  in  1858,  and  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1860.  His  pa-
pers include  279  titles,  and  a  complete  bibliogra-
phy of  them,  illustrated  by  an  etched  portrait,  was
published  as  a  "Bulletin  of  U.  S.  National  Mu-
seum, No.  23  "  (Washington,  1885). — Isaac's  son,
Mathew  Carey,  chemist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
18  Aug.,  1823,  received  his  education  at  home,  and
then  turned  his  attention  to  chemistry,  which
he  studied  under  James  C.  Booth.  His  early  re-
searches were  numerous,  and  the  titles  of  nearly
fifty  papers  are  credited  to  him  by  the  younger
Silliman  in  his  "  American  Contributions  to  Chem-
istry "  (Philadelphia,  1875).  Mr.  Lea  has  become
best  known  through  his  large  contributions  to  the
literature  of  photographic  chemistry.  He  has
made  a  specialty  of  the  chemical  effects  of  light,
especially  on  the  haloid  salts  of  silver,  on  which
subject  he  has  published  numerous  papers  in  the
"  British  Journal  of  Photography  "  and  in  home
journals.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Manual  of  Pho-
tography "  (Philadelphia,  1868 ;  2d  ed.,  1871),  which
is  recognized  ,as  a  work  of  standard  authority
among  photographers.  —  Another  son,  Henry
Charles,  publisher,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19
Sept.,  1825,  was  educated  in  Philadelphia,  and  at


the  age  of  seventeen  entered  the  publishing-house
of  his  father,  ultimately  becoming  principal  of  the
concern.  Several  papers  on  chemistry  and  con-
chology,  notably  "  Description  of  New  Species  of
Shells,"  were  published  by  him.  During  the  civil
war  he  organized  the  system  of  municipal  bounties
to  encourage  volunteering,  and  also  wrote  much
for  the  periodicals.  Since  1857  he  has  devoted
special  attention  to  European  mediaeval  history,
and  has  published  "Superstition  and  Force :  Essays
on  the  Wager  of  Battle,  the  Wager  of  Law,  the
Ordeal  and  Torture  "  (Philadelphia,  1866) ;  "  Studies
in  Church  History:  the  Rise  of  the  Temporal
Power,  Benefit  of  Clergy,  Excommunication,  the
Earlv  Church  and  Slavery  "  (1869) :  "  An  Historical
Sketch  of  Sacerdotal  Celibacy"  (1867);  and  "A
History  of  the  Inquisition  of  the  Middle  Ages"
(3  vols..  New  York,  1888).

LEACH,  De  Witt  Clinton,  journalist,  b.  in
Clarence,  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Nov.,  1822.  He  is  a
descendant  of  Lawrence  Leach,  noticed  below.
His  great-grandfather,  Samuel  Leach,  was  killed
in  the  French  and  Indian  war,  and  his  grand-
father, Samuel  Leach,  served  in  the  Revolution.
He  received  his  education  in  the  public  schools,
and  on  reaching  manhood  began  teaching.  He
then  removed  with  his  parents  to  Michigan,  and  in
1849  was  chosen  to  the  legislature  of  that  state.
In  1850  he  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional
convention,  and  made  a  speech  before  it  urging
the  granting  of  the  right  of  suffrage  to  the  colored
race.  In  1854  he  was  appointed  state  librarian,
in  1855  he  became  editor  of  a  Republican  pa-
per at  Lansing,  and  in  the  following  year  he  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  till  1861.  He  was
commissioned  by  President  Lincoln  as  Indian
agent  for  Michigan,  retaining  the  office  four  years.
In  1867  he  was  for  the  second  time  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  a  Constitutional  convention  of  the  state.
About  this  time  he  purchased  the  "  Herald,"  Trav-
erse City,  Mich.,  which  he  published  and  edited
for  nine  years.  He  has  since  published  the  "  Pa-
triot Advertiser,"  Springfield,  Mo.,  and  the  "  North-
west Farmer,"  Traverse  City,  Mich.

LEACH,  James  Madison,  member  of  congress,
b.  in  Lansdowne,  Randolph  co.,  N.  C,  in  1824
He  received  a  college  education,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1842.  He  was  for  ten  years  in  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives of  North  Carolina,  six  years  in  the  state
senate,  and  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Fill-
more ticket  in  1856.  He  was  then  elected  to  con-
gress from  North  Carolina  as  a  Whig,  and  served
from  3  Dec,  1859,  till  3  March,  1861.  He  opposed
secession  till  the  beginning  of  hostilities,  but  was
for  one  year  a  field-officer  in  the  Confederate  army
and  a  member  of  the  Confederate  congress  in
1864-'5.  After  the  war  he  served  twice  in  the
state  senate,  and  was  elected  to  congress  for  two
consecutive  terms  as  a  Conservative,  serving  from
4  March,  1871,  till  3  March,  1875.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1876  and  1880.

LEACH,  Josiah  Granville,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cape
May,  N.  J.,  27  July,  1842.  His  father,  Rev.  Joseph
S.  Leach,  a  descendant  of  Lawrence  Leach  (q.  v.),
became  in  1855  editor  of  the  "  Ocean  Wave,"  the
first  newspaper  in  Cape  May  county,  N.  J.  The
son  entered  journalism  in  1860,  and  in  August,
1862,  enlisted  in  the  army,  and  served  as  sergeant,
sergeant-major,  and  lieutenant  in  the  25th  New
Jersey  regiment.  In  1866  he  was  graduated  in  law
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  admitted  to
the  Philadelphia  bar.  He  has  been  active  in  poli-
tics since  he  was  nineteen  years  old,  has  served  in
the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1881-r2  was


LEACH

one  of  the  leaders  of  the  independent  Republican
movement  in  Pennsylvania.  He  is  now  (1887)  com-
missary-general of  Pennsylvania.  He  has  written
largely  for  biographical  publications,  and  is  pre-
paring genealogies  of  the  Leach  and  Manning
families  in  the  United  States. — His  brother,  Frank
Willing,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cape  May,  N.  J.,  25  Aug.,
1855,  was  educated  in  public  and  private  schools,
studied  law,  and  in  1877  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  Philadelphia.  He  has  been  active  in  politics  in
Pennsylvania,  has  filled  the  office  of  secretary  to
numerous  state  conventions,  in  1881-'2  was  secre-
tary to  the  independent  Republican  state  com-
mittee, and  in  1885  was  chosen  secretary  to  the
Republican  state  committee,  which  position  he  still
holds.  Since  he  was  seventeen  years  old  he  has
contributed  largely  in  both  verse  and  prose  to  peri-
odicals. He  contributed  several  chapters  to  Scharff
and  Westcott's  "History  of  Philadelphia"  (3  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1883),  and  has  now  (1887)  in  prepara-
tion "  The  Signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence :  their  Ancestors  and  Descendants."

LEACH,  Lawrence,  colonist,  b.  in  England  in
1589:  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1662.  He  was  one  of
the  "  planters  "  that  came  over  with  Rev.  Francis
Iligginson  in  1629,  was  a  man  of  repute  in  Eng-
land, and  is  said  to  have  descended  from  John  Lc
Leche,  surgeon  to  King  Edward  III.  At  Salem  he
engaged  extensively  in  the  farming  and  milling
business,  his  large  plantation  and  mills  being  lo-
cated in  what  is  now  Beverly.  The  mills  were  of
such  importance  that  the  adjacent  towns  caused
public  roads  to  be  opened  to  them.  He  was  active
in  public  affairs,  was  one  of  the  twelve  jurymen
who  at  Boston  (1630)  served  on  the  trial  of  the
first  capital  case  that  was  heard  in  Massachusetts,
and  for  many  years  represented  Salem  in  the  legis-
lature. He  assisted  in  the  formation  of  the  first
church  that  was  organized  at  Salem. — His  son,
Robert,  became  one  of  the  founders  of  Manches-
ter, Mass.,  and  one  of  its  largest  landed  proprietors.
— Giles,  believed  to  have  been  his  youngest  child,
and  the  only  one  born  in  this  country,  was  a  founder
of  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  owning  one  of  the  "  fifty-
six  proprietary  interests  "  of  the  town.

LEACH,  Sheperd,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Easton,
Mass..  30  April,  1778;  d.  there,  19  Sept.,  1832.  His
father,  Abisha  Leach,  was  a  member  of  the  "com-
mittee of  correspondence  and  safety"  in  1775,  and
afterward  served  in  the  Revolutionary  army.  His
business  was  that  of  a  manufacturer  of  iron,  in
which  the  son  was  early  instructed  and  by  which
he  became  widely  known.  In  1802  he  purchased
his  father's  forge  and  furnace,  and  a  few  years
later  became  the  proprietor  of  the  Easton  furnaces.
He  was  ambitious  to  control  the  iron  business  in
New  England,  and  purchased  all  the  foundries  of
which  he  could  get  possession.  In  1823  he  was
running  seven  furnaces  in  Easton  besides  several  in
other  Massachusetts  towns,  at  which  time  and  up
to  the  time  of  his  death  his  operations  in  the  iron
trade  were  probably  more  extensive  than  those  of
any  other  man  in  New  England.  He  possessed
large  wealth,  of  which  he  gave  liberally  to  be-
nevolent objects.  He  was  commissioned  captain
of  militia  in  1804,  colonel  in  1816,  brigadier-gen-
eral in  1819.  and  major-general  in  1827,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.

LEACH,  William  Tiirnbnll,  Canadian  educa-
tor, b.  in  Berwick-on-Tweed,  Scotland,  2  March.
1805:  d.  in  Montreal.  Canada,  in  November,  1886.
He  graduated  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
studied  theology,  and  in  1831  was  ordained  a  min-
ister of  the  Presbyterian  church.  Shortly  after-
ward he  became  pastor  of  St.  Andrew's  church  at


LEAMING


64?


Toronto,  Canada.  In  1834  he  took  an  active  part
in  the  movement  to  establish  Queen's  college  at
Kingston.  In  1837-8  he  served  as  chaplain  to  the
93d  Highlanders,  and  in  1841  united  with  the
Church  of  England  and  became  the  first  incum-
bent of  St.  George's,  Montreal,  which  rectorship  he
filled  for  nearly  twenty  years,  resigning  it  to  de-
vote his  whole  time  to  his  educational  duties  in
connection  with  McGill  college.  The  congregation
was  then  the  strongest  of  the  Anglican  church  in
Canada.  He  also  filled  for  some  time  the  office  of
rector  of  Lachine.  With  McGill  college  he  was
prominently  identified  for  twenty-seven  years,  fill-
ing the  posts  of  professor  of  the  faculty  of  arts,
of  the  Molson  chair  Of  English  literature,  and  of
mental  and  moral  philosophy.  In  1854  he  received
the  dignity  of  canon  of  Christ  church  cathedral,
and  in  1865  he  was  appointed  archdeacon  of  Mon-
treal. At  the  time  of  his  death  he  held  the  offices
of  vice-principal  of  McGill  college  and  dean  and
emeritus  professor  in  the  faculty  of  arts.  He  was
an  eloquent  and  able  preacher.  Dr.  Leach  was
a  member  of  the  council  of  public  instruction. for
the  province  of  Quebec.  He  had  received  the  de-
grees of  D.  D.,  D.  C.  L.,  and  LL.  D.  His  lectures
on  English  literature  are  under  revision  for  publi-
cation by  Rev.  Edwin  Gould,  of  Montreal,  and  by
his  son,  David  S.  Leach,  a  lawyer  of  that  city.

LEACOCK.  Hamble  James,  missionary!  b.  in
duff's  Bay.  Barbadoes,  14  Feb.,  1795;  d.  in  Sierra
Leone,  Africa,  20  Aug.,  1856.  His  father  was  a
wealthy  slave-owner.  The  son  was  educated  at
Codrington  college,  Barbadoes,  studied  theology,
and  took  deacon's  orders  in  1826.  While  acting  as
assistant  priest  of  St.  John's  church  he  aroused
the  hatred  of  the  whites  by  freeing  his  slaves  and
by  extending  the  privileges  of  the  church  to  all  the
slaves  in  the  parish.  He  was  soon  afterward  trans-
ferred to  the  island  of  St.  Vincent,  and  then  to
Nevis,  where  he  became  pastor  and  rural  dean  of
St.  George's  church,  Chariest  own.  While  there  he
opposed  polygamy  successfully;  but  in  1835  a  diffi-
culty with  the  bishop  and  other  causes  led  him  to
remove  to  the  United  States,  where  he  settled  in
Lexington,  Ky.  He  secured  a  livelihood  by  teach-
ing till  1836,  and  then  held  various  pastorates.
He  preached  again  in  Barbadoes  from  1848  till
1855,  when  he  went  to  Africa  as  a  missionary,  be-
ing the  first  volunteer  to  the  West  Indian  church
association  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel  in
western  Africa.  He  landed  at  Freetown,  Sierra
Leone,  on  10  Nov.,  1855,  and  founded  a  mission
station  at  Rio  Pongas,  afterward  opening  a  school
for  boys,  which  became  a  great  success.  As  a  re-
sult of  his  labors  a  large  missionary  field  was
opened.  See  his  biography  by  his  friend,  Rev.
Henry  Caswall,  I).  D.  (London,  1857).

LEAKE,  Walter,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia  about
1760;  d.  in  Mount  Salus.  Hinds  co.,  Miss.,  17  Nov.,
1825.  He  fought  during  the  Revolutionary  war,
and  afterward  removed  from  Virginia  to  Hinds
county,  Miss.,  where  he  practised  law.  He  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  from  that  state,  and  served
from  11  Dec,  1817,  till  1820,  when  he  resigned.
Immediately  afterward  he  was  appointed  a  judge
of  the  circuit  court,  and  so  continued  till  1821,
when  he  was  chosen  governor  of  Mississippi,  which
office  he  held  till  1825.

LEAMING,  Jeremiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mid-
dletown.  Conn.,  in  1717;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
in  September,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1745.  and  officiated  as  lay-reader  in  the  Episcopal
church  in  Norwalk,  Conn.  In  1747  he  went  to
London  to  obtain  orders,  there  being  no  bishop  at
that  date  in  this  country. Having  been  ordained


648


LEAMING


LEARNED


deacon  and  priest,  he  returned  home  in  September,
1747,  bringing  a  letter  from  the  Society  for  propa-
gating the  gospel  in  foreign  parts,  signifying  that
the  society  approved  of  Mr.  Learning  for  a  school-
master, catechist.  and  assistant  minister.  He  en-
tered upon  his  duties  at  once  in  Trinity  church,
Newport,  R.  I.,  where  he  did  good  service  for  eight
years.  Thence  he  removed  to  Norwalk,  Conn.,  in
1755,  where  he  continued  for  twenty-one  years.
Mr.  Learning,  sympathizing  with  the  British  gov-
ernment at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  in
1776,  suffered  severely  in  consequence.  He  lost
his  furniture,  books,  and  papers  during  Tryon's
raid  on  Norwalk  in  July,  1779,  and  for  a  time  was
imprisoned  as  a  Tory.  After  the  war  he  was  for
several  years  minister  of  the  church  in  Stratford,
Conn.  In  1783  he  was  chosen  by  the  convention
of  Connecticut  to  be  their  first  bishop,  but  declined
the  appointment  on  account  of  age  and  infirmities.
In  1780  he  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Co-
lumbia. The  last  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in
New  Haven,  Conn.  Dr.  Learning  published  a
"  Defence  of  the  Episcopal  Government  of  the
Church"  (1766);  a  "Second  Defence,  in  Answer  to
Noah  Welles  "  (1770) ;  "  Evidences  of  the  Truths  of
Christianitv "  (1785);  and  "Dissertations  on  Va-
rious Subjects "  (1789).

LEAMING,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  20  Aug.,  1748;
d.  in  Philadelphia  in  1797.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  studied  law  with
John  Dickinson,  and  practised  his  profession  until
1776.  He  possessed  a  large  landed  estate  in  New
Jersey,  and  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion that  met  10  June,  1776,  to  frame  a  constitu-
tion for  that  state  and  declare  its  independence.
This  was  done  on  2  July,  two  days  before  the  pas-
sage of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  by  con-
gress. Throughout  the  whole  exciting  session  of
this  convention,  Mr.  Learning's  votes  and  influ-
ence were  invariably  given  to  the  patriot  cause.
He  declined  to  accept  the  protection  offered  by  the
British  to  those  who  would  not  bear  arms  against
them,  although  such  refusal  rendered  his  property
liable  to  confiscation.  He  returned  to  Philadel-
phia, and,  as  soon  as  war  was  decided  upon,  joined
the  patriot  army  and,  after  obtaining  a  knowledge
of  military  tactics,  returned  to  New  Jersey  to
arouse  the  people  in  the  neighborhood  of  his  estates.
He  first  obtained  the  signatures  of  every  able-
bodied  man  in  the  county  to  a  paper  pledging
them  to  support  their  country,  and  afterward  en-
rolled them  in  a  battalion  which  he  drilled,  officered,
and  equipped.  Going  back  to  Philadelphia  he
joined  the  1st  city  troop  of  light  horse,  which  acted
as  a  body-guard  to  Gen.  Washington  in  1776-'7,  un-
til the  formation  of  the  regular  Continental  cav-
alry. He  afterward  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Ger-
man town,  4  Oct.,  1777,  and  remained  a  member  of
the  troop  until  his  death.  The  war  having  closed
the  courts,  he  began  business  as  a  merchant,  be-
coming the  moneyed  partner  in  the  house  of  A.
Banner  and  Co.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
firm  lost  largely  by  the  dishonoring  by  congress  of,
the  Continental  currency,  they  persisted  in  im-
porting large  quantities  of  ammunition  and  other
necessaries  of  war,  and,  at  a  time  when  the  new
government  had  neither  money  nor  credit,  fur-
nished from  their  stock  a  large  quantity  of  such
equipments  as  were  needed.  At  the  time  when  the
army,  dispirited  by  defeat  and  in  want  of  the
common  necessaries  of  life,  turned  for  succor  to  a
bankrupt  government,  the  sum  of  £260,000  was
subscribed  for  their  relief  by  the  merchants  of
Philadelphia.  The  list  was  headed  by  Robert.
Morris  and  Blair  McClennaghan  with  £10,000  each.


The  next  largest  subscription  was  that  of  Mr.
Learning's  firm,  which  gave  £6,000.  The  latter
was  also  largely  engaged  in  privateering,  and  Mr.
Learning  said,  in  1785,  that  their  vessels  had  cap-
tured fifty  prizes  and  over  1,000  prisoners.

LEANDRO  DO  SACRAMENTO  (lay-an'-dro),
Brazilian  naturalist,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  16  Oct.,
1762;  d.  there,  7  April,  1809.  He  received  his
early  education  in  his  native  city,  but  finished  his
studies  in  Coimbra,  Portugal,  and  became  a  Car-
melite friar  in  1784.  He  returned  afterward  to
Rio  Janeiro,  and  until  his  death  was  president  of
the  botanical  garden,  which  he  greatly  improved.
He  specially  directed  his  attention  to  the  studies
of  the  Balanophorei,  and  gave  valuable  assistance
in  preparing  the  "Flora  Brasilica"  (1799-1828),
He  was  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Academies
of  sciences  in  Paris,  Berlin,  and  Vienna,  and  pub-
lished many  papers  in  the  proceedings  of  those  so-
cieties. He  wrote  most  of  his  works  in  French.
They  include  "  Memoires  sur  les  Archimedees  ou
Balanophorees,  plantes  particulieres  a  l'Amerique
meridionale"  (3  vols.,  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  Paris,
1798);  the  botanical  part  of  Geoff roy  St.  Hilaire's
"  Voyage  dans  le  district  des  diamants  et  sur  le
littoral  du  Bresil "  (6  vols.,  Paris,  1805) ;  "  Me-
moires sur  les  legumineuses  arborescentes  de  l'Ame-
rique du  Sud  "  (5  vols.,  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  Paris,
1806) ;  "  Etudes  sur  les  champignons  propres  a
l'Amerique  du  Sud"  (2  Vols.,  1807);  and  "Me-
moires sur  la  famille  des  pommes  de  terre,  iguames,
couscous,  et  autres  varietes  propres  a,  l'Amerique
du  Sud"  (6  vols.,  1808).  Many  of  these  are  ac-
companied by  colored  plates.

LEAR,  Tobias,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H..  19  Sept.,  1762;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.  11
Oct.,  1816.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1783,
and  in  1785  became  private  secretary  to  Gen.
Washington.  For  several  years  he  attended  to  the
details  of  Washington's  domestic  affairs,  and  was
liberally  remembered  by  him  in  his  will.  In  1802
Mr.  Lear  was  consul-general  at  Santo  Domingo,
and  in  1804  was  made  consul-general  at  Algiers.
In  1805  he  was  appointed  commissioner  to  conclude
a  peace  with  Tripoli,  but  discharged  this  duty  in
a  manner  that  gave  umbrage  to  Gen.  William
Eaton  (q.  v.),  who,  in  concert  with  Isaac  Hull  and
Hamet  Caramelli,  the  deposed  bey,  had  gained  im-
portant advantages  over  the  reigning  bey.  It  was
thought  that  to  accept  terms  of  peace  at  this  junc-
ture was  to  throw  away  the  fruits  of  hard-earned
success,  but  Mr.  Lear's  conduct  was  approved  by
his  government,  though  much  censured  by  a  part
of  the  public.  He  returned  shortly  afterward  to
the  United  States,  and  was  employed  in  Washing-
ton as  accountant  for  the  war  department  until
the  time  of  his  death  by  his  own  hand.

LEARNED,  William  Law,  jurist,  b.  in  New
London,  Conn.,  24  July,  1821.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1841,  studied  law  in  New  London  and
in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,
and  practised  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  until  1870,  when
he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  John  T.  Hoffman  a  jus-
tice of  the  supreme  court  to  fill  a  vacancy.  In  the
same  year  he  was  the  Democratic  nominee  for  the
office,  and  was  retained  in  it  by  the  popular  vote.
In  1875  Gov.  Samuel  J.  Tilden  appointed  him  pre-
siding justice  of  the  third  division.  At  the  close
of  his  term  he  was  continued  on  the  bench  in  the
election  of  1884,  and  reappointed  presiding  justice
by  Gov.  Grover  Cleveland.  He  has  been  a  pro-
fessor in  the  Albany  law-school  since  1874.  lectur-
ing on  equity,  Roman  law,  and  trials  of  cases,  and
is  president  of  that  institution.  Judge  Learned
edited  "  Madame  Knight's  Journal "  (Albany,  1865)


LEAVENWORTH


LEAVITT


649


and  "  Earle's  Microcosm ography  "  (1867),  and  com-
piled the  "  Learned  Genealogy  "  (1882).

LEAVENWORTH,  Abner  Johnson,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Waterbury,  Conn.,  2  July,  1803;  d.  in
Petersburg,  Va.,  12  Feb.,  1869.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1825,  studied  theology  at  Andover,
and  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a  Congregationalist,
22  April,  1828.  After  holding  charges  at  Orange
and  Bristol,  Conn.,  he  became  pastor,  in  1831,  of
the  Young  ladies'  seminary  at  Charlotte,  N.  C,  and
in  1838  removed  to  Warrenton,  Va.,  where  he  again
took  charge  of  a  school  until  he  was  called,  in
1840,  to  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Petersburg,  Va.
Resigning  in  1844,  he  became  the  principal  and
proprietor  of  the  Leavenworth  academy  and  col-
legiate seminary  for  young  ladies,  which  acquired
a  wide  reputation  throughout  the  south.  Mr.
Leavenworth  was  a  vigorous  and  ready  writer,  and
as  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Virginia  educa-
tional association,  which  he  was  largely  instrumen-
tal in  founding,  exerted  a  powerful  influence  for
good  throughout  the  southern  states.

LEAVENWORTH,  Elias  Warner,  lawyer,  b.
in  Canaan,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec,  1803 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,
N.  Y.,  25  Nov.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  "at  Yale
in  1824.  studied  law  with  William  (5.  Bryant,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827,  and  practised  in  Syra-
cuse, N.  Y.,  until  1850,  when  he  was  compelled  to
retire  through  ill  health.  He  was  mayor  of  the
latter  city  in  1849,  and  again  in  1859,  member  of
assembly  in  1850  and  1857,  secretary  of  state  of
New  York  from  1854  till  1855,  and  president  of  the
board  of  quarantine  commissioners  in  I860.  In
1861  he  became  a  regent  of  the  State  university,
and  he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  a  com-
missioner under  the  convention  with  New  Granada.
He  subsequently  filled  the  offices  of  president  of
the  board  of  commissioners  to  locate  the  State  asy-
lum for  the  blind,  trustee  of  the  State  asylum  for
idiots  for  over  twenty  years,  and  constitutional
commissioner.  He  was  elected  to  the  44th  con-
gress, serving  from  6  Dec.  1875,  till  3  March,  1877.
From  the  year  1879  till  his  death  he  acted,  with
Henry  R.  Pierson,  chancellor  of  the  board  of  re-
gents, and  Chauncey  M.  Depew.  as  a  commission  to
establish  and  define  the  boundaries  between  New
York  and  New  Jersey,  and  between  New  York  and
Pennsylvania.  Mr.  Leavenworth  was  the  author
of  an  elaborate  "Genealogy  of  the  Leavenworth
Family  in  the  United  States"  (Svracuse,  1873).

LEAVENWORTH,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  10  Dec,  1783;  d.  in  Cross  Timbers,
Indian  territory,  21  July,  1834.  He  studied  and
practised  law,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of
1812  was  appointed  captain  in  the  25th  infantry.
Promoted  major,  15  Aug.,  1813,  lieutenant-colo-
nel, 10  Feb.,  1818,  and  colonel,  16  Dec,  1825,  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallantry  at
the  battle  of  Chippewa,  colonel  for  meritorious  con-
duct at  Niagara,  where  he  was  wounded,  and  briga-
dier-general, 25  July,  1824,  for  "  ten  years'  faithful
service  in  one  grade."  He  subsequently  command-
ed an  expedition  against  the  Arickaree  Indians  on
the  upper  Missouri  river,  and  founded  several  mili-
tary posts  on  the  western  frontier,  one  of  which.
Fort  Leavenworth,  was  the  nucleus  of  the  Kansas
town  of  that  name.

LEAVITT,  Dudley,  almanac-maker,  b.  in  Exe-
ter, N.  H.,  23  May,  17*72;  d.  in  Meredith,  N.  H.,  15
Sept.,  1851.  He  at  one  time  taught  in  winter,  and
worked  on  his  farm  throughout  the  year,  making
almanacs,  arithmetics,  and  grammars  during  the
long  winter  evenings.  He  was  known  throughout
his  native  state  as  "  Old  Master  Leavitt,"  and  made
its  almanacs  for  over  half  a  century. In  1800  he


edited  the  Gilmanton  "  Gazette,"  and  in  1806  he
removed  to  Meredith.  In  1811  he  began  the  pub-
lication of  the  "  New  Hampshire  Register,"  which
he  continued  to  edit  for  several  years.

LEAVITT,  Humphrey  Howe,  jurist,  b.  in
Suffield,  Conn.,  18  June,  1796;  d.  in  Springfield,
Ohio,  in  March,  1873.  Pie  went  with  his  father  to
Ohio  in  1800,  received  a  classical  education,  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1816.  He
settled  at  Cadiz,  but  soon  removed  to  Steubenville,
and,  after  being  appointed  prosecuting  attorney,
was  chosen  successively  a  member  of  both  branches
of  the  Ohio  legislature  in  1825-6  and  '7.  He  was
then  elected,  as  a  Jackson  Democrat,  to  congress,
serving  from  6  Dec,  1830,  till  18  June,  1834,  when
he  resigned,  having  been  appointed  by  President
Jackson  judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  for  the  district  of
Ohio.  This  office  he  held  for  nearly  forty  years.
His  opinions  are  contained  in  Bond's  and  McLean's
reports  and  in  Fisher's  "  Patent  Cases,"  in  which
latter  branch  of  the  law  he  was  deemed  an  au-
thority. Judge  Leavitt  decided  the  Vallandighain
case  during  the  civil  war,  which  Mr.  Lincoln  said
was  worth  three  victories  to  him.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  sat  as  a  dele-
gate during  eleven  sessions  of  the  general  assembly.

LEAVITT,  John  McDowell,  clergyman,  b.  in
Steubenville,  Ohio,  10  May,  1824.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Jefferson  college  in  1841,  and  studied  law,
but  after  a  few  years'  practice  he  went  to  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  Gambier,  Ohio,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  1848.  Mr.  Leavitt  has  been  successively  pro-
fessor in  Kenvon  college  and  in  Ohio  university  ;
also  president  of  Lehigh  university,  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  and  of  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  Md.  For
several  years  he  was  editor  of  "  The  Church  Re-
view," and  he  founded  and  edited  "  The  Interna-
tional Review."  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Ohio  university  in  1874.  Dr.  Leavitt  has
published  "Hymns  to  our  King"  (1872):  "Old
World  Tragedies  from  New  World  Life  "  (1876) ;
"  Reasons  for  Faith  in  this  Nineteenth  Century  "
(1883);  and  "Visions  of  Solyma "  (1887);  and
he  has  also  contributed  freely  to  educational  and
current  literature.

LEAVITT,  Joshua,  reformer,  b.  in  Heath,
Franklin  co..  Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1794;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  16  Jan.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1814,  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1819,  and  began
to  practise  in  Putnev,
Vt.,  in  1821.  In  1823
he  abandoned  his  pro-
fession for  the  study
of  theology,  and  was
graduated  at  Yale
divinity  -  school  in
1825.  'He  settled  the
same  year  at  Strut-
ford,  Conn.,  where  he
had  charge  of  a  Con-
gregational church
until  1828.  In  1819,
while  a  student  of  law
in  Heath,  Mr.  Leavitt
organized  one  of  the
first  Sabbath-schools
in  western  Massachusetts,  embracing  not  only  the
children,  but  the  entire  congregation,  all  of  whom
were  arranged  in  classes  for  religious  instruction.
He  also  became  interested  in  the  improvement  of
the  public  schools.  Before  he  entered  the  theologi-
cal seminary  he  prepared  a  new  reading-book,
called  "Easy  Lessons  in  Reading"  (1823),  which


650


LEBAY


LEBORGNE  DE BOIGNE


met  with  an  extensive  sale.  He  subsequently  issued
a  "  Series  of  Readers  "  (1847),  but  these  were  not  as
popular.  When  the  American  temperance  society
was  formed  he  became  its  first  secretary,  and  was
one  of  its  travelling  agents,  in  many  places  deliver-
ing the  first  temperance  lecture  the  people  had
heard.  In  1828  he  removed  to  New  York  city  as
secretary  of  the  American  seamen's  friend  society
and  editor  of  the  "  Sailor's  Magazine."  He  estab-
lished chapels  in  Canton,  the  Sandwich  islands,
Havre,  New  Orleans,  and  other  domestic  and  for-
eign ports.  He  also  aided  in  founding  the  first
city  temperance  society,  and  became  its  secretary.
He  became  in  1831  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  new-
ly established  "  Evangelist,"  which  under  his  man-
agement soon  grew  to  be  the  organ  of  the  more
liberal  religious  movements,  and  was  outspoken
on  the  subjects  of  temperance  and  slavery.  Mr.
Leavitt  bore  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  early  anti-
slavery  conflict.  His  denunciation  of  slavery  cost
his  paper  its  circulation  in  the  south  and  a  large
proportion  of  it  in  the  north,  well-nigh  compelling
its  suspension.  To  offset  this  loss  he  undertook
the  difficult  feat  of  reporting  in  full  the  revival
lectures  of  Charles  Gr.  Finney  (q.  v.),  which,  though
not  a  short-hand  reporter,  he  accomplished  success-
fully. The  financial  crisis  of  1837  compelled  him,
while  erecting  a  new  building,  to  sell  out  the
"  Evangelist."  In  1833  he  aided  in  organizing  the
New  York  anti-slavery  society,  and  was  a  member
of  its  executive  committee,  as  well  as  of  that  of  the
National  anti-slavery  society  in  which  it  was  merged.
He  was  one  of  the  abolitionists  who  were  obliged  to
fly  for  a  time  from  the  city  to  escape  mob  violence.
In  1837  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Emancipator,"
which  he  afterward  moved  to  Boston,  and  he  also
published  in  that  city  "  The  Chronicle,"  the  earliest
daily  anti-slavery  paper.  In  the  convention  that
met  at  Albany  in  1840  and  organized  the  Liberal
party,  Mr.  Leavitt  took  an  active  part,  and  he  was
also  chairman  of  the  national  committee  from  1844
till  1847.  In  1848  Mr.  Leavitt  became  office-editor
of  the  New  York  "  Independent,"  and  was  con-
nected editorially  with  it  until  his  death.  Mr.
Leavitt  was  an  earnest  and  powerful  speaker.  In
1855  Wabash  college  conferred  on  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  Dr.  Leavitt's  correspondence  with  Rich-
ard Cobden,  and  his  "  Memoir  on  Wheat,"  setting
forth  the  unlimited  capacity  of  our  western  terri-
tory for  the  growth  and  exportation  of  that  cereal,
were  instrumental  in  procuring  the  repeal  of  the
English  corn  laws.  During  a  visit  to  Europe  he
also  became  much  interested  in  Sir  Rowland  Hill's
system  of  cheap  postage.  In  1847  he  founded  the
Cheap  postage  society  of  Boston,  and  in  1848-'9  he
labored  in  Washington  in  its  behalf,  for  the  estab-
lishment of  a  two-cent  rate.  In  1869  he  received  a
gold  medal  from  the  Cobden  club  of  England  for
an  essay  on  our  commercial  relations  with  Great
Britain,  in  which  he  took  an  advanced  position  in
favor  of  free-trade.  Besides  the  works  already
mentioned,  he  published  a  hymn-book  for  revivals,
entitled  the  "Christian  Lyre"  (1831).

LEBAY,  Theodore  Constant  (leh-bay').  French
colonial  officer,  b.  in  Lous-le-Saulnier  in  1795  ;  d.
in  Saint  Pierre,  Martinique,  17  Oct.,  1849.  He
entered  the  colonial  service  in  1817  as  secretary  of
the  treasurer  of  Guadeloupe,  served  in  Terre  Neuve,
La  Desirade,  and  Guadeloupe,  as  treasurer  in
1831-'4,  and  in  St.  Pierre  as  commissary  from  1835
till  his  death.  He  interested  himself  in  the  study
of  the  countries  where  he  resided,  and  tried to

Sromote  emigration  from  France  to  the  West  In-
ies. His  works  include  "  Statistique  de  la  Guade-
loupe" (2  vols.,  Paris,  1831);  "Des  productions,  de


la  consommation,  et  du  commerce  des  Antilles
Francaises  comparees  entre  elles"  (2  vols.,  1835);
'•Les  Antilles  sont- elles  propres  a  l'emigration
Francaise  ?  "  (1836);  "  Du  climat  des  Antilles"
(1839);  "Statistique  de  longevite  dans  les  Antilles
Francaises,  comparee  avec  les  tables  de  mortalitee
dressees  pour  la  France"  (1840);  "Des  pays  pro-
pres a  l'emigration  pour  la  race  Francaise  "(1842);
and  "Necessite  de  l'emigration  et  des  avantages
qu'elle  procure  a,  la  mere  patrie"  (1843).

LEBLOND,  Jean  Baptiste,  French  naturalist,
b.  in  Toulongeon,  near  Autun,  France,  2  Dec,
1747;  d.  in  Masille,  France,  14  Aug.,  1815.  He
devoted  himself  from  boyhood  to  the  study  of  the
natural  sciences,  and  was  named  in  1767  royal
commissioner  to  Guiana  to  make  researches  as  to
Peruvian  bark  and  other  objects  of  natural  his-
tory. He  spent  many  years  in  this  colony,  and
was  there  at  the  time  of  the  French  revolution.
After  his  return  to  France  he  resided  for  some
years  in  Paris,  where  he  read  several  papers  on
the  natural  history  of  Guiana  before  the  Agricul-
tural society  of  the  Seine  and  the  Academy  of
medicine.  He  wrote  "  Essai  sur  l'art  de  l'indigo-
tier"  (Paris,  1791);  "Moyen  de  faire  disparaitre
les  abus  et  les  effets  de  la  mendicite  par  l'emigra-
tion volontaire  a  la  Guiane  francoise " ;  "  Obser-
vations sur  le  cannellier.de  la  Guiane "  (Cayenne,
1795 :  enlarged  ed.,  Paris,  1796) ;  "  Memoire  sur  la
culture  du  cotonnier  a  la  Guiane"  (1801);  "Voy-
age aux  Antilles  et  a  l'Amerique  meridionale"
(Paris,  1813);  and  "Description  abregee  de  la
Guiane  francoise  "  (1814 ;  2d  ed.,  with  a  notice  on
the  author,  1825). — His  son,  a  native  of  Guiana,
published  "  Trente  annees  d'existence  de  F.-F.
Leblond,  creole  de  Cayenne,  fils  du  celebre  medecin-
naturaliste  de  ce  nom,  ancien  medecin  du  roi  a
la  Guiane  francoise,  nar  un  ami"  (Paris,  1834).

LEBORGNE  DE  BOIGNE,  Claude  Pierre
Joseph  (leh-born'),  French  colonial  administrator,
b.  in  Chambery,  8  March,  1764;  d.  in  Paris,  7  Jan.,
1822.  He  entered  the  French  service,  was  given
in  1786  an  appointment  in  the  colonial  depart-
ment, and  in  1791  sent  as  one  of  a  special  commis-
sion to  Santo  Domingo  to  pacify  the  island.  After
a  few  weeks'  stay  his  colleagues  gave  up  the  task
and  returned  to  France ;  but  he  remained  and  suc-
ceeded in  winning  the  confidence  of  the  negroes.
During  the  following  year  he  promulgated  the  de-
cree of  the  National  assembly  that  liberated  all
slaves  within  the  French  dominions ;  but  the
whites  opposed  the  decree,  and,  uniting  their
forces,  besieged  the  commissary  in  Jeremie  and
compelled  him  to  return  to  France.  The  home
government  sustained  Leborgne,  and  sent  him
again,  in  January,  1793,  to  the  West  Indies.  He
landed  in  La  Desirade,  where  he  organized  a  new
government,  and,  going  to  Guadeloupe,  restored
order  in  that  island.  He  had  nearly  succeeded  in
accomplishing  the  same  result  in  Martinique  when
that  colony  was  attacked  by  the  British  under
Admiral  Jervis.  Leborgne  at  first  defeated  the
enemy,  but  afterward  was  taken  prisoner,  and  the
colony  surrendered  on  11  May,  1793.  Leborgne
was  transported  to  England,  but  liberated  in  the
course  of  a  few  months.  In  1796  he  was  sent  again
to  Santo  Domingo  as  quartermaster  of  the  armies
of  Gen.  Sothonac  and  Gen.  Rigaud,  and  took  pos-
session of  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island,  which  the
treaty  of  Basel  had  given  to  France.  In  April,
1797,  he  was  elected  deputy  from  the  island  to  the
French  directory,  and  returned  in  1798  to  the
council  of  five  hundred.  He  protested  in  the  lat-
ter assembly  against  the  policy  of  Toussaint  i'Ou-
verture,  and  was  instrumental  in  the  government's


LE  CARON


LECLERC


651


opposition  to  the  measures  of  that  statesman.  He
refused  to  serve  under  Napoleon  I.,  and  in  1817
declined  the  governorship  of  La  Desirade.  He
published  "Essai  de  conciliation  de  l'Amerique,  et
de  la  necessite  de  l'union  de  cette  partie  du  monde
avec  l'Europe"  (Paris,  1817):  "Nouveau  systeme
de  colonisation  de  Saint  Domingue,  combinee  avec
la  creation  d'une  compagnie  de  commerce  pour  re-
tablir  les  relations  de  la  France  avec  cette  ile "
(1817);  "Considerations  generates  sur  le  regime
colonial  des  Europeens  dans  les  deux  Indes"
(1818) ;  and  "  Memoires  pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de
Saint  Domingue"  (2  vols.,  1819).

LE  CARON,  Joseph,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France ;  d.  there,  29  March,  1632.  He  became  a
member  of  the  Franciscan  order,  and  in  1615,  with
three  others,  followed  Champlain  to  Canada,  where
they  built  a  rude  monastery  on  St.  Charles  river,
near  Quebec.  Le  Caron  set  out  in  the  autumn  of
1615  with  some  French  traders  for  the  Huron
country,  and,  after  enduring  many  hardships,
reached  Lake  Huron,  being  the  first  white  man  to
enter  it.  He  landed  at  what  is  now  Simcoe  coun-
ty. Ontario,  and  chanted  the  first  Te  Deum  and
said  the  first  mass  in  the  country  of  the  Hurons
on  12  Aug.,  1615.  His  missionary  labors  were  not
successful,  and,  after  wintering  with  the  Indians.
he  set  out  with  Champlain  in  the  spring  of  1616
for  Quebec,  and  embarked  for  France.  On  his  re-
turn, in  March,  1617,  he  celebrated  the  first  Chris-
tian marriage  in  Canada.  In  1623  the  French  col-
ony feared  that  the  Hurons  would  abandon  their
alliance  and  join  the  Iroquois,  and  Le  Caron  was
sent  to  the  Huron  country  again,  but  with  no  suc-
cess. When  Quebec  was  taken,  in  July,  1629.  by
the  English,  Le  Caron  was  led  prisoner  to  Eng-
land, but  afterward  released.  He  endeavored  to
return  to  Canada  when  it  was  restored  to  France,
but  every  obstacle  was  thrown  in  his  way  by  the
commercial  company  that  ruled  the  colony,  and
he  is  said  to  have  died  broken-hearted  at  his  fail-
ure. Le  Caron  was  the  founder  of  the  Huron
mission,  and  left  Huron  vocabularies  that  were
found  useful  by  his  successors  in  Canada.

LECHFORD,  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  London
about  1590;  d.  there,  probably,  in  1644. He  emi-
grated to  Boston  in  1638,  and  was  the  first  to  prac-
tise law  in  New  England,  but  returned  to  England
in  1641.  much  dissatisfied  with  his  experience. He  |
published  "  Plaine Dealing,  or  Newes  from  New  i
England"  (London, 1642),  and  "New  England's
Advice  to  Old  England  "  (1644). A  new  edition  of
"  Plaine Dealing,"  with notes by  J. Hammond  !
Trumbull,  has  been  published  (New  York.  1867).  I
Although  written  »in  a  spirit  of  hostility  to  New
England,  it  contains  much  valuable  information.

LE  CLEAR,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Owego,  N.  Y.,
17  March,  1818;  d.  in  Rutherford  Park.  N.  J.,  26
Nov.,  1882.  He  began  to  follow  art  professionally
before  he  had  had  any  instruction,  and  his  later  ad-
vantages in  that  direction  were  confined  to  simple
observation  of  the  works  of  other  artists.  He  went
to  London,  Canada,  with  his  father  in  1832,  and
after  painting  portraits  for  a  time  there,  and  in
Elmira  and  Rochester,  he  made  his  way  to  New
York  city  and  opened  a  studio  in  1839.  In  1844-'60
he  resided  in  Buffalo,  but  afterward  returned  to
New  York.  In  1863  he  was  elected  a  National
academician.  Among  his  compositions  are  "The
Reprimand";  "Marble-Players";  and  "Itiner-
ants "  (1862).  Of  his  numerous  portraits,  one  of  the
best  is  that  of  George  Bancroft,  at  the  Century
club.  New  York ;  other  excellent  portraits  are  those
of  William  Cullen  Bryant,  Bayard  Taylor,  Presi-
dent Fillmore,  and  Edwin  Booth  as  Hamlet.


LE  CLERC,  French  adventurer,  b.  in  Tirles-
Mou tiers,  near  Mezieres,  France,  about  1750;  d.  in
Mezieres  in  1817.  Although  he  was  generally
known  by  the  name  of  Le  Clerc,  his  real  name
seems  to  have  been  Milfort.  Having  killed  a  ser-
vant of  the  king's  household  in  a  duel,  according  to
his  own  story,  he  took  refuge  in  the  United  States,
and  went  to  the  country  of  the  Creek  Indians,
whose  friendship  he  gained  by  adopting  their  cus-
toms. He  fought  at  the  head  of  these  savages  in
the  wars  against  the  frontier  settlements,  and  was
named  by  them  Tastanegy,  or  "great  warrior."
Hearing  of  the  changes  that  the  revolution  had
wrought  in  France,  he  went  to  Paris  and  offered
his  services  and  those  of  his  adopted  tribe  in
strengthening  the  French  possessions  in  North
America.  He  was  well  received  by  the  Directory,
but  the  sale  of  Louisiana  to  the  United  States  in
1803  rendered  his  mission  useless.  It  was  feared
that  he  might  make  a  bad  use  of  his  influence
among  the  Indians  if  he  returned  to  this  country,
and  he  was  therefore  ordered  to  remain  in  France,
where  he  was  given  the  commission  of  general  of
brigade.  He  lived  quietly  in  France  until  the  in-
vasion of  1814,  during  which  he  performed  various
exploits.  He  published  "  Memoires,  ou  coup  d'oeil
rapide  sur  mes  voyages  en  Louisiane.et  mon  sejour
dans  la  nation  Creeke"  (Paris,  1802).  These  me-
moirs are  interesting;  but  they  could  not  have
been  written  by  Le  Clerc,  who  was  quite  illiterate,
and  had  almost  forgotten  his  native  language  in
the  course  of  his  travels.

LECLERC,  Victor  Emmanuel  (h  h-clairk ),
French  soldier,  b.  in  Pontoise,  17  March,  1779;  d.
in  Tortugas.  2  Dec,  1802.  He  enlisted  in  the  army
as  a  private  in  1790.  became  a  captain  in  1793,  and
in  1796  a  major-general.  He  served  in  Italy  under
Bonaparte,  did  good  service  at  the  battles  of  Ro-
veredo  and  Rivoli,  and  married,  in  Milan  in  1797,
Pauline  Bonaparte,  sister  of  the  future  emperor-
Through  his  timely  arrival  with  his  grenadiers,
Bonaparte  was  enahled  successfully  to  cany  out
his  coup  d'etat  in  1799,  and  Leclerc  was  rewarded
with  the  commission  of  lieutenant-general.  In
1801  Leclerc  defeated  the  Prince  of  Brazil  at  Bada-
joz,  and  in  December  following  he  was  appointed
commander-in-chief  of  the  expedition  to  Santo
Domingo,  which  was  then  in  possession  of  the  ne-
gro insurgents  under  Toussaint  l'Ouverture.  An
army  of  33.000  veterans  was  assembled  at  Roche-
fort,  and  a  fleet  of  eighty  sail  under  Villaret  Joy-
euse  (q.  v.)  transported  the  troops  and  co-operated
in  the  campaign.  Madame  Leclerc  accompanied
her  husband  to  participate  in  his  triumph,  and  sev-
eral poets  were  in  the  retinue  of  the  general  to
celebrate  his  victories.  On  28  Jan..  1802,  the  fleet
anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Samana.  Three  divisions
were  immediately  sent  to  different  parts  of  the  isl-
and, while  Leclerc  himself  set  sail  for  Cape  Fran-
cais,  where  he  arrived  on  3  Feb.  Henry  Chris-
tophe.  then  in  command  at  Le  Cap.  tried  to  nego-
tiate with  the  French  while  awaiting  instructions
from  Toussaint  l'Ouverture;  but  Leclerc  refused,
and  on  6  Feb.  landed  his' forces,  whereupon  Chris-
tophe  set  fire  to  the  town  and  withdrew  with  his
troops  to  the  mountains.  Leclerc  afterward  en-
tered into  negotiations  with  Toussaint.  and  through
the  sons  of  the  latter,  whom  he  had  brought  from
France,  tried  to  win  him  to  the  French  cause.
Failing  in  this  attempt,  he  issued  proclamations  to
the  inhabitants,  endeavoring  to  enlist  them  against
Toussaint,  and.  joined  by  a  considerable  number
of  negroes,  opened  the  campaign,  which  lasted
three  months  and  devastated  the  country.  Leclerc
was  besieged  at  Cape  Francais  so  closely  that  a  large


652


LECLERQ


LE  CONTE


number  of  his  forces  fell  a  prey  to  a  pestilence ;
but  after  receiving  re-enforcements  by  sea  from  the
other  generals,  who  had  so  far  been  successful,  he
defeated  Toussaint.  and  on  9  May  the  latter  signed
a  treaty,  acknowledging  the  dominion  of  France
over  the  whole  island.  In  spite  of  the  treaty,  Le-
clerc  ordered  the  arrest  of  Toussaint  a  few  days
later,  and  sent  him  to  Prance  as  a  prisoner.  Then,
assuming  the  rank  of  governor-general,  he  began
to  carry  out  his  plan  of  re-enslaving  the  negroes.
A  rising  took  place  in  the  interior,  and  the  whole
island  was  soon  ablaze  with  the  fires  of  the  insur-
rectionists. The  negroes  now  committed  horrible
acts  of  vengeance,  and  the  French  retaliated  with
revolting  cruelties.  The  latter  were  soon  worn  out
and  decimated  by  yellow  fever  and  want  of  pro-
visions. The  blacks  gained  ground,  and  Leclerc
retired  to  the  island  of  Tortugas.  where  he  died  of
yellow  fever.  See  Thomas  Madion's  "  Histoire
d'Haiti "  (Port  au  Prince,  1847) ;  Pamphile  La-
croix's  "  Memoires  pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de  la
revolution  de.  Saint  Domingue"  (Paris,  1819);  and
Ardouin's  "  Etudes  sur  l'histoire  d'Haiti "  (1833).

LECLERQ,  Chretien,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Artois,  France,  about  1630;  d.  in  Lens,  France,
about  1695.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Recollet
order  of  Franciscans,  and  in  1655  was  sent  as  a
missionary  to  Canada.  Landing  on  the  coast  of
the  island  of  Gaspe,  he  learned  the  language  of  the
Indians  and  labored  among  them  for  six  years,
when  he  was  sent  to  France  to  obtain  permission
to  found  a  house  of  Recollets  in  Montreal.  He
was  successful,  and  returned  to  his  mission  in
1662.  After  passing  several  years  in  Canada  and
meeting  with  little  success  in  his  work,  he  re-
turned to  France,  and  was  made  guardian  of  the
convent  of  Lens.  He  wrote  "  Nouvelle  relation
de  la  Gaspesie  "  (Paris,  1691) ;  "  Etablissement  de
la  foi  dans  la  nouvelle  France "  (2  vols.,  Paris,
1691 ;  English  translation,  by  John  G.  Shea,  New
York,  1881).  Charlevoix  complains  that  Leclerq
seldom  speaks  of  any  religious  affairs  except  those
in  which  his  order  took  part,  and  that  he  treats
of  the  history  of  the  colony  only  as  far  as  Count
Frontenac  was  connected  with  it,  and  that  there
is  reason  to  believe  that  Frontenac  had  some  part
in  composing  the  work.  Leclerq  claims  for  the
Recollets  the  honor  of  being  the  first  to  compile
a  dictionary  of  the  languages  of  the  Indians  of
Canada,  and  insists  on  the  superiority  of  his  order,
as  Indian  missionaries,  to  the  Jesuits.

LE  CONTE,  Lewis,  naturalist,  b.  near  Shrews-
bury, N.  J.,  4  Aug.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Liberty  county,  Ga.,
9  Jan.,  1838.  He  was  descended  from  a  French
Huguenot  family  that  settled,  about  the  close  of
the  17th  century,  in  New  Roehelle,  N.  Y.,  and  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1799,  after  which  he
studied  medicine  with  Dr.  David  Hosack.  Mr.
Le  Conte  was  soon  afterward  called  to  the  charge
of  the  family  estates  of  Woodmanston,  in  Georgia,
and  gave  up  his  profession,  but  cultivated  several
branches  of  the  natural  and  physical  sciences.  He
established  a  botanical  garden  on  his  plantation,
which  was  especially  rich  in  bulbous  plants  from
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  a  laboratory  in  which
he  tested  the  discoveries  of  the  chemists  of  the  day.
In  consequence  of  an  aversion  to  appearing  in  print,
he  published  nothing,  but  gave  the  fruits  of  his
investigations  to  his  scientific  friends.  The  mono-
graphs of  his  brother,  John  Eatton  Le  Conte,  were
enriched  by  his  observations.  Stephen  Elliott,  of
South  Carolina,  and  other  contemporary  botanists,
acknowledged  their  obligations  to  him.  He  also
devoted  much  attention  to  mathematical  subjects,
and  among  others  to  that  of  "  magic  squares." His


death  resulted  from  poison  that  was  taken  into  his
system  while  he  was  dressing  a  wound  for  a  inein-
ber  of  his  family. — His  brother,  John  Eatton,
naturalist,  b.  near  Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  22  Feb.,  1784:
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21  Nov.,  1860,  entered  the
corps  of  topographical  engineers  of  the  U.  S.  army
in  1818,  and  remained  in  the  service  till  18:!  1,  at-
taining, in  1828,  the  brevet  rank  of  major  for  ten
years'  faithful  service.  He  had  been  associated
with  his  elder  brother  in  the  study  of  botany  in
New  York  city.  Maj.  Le  Conte  published  special
studies  on  utricularia,  graticla,  ruellia,  tillandsia,
viola,  and  pancratium  ;  also  on  native  grape-vines,
tobacco,  and  the  pecan-nut.  He  also  wrote  several
papers  on  mammals,  reptiles,  batrachians,  and
Crustacea,  mostly  of  a  systematic  character,  and
collected  a  vast  amount  of  original  material  for  the
natural  history  of  American  insects,  as  may  be  seen
by  a  single  instalment  that  was  published  in  Paris
in  conjunction  with  Boisduval  upon  "  North
American  Butterflies."  His  specialty  was  coleop-
tera.  particularly  during  the  latter  part  of  his
career,  though  he  published  only  four  papers  upon
them,  and  chiefly  upon  the  histerida?.  He  not
only  gathered  a  considerable  collection,  but  left
an  extensive  series  of  water-color  illustrations  of
American  insects  and  plants  that  he  made  with
his  own  hands.  Maj.  Le  Conte  was  a  member  of
the  New  York  lyceum  of  natural  history,  and  vice-
president  of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural
sciences,  to  whose  proceedings  he  contributed  sci-
entific papers. — Lewis's  son,  John,  physicist,  b.  in
Liberty  county,  Ga.,  4  Dec,  1818,  was  graduated  at
Franklin  college,  of  the  University  of  Georgia,  in
1838,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,
New  York,  in  1841.  He  settled  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
in  1842,  and  there  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion, but  in  1846  was  called  to  the  chair  of  natural
philosophy  and  chemistry  in  Franklin  college,  which
he  held  until  1855.  He  lectured  on  chemistry  at  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  at  New  York,
in  1855-'6,  and  in  1856  became  professor  of  natural
and  mechanical  philosophy  in  South  Carolina  col-
lege, at  Columbia.  In  1869  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  physics  and  industrial  mechanics  in  the
University  of  California,  and,  after  holding  the
office  of  president  of  the  university,  in  addition  to
his  chair,  during  1876-'81,  retired  in  the  latter
year  to  the  chair  of  physics,  which  he  still  (1887)
retains.  His  scientific  work  extends  over  nearly
fifty  years,  and  at  first  was  in  the  line  of  medi-
cal investigation,  but  subsequently  became  con-
fined almost  exclusively  to  physical  science.  It
includes  more  than  fifty  communications  that  have
appeared  in  scientific  journals  both  in  the  United
States  and  in  England,  also  in  the  "  Proceedings
of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement
of  Science,"  of  which  organization  he  was  general
secretary  in  1857.  During  the  same  year  he  de-
livered a  course  of  lectures  on  the  "  Physics  of
Meteorology"  at  the  Smithsonian  institution  in
Washington,  D.  C.  and  in  1867  one  of  four  lectures
on  the  "  Stellar  Universe  "  at  the  Peabody  insti-
tute in  Baltimore,  Md.  Prof.  Le  Conte  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of
Georgia  in  1879.  Since  1878  he  has  been  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  of  science.  A  treatise
on  "  General  Physics,"  which  had  been  nearly  com-
pleted by  him,  was  destroyed  by  fire  in  the  burning
of  Columbia.  S.  C,  in  1865. — Another  son  of  Lewis.
Joseph,  geologist,  b.  in  Liberty  county,  Ga.,  26
Feb.,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Franklin  college,  of
the  University  of  Georgia,  in  1841,  obtained  his
medical  degree  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons,  New  York,  in 1845,  and,  settling in


LE  CONTE


LEDERER


653


Macon,  Ga.,  practised  for  several  years.  In  1850  he
entered  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,
and  there  devoted  his  attention  principally  to  the
natural  sciences  and  geology  under  Louis  Agassiz.
He  received  the  degree  of  B.S.  in  1851,  and  during
the  same  year  ac-
companied Agassiz
on  an  exploring  ex-
pedition to  Florida.
In  1852  he  became
professor  of  natural
science  in  Oglethorpe
college,  and  a  year
later  was  called  to
the  chair  of  geology
and  natural  history
in  Franklin  college.
He  accepted,  in  1857,
the  professorship  of
chemistry  and  geolo-
gv  in  South  Carolina

X,  ^a>^^& rllege-  amvn  imi

// <*-^c-  ^ — *-^ became  professor  of
r  geology  and  natural

history  in  the  University  of  California,  which  chair
he  still  (1887)  retains.  During  the  civil  war  he  served
as  chemist  to  the  Confederate  laboratory  for  the
manufacture  of  medicines  in  1862-'3,  and  in  a  simi-
lar capacity  to  the  nitre  and  mining  bureau  in
1864— '5.  Prof.  Le  Conte's  work  includes  numerous
original  investigations  in  geology  and  physiologi-
cal optics,  and  he  has  written  essays  on  subjects
pertinent  to  the  development  theory,  that  have
been  contributed*  to  scientific  journals,  to  the  re-
views, or  to  the  transactions  of  societies  with  which
he  is  connected.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1879,  and  is
a  member  of  numerous  scientific  societies,  includ-
ing the  National  academy  of  sciences,  to  which  he
received  an  election  in  1875.  Prof.  Le  Conte  lias
published  "  Religion  and  Science,"  a  series  of  Sun-
day lectures  (New  York,  1873) ;  "  Elements  of  Ge-
ology "  (1878) :  "Sight :  an  Exposition  of  the  Prin-
ciples of  Monocular  and  Binocular  Vision  "  (1880) ;
^'Compendof  Geology"  (1884):  and  "Evolution:
its  Nature,  its  Evidences,  and  its  Relation  to  Re-
ligious Thought "  (1887).— John  Eatton's  son.  John
Lawrence,  naturalist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  13  Mav,
1825;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  15  Nov.,  "1883,  was
graduated  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Emmetts-
burg,  Md.,  in  1842,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  of  New  York  in  1846.  As  a  student
he  devoted  considerable  attention  to  the  study  of
natural  history,  visiting  Lake  Superior  and  the
upper  Mississippi  in  1844.  the  Rocky  mountains  in
1845,  and  the  Lake  Superior  region  again  in  1846.
He  visited  this  region  for  a  third  time,  with  Louis
Agassiz,  in  1848,  and  during  the  following  year
went  to  California,  where  he  remained  until  1851,
exploring  the  Colorado  river.  In  1857  he  spent
several  months  in  Honduras,  during  the  survey  of
the  interoGeanic  route  across  that  country,  and  in
1867  he  visited  parts  of  Colorado  and  New  Mexico
while  the  survey  for  the  Kansas  Pacific  railroad  was
in  progress.  Subsequently  he  made  other  expe-
ditions at  various  times  to  Panama,  Europe,  Egypt,
and  Algiers,  collecting  valuable  material  on  the
fauna  of  the  world.  In  1852  he  moved  to  Philadel-
phia, where  he  resided  until  his  death.  Soon  after
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the
U.  S.  army  as  surgeon  of  volunteers,  and  was  ad-
vanced to  the  office  of  medical  inspector  with  the
rank  of  lieulenant-colonel,  which  he  retained  until
the  end  of  the  war.  He  became  chief  clerk  of  the
U.  S.  mint  in  Philadelphia  in  1878,  and  held  that


place  until  his  death.  Dr.  Le  Conte  was  a  member
of  various  scientific  societies,  held  the  vice-presi-
dency of  the  American  philosophical  society  in
1880-'3,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Ameri-
can entomological  society.  He  was  one  of  the
charter  members  of  the  National  academy  of  sci-
ences, and  in  1873  was  elected  president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, delivering  his  retiring  address  at  the  Detroit
meeting  on  "  Modern  Biological  Inquiry,"  in  which
he  collated  the  known  facts  concerning  the  actual
distribution  of  certain  American  coleoptera.  Dr.
Samuel  H.  Scudder  calls  him  "  the  greatest  en-
tomologist that  this  country  has  yet  produced."
His  specialty  was  the  coleoptera,  and  full  lists  of
his  papers  are  given  by  Louis  Agassiz  in  his  "  Bib-
liographia  Zoologhv,"  and  by  Hermann  A.  Hagen
in  his  "  Bibliotheca  Entoniologiea."  The  Smith-
sonian collections  include  his  "  Classification  of  the
Coleoptera  of  North  America"  (part  i.,  1862;  part
ii.,  1873) ;  "List  of  Coleoptera  of  North  America"
(part  i.,  1866) ;  and  "  New  Species  of  North  Ameri-
can Coleoptera  "  (part  i.,1866  ;  part  ii.,  1873).

LECOR,  Carlos  Federico  (lay-kor ),  Portuguese
soldier,  b.  in  Algarve,  Portugal,  about  1765;  d.  in
Sacramento,  Brazil,  in  1836.  He  was  educated  in
Holland,  his  father's  native  country,  and  was  in-
tended for  a  commercial  career,  but  entered  the
Portuguese  army,  and  at  the  close  of  the  Napo-
leonic wars  was  a  lieutenant-general.  He  was  sent
to  Brazil  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  4,500  men  in
1816,  and  captured  Montevideo,  20  Jan.,  1817.  The
Banda  Oriental  was  then  exposed  to  a  revolution-
ary movement  in  consequence  of  the  intrigues  of
Jose  Artigas,  and  Lecor,  after  routing  the  latter,
persuaded  the  country  to  recognize  the  provisional
authority  of  the  court  of  Brazil.  He  was  rewarded
by  his  sovereign  with  the  title  of  Baron  de  Laguna.
\Vhen  it  was  seen  that  the  Brazilian  occupation
was  to  be  permanent,  there  was  an  insurrection  in
Montevideo  that  resulted  in  a  disastrous  war.
Finally  Lecor  was  commissioned  by  the  court  to
propose  that  the  inhabitants  should  place  them-
selves under  the  protectorate  of  Brazil,  while  re-
taining their  independence.  This  proposition  was
submitted  to  an  assembly  of  notables  ;  but,  in  con-
sequence of  the  intrigues  of  Lecor,  the  deputies
pronounced  in  favor  of  the  union  of  the  country
with  the  united  kingdom  of  Portugal,  Brazil,  and
Algarve.  In  1822  Dom  Pedro  I.,  who  had  been
proclaimed  emperor  of  Brazil,  sent  Lecor  to  Monte-
video to  persuade  or  force  the  deputies  to  swear  to
accept  the  act  of  union.  The  city  was  divided  on
the  question,  and  Lecor  took  command  of  the  Bra-
zilian troops  against  those  who  favored  a  continu-
ance of  the  union  with  Portugal;  but  the  Portuguese
party  was  victorious,  and  Lecor  was  forced  to  leave
Montevideo.  Afterward  the  place  fell  into  his
hands  again,  and  he  kept  control  of  it  till  1825.
The  discontent  of  the  inhabitants  ended  in  an  in-
surrection which  was  supported  by  the  government
of  Buenos  Ayres.  The  army  of  Lecor  was  defeated,
but  he  maintained  his  position  in  Montevidep  until
re-enforced  from  Brazil  in  1826.  After  this  he  was
dismissed,  and  retired  to  private  life.

LEDERER,  John,  traveller.  He  explored  the
Alleghany  mountains  in  16(i9-'70.  and  wrote  in
Latin  an  account  of  his  discoveries,  which  was
translated  by  Sir  William  Talbot  with  the  title
"  The  Discoveries  of  John  Lederer  in  Three  Several
Marches  from  Virginia  to  the  West  of  Carolina  and
other  Parts  of  the  Continent ;  begun  in  March,
1669,  and  ended  in  September,  1670.  Together
with  a  General  Map  of  the  whole  Territory  which
he  traversed  "  (London,  1672). The  translator  says


654


LEDLIE


LEDYARD


in  the  preface  that  Lederer's  presumption  in  going
"  where  Englishmen  never  had  been,  and  whither
some  refused  to  accompany  him,"  brought  on  him
"  affronts  and  reproaches  "  in  Virginia,  so  that  he
was  obliged  to  flee  to  Maryland.  Here  he  became
known  to  Talbot,  who,  though  at  first  prejudiced
against  him  by  popular  report,  found  him  "a  mod-
est, ingenious  person  and  a  pretty  scholar,"  and
determined  to  vindicate  him  by  translating  his  ac-
count of  his  travels.  Lederer  appears  to  have
reached  only  the  "top  of  the  Apalatean  moun-
tains," but  gives  reasons  for  supposing  that  "  they
are  certainly  in  a  great  error  who  imagine  that  the
continent  of  North  America  is  but  eight  or  ten
days'  journey  over  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Indian
ocean." Sir  William's  volume  is  rare.

LEDLIE,  James  Hewett,  soldier,  b.  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  14  April,  1832 ;  d.  in  New  Brighton,  Staten
island,  N.  Y.,  15  Aug.,  1882.  He  studied  at  Union
college,  became  a  civil  engineer,  and  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  was  commissioned  major  of
the  19th  New  York  infantry,  which  in  the  autumn
of  1801  became  an  artillery  regiment.  He  was  made
chief  of  artillery  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  G.  Fos-
ter late  in  1862,  and  on  24  Dec.  promoted  to
brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers.  lie  served  in
North  and  South  Carolina,  and  subsequently  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  where  his  brigade  made
the  assault  on  the  crater  after  the  mine-explosion
at  Petersburg.  On  23  Jan.,  1865,  he  resigned,  de-
clining a  commission  in  the  regular  army,  and  re-
turned to  his  profession.  He  took  the  entire  con-
tract for  the  construction  of  bridges,  trestles,  and
snow-sheds  on  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  built  the
breakwaters  of  Chicago  harbor,  and  was  engaged
in  railroad  construction  in  the  west  and  south.
At  the  time  of  his  death  Gen.  Ledlie  was  chief  en-
gineer of  railways  in  California  and  Nevada,  and
president  of  the  Baltimore,  Cincinnati,  and  West-
ern railroad  construction  company.

LEDO,  Joaquim  Goncalves  (lay-do),  Brazilian
statesman,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  11  Dec,  1771;  d.  in
Macacu,  19  May,  1847.  He  studied  at  Coimbra,
but  was  not  graduated  on  account  of  feeble  health.
In  1821  he  was  elected  from  Rio  Janeiro  to  the
constituent  assembly  that  opened  its  sessions  in
that  year.  He  was  active  in  exciting  the  people  to
rebellion  against  the  Portuguese  authorities,  and
as  soon  as  independence  was  secured,  in  1825,  was
elected  to  parliament.  He  gained  the  friendship
of  the  Emperor  Dom  Pedro  I.  and  the  sympathies
of  a  great  part  of  the  intelligent  people  of  the
country,  but  he  had  to  contend  against  the  broth-
ers Andrada  (q.  v.),  who  were  his  political  adver-
saries. In  1827  Ledo  fled  to  Buenos  Ayres  because
the  Andradas  had  discovered  a  plot  to  wrest  the
power  from  them  ;  but  Pedro  I.  pardoned  him  and
recalled  him  from  exile.  In  1831,  when  Pedro  I.
abdicated,  Ledo  also  retired  from  politics;  but  in
1835  he  was  elected  representative  by  the  province
of  Rio  Janeiro,  and  until  1847  he  held  several  pub-
lic offices.  When  he  was  in  the  government  he
struggled  to  introduce  in  his  country  labor-saving
machinery.  In  1847  he  resolved  to  withdraw  for-
ever from  politics,  and  retired  to  a  farm  to  devote
himself  to  literature;  but  in  a  fit  of  insanity  he
burned  the  larger  part  of  his  manuscripts,  only  a
few  being  saved.  The  Brazilian  government  has
lately  issued  a  decree  for  printing  those  of  his
works  that  remain  unedited.  Ledo  was  a  power-
ful orator  and  good  writer,  his  best  work  being  his
"  History  of  the  Independence  of  Brazil "  (1846).
He  also  composed  several  poems  and  tragedies.

LEDRU,  Andre"  Pierre  (leh-droo'),  French  nat-
uralist, b.  in  Chantenay,  France,  22  Jan.,  1761 ;  d.  in


Mans,  11  July,  1825.  At  the  beginning  of  the  French
revolution  he  had  been  ordained  to  the  priesthood,
and  was  one  of  the  first  to  take  the  oath  prescribed
by  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy  in  1791.
When,  in  1793,  the  convention  decreed  the  abolition
of  all  religion,  Ledru  returned  to  his  family  and
afterward  went  to  Paris,  where  he  remained  until
he  left  his  country  with  the  expedition  to  the
Canary  and  West  India  islands  under  Capt.  Bau-
din,  to  which  he  had  been  appointed  botanist.  On
his  return  in  1798  the  government  made  him  the
professor  of  legislation  in  the  central  school  of  La
Sarthe,  and  afterward  opened  a  school  for  free  in-
struction in  physics  and  natural  history  in  his
house,  where  he  had  a  large  library,  a  fine  herbari-
um, and  a  botanical  garden.  His  collections  are
now  in  the  museum  of  the  city  of  Mans.  From
1816  until  1830  he  occupied  himself  in  preparing
for  publication  several  works,  of  which  the  most
important  are  "  Memoires  sur  les  ceremonies  re-
ligieuses  et  vocabulaire  des  Guanches,"  published
in  "  Memoires  de  PAcademie  Celtique  "  (1809),  and
"Voyage  aux  isles  de  Tenerif,  La  Trinite,  St.
Thomas,  Ste.  Croix,  et  Porto  Rico,  execute  par
l'ordre  du  gouvernement  Francais,  par  Andre  Pierre
Ledru,  l'un  des  natural istes  de  Pexpedition  "  (Paris,
1810-'20).  A  Spanish  translation  of  the  part  of
this  book  that  relates  to  Porto  Rico  was  made  by
Julio  L.  Vizcarrondo  (Porto  Rico,  1863).

LEDRU,  Hector  Priam,  West  Indian  sculp-
tor, b.  in  Les  Saintes  in  1726;  d.  there  in  1775.
He  was  a  mulatto,  and,  as  he  early  exhibited  a
strong  tendency  for  sculpture,  the  Marquis  Pinel
Dumanoir  de  la  Palan,  whose  slave  he  was,  sent
him  to  study  in  Paris.  There  he  interested  Dide-
rot, D'Alembert,  Holbach,  Rousseau,  and  the  phi-
losophers of  the  "  Encyclopaedia,"  to  which  he  con-
tributed several  articles  and  sketches  on  the  colo-
nies and  Central  American  characters.  In  1761  he
exhibited,  in  the  salon  of  the  Louvre,  a  bust  of
Columbus,  which  was  highly  praised.  Among  his
other  works  are  " Captive  Indians"  (1756);  "Buc-
caneers at  Rest"  (1759);  "Slave  Unjustly  Chas-
tised" (1763);  and  "America  the  Treasure  of  Eu-
rope" (1767).  Returning  to  his  native  country  in
1763,  he  executed  ornaments  and  statues  for
churches  of  Les  Saintes,  Guadeloupe,  and  Martin-
ique, and  became  wealthy.  He  published  "  Histoire
de  l'art  en  Amerique"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1769)  and
"  L'art  chez  les  Aztiques  et  les  Incas  "  (4  vols.,  1771).

LEDYARD,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Groton,
Conn.,  about  1750;  d.  there,  7  Sept.,  1781.  He
held  the  commission  of  colonel  in  the  militia  of
Connecticut,  and  during  the  expedition  of  Bene-
dict Arnold  along  the  coast  of  that  state  in  Sep-
tember, 1781,  was  in  command  of  Fort  Trumbull
and  Fort  Griswold,  which  protected  New  London.
In  the  latter  work,  with  157  hastily  collected  and
poorly  armed  militia,  he  resisted  for  nearly  an  hour
the  attack  of  a  British  force  of  800  men  led  by
Lieut.-Col.  Eyre.  This  attack  was  made  on  three
sides,  and,  although  there  was  a  battery  between
the  fort  and  the  river,  the  Americans  could  spare
no  men  to  work  it.  The  enemy  made  their  way  into
the  fosse  and  scaled  the  works  in  the  face  of  a  •
severe  fire  from  the  little  garrison.  Lieut.-Col.  Eyre
was  wounded,  and  died  twelve  hours  afterward  on
shipboard,  and  his  successor,  Maj.  Montgomery,
having  been  killed  while  mounting  the  parapet,
the  command  devolved  upon  Maj.  Bromfield,  a
Tory,  who  effected  an  entrance  into  the  fort  after
nearly  200  of  his  men  had  been  disabled,  including
48  killed,  the  Americans  having  lost  only  about
twelve  men.  Col.  Ledyard  ordered  his  men  to
cease  firing  and  to  lay  down  their  arms. "  Who


LEDYARD


LEDYARD


655


commands  this  garrrison  ?  "  shouted  Bromfield,  as
he  entered. "  I  did,  sir,  but  you  do  now,"  replied
Ledyard,  handing  him  his  sword. According  to
the  generally  received tradition, Bromfield  im-
mediately plunged  the  weapon  to  the  hilt  in  the
body  of  Ledyard, killing him instantly. The
waistcoat  that  was  worn  by  Ledyard  on  this  occa-
sion is  still  (1887)  preserved  by  the  Connecticut
historical  society. A  massacre  of  the  Americans
then  ensued,  in  which  nearly  100  were  killed  or
wounded. A  monument  has  been  erected  near  the
spot  to  commemorate  this  event. Arnold,  in  a
despatch  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  two  days  after-
ward, gave  the  impression  that  the  killed  were
victims  of  honorable  strife. "  I  have  inclosed  a
return  of  the  killed  and  wounded,  by  which  your
excellency  will  observe  that  our  loss,  though  very
considerable,  is  short  of  the  enemy's,  who  lost  most
of  their  officers,  among  whom  was  their  commander.
Col.  Ledyard. Eighty-five  men  were  found  dead
in  Fort  Griswold,  and  sixty  wounded,  most  of
them  mortally. . Their  loss  on  the  opposite  side
(New  London)  must  have  been  considerable,  but
cannot  be  ascertained." On  the  following  morning
at  dawn  Col.  Ledyard's  niece,  Fanny,  visited  the
prisoners,  who  had  been  conveyed  across  the  river,
to  alleviate  their  sufferings. — His  nephew.  John,
traveller,  b.  in  Groton,  Conn.,  in  1751  ;  d.  in  Cairo,
Egypt.  17  Jan.,  1789,  lost  his  father  at  an  early  age,
and  after  an  ineffectual  attempt  to  study  law,  en-
tered Dartmouth  in  1772,  with  a  view  toward  fit-
ting himself for missionary duty among the
Indians. The  restraints  of  this  mode  of  life  prov-
ing irksome,  he  absented  himself  from  college  for
several  months,  during  which  he  visited  the  In-
dians of  the  Six  Nations,  and  finally  abandoned
the  idea  of  becoming  a  missionary,  and,  embark-
ing on  the  Connecticut  river  in  a  canoe  of  his
own fashioning, floated to Hartford. After  a
brief experience as a theological student, he
shipped  at  New  London  as  a  common  sailor  in  a
vessel  that  was  bound  for  the  Mediterranean,  and
at  Gibraltar  enlisted  in  a  British  regiment,  from
which  he  was  discharged  at  the  request  of  his  cap-
tain. Returning  to  New  London  by  way  of  the
West  Indies  at  the  end  of  a  year,  he  soon  embarked
from  New  York  for  England,  and  arrived  in  Lon-
don when  Capt.  Cook  was  about  to  sail  on  his  third
and  last  voyage  around  the  world. Having  pro-
cured an  introduction  to  Cook,  he  was  engaged  for
the  expedition,  and  made  corporal  of  marines. He
kept  a  private  journal  of  this  voyage,  which,  in
accordance  with  a  general  order  of  the  government,
was  taken  from  him  on  the  return  of  the  expedi-
tion  to England. Subsequently he wrote from
recollection,  assisted  by  a  brief  sketch  that  was
issued  under  the sanction  of  the  admiralty,  an
account  of  the  expedition,  which  was  published
(Hartford,  1783). During  the  two  years  succeed-
ing his  return  to  England  he  remained  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  British  navy,  but  refused  to  take  arms
against  his  native  country. In  December,  1782,
being  in  a  British  man-of-war  off  Long  Island,  he
escaped  and  revisited  his  friends  after  an  absence
of  eight  years. After  spending  many  months  in
fruitless  endeavors  to  fit  out  an  expedition  to  the
northwestern  coast  of  North  America,  which  he
was  the  first  of  his  countrymen to propose,  he
embarked  for  Europe  in  June,  1784,  in  the  hope  of
finding  there  the  means  for  carrying  out  this  pro-
ject. He  remained several months  in Lorient,
where  hopes  of  receiving  command  of  a  ship  for
an  exploring  expedition were held out to  him.
Upon  the  failure  of  these  negotiations  he  went  in
1785  to  Paris,  where  he  was  received  by  Thomas


Jefferson,  then  minister  to  France,  Lafayette,  and
others,  and  found  in  Paul  Jones  a  ready  co-operator
in  his  plans  of  maritime  exploration. After  these
had  failed  he  determined  to  carry  out  his  original
design  by  a  journey  through  northern  Europe  and
Asia,  and  across  Bering  straits to  the  western
hemisphere. An  application  to  Catherine  II.  of
Russia  for  permission  to  pass  through  her  domin-
ions, which  was  made  by  Mr.  Jefferson,  remained
unanswered  for  five  months,  during  which  time  Mr.
Ledyard  went  to  London,  where  the  influence  of
Sir  James  Hall  obtained  him  free  passage  to  the
Pacific,  but  the  vessel  was  brought  back  by  order
of the  government,  and the  voyage  abandoned.
He  was  finally  supplied  with  a  sum  of  money  by
Sir  Joseph  Banks  and  others,  and  departed  on  his
long  overland  journey  in  1786. On  his  arrival  at
Stockholm,  he  attempted  to  cross  the  Gulf  of  Both-
nia on  the  ice  to  Abo  in  Finland,  but  was  met  by
open  water,  which  caused  him  to  alter  his  course,
and  in  the  depth  of  winter  he  walked  around  the
whole  coast  of  the  gulf,  arriving  in  St.  Petersburg
in  the  latter  part  of  March,  without  money,  shoes,
or  stockings. This  journey  of  about  1,400  miles
was  accomplished  in  less  than  seven  weeks. After
a  delay  of  several  weeks,  he  procured  his  passport
from  the  empress  and  received  permission  to  ac-
company Dr.  Brown,  a  Scotchman  in  the  Russian
service,  as  far  as  Barnaul,  in  southern  Siberia,  a  dis-
tance of  about  3,000  miles.  He  then  travelled  with  a
Swedish  officer,  Lieut.  Laxman,  to  Irkutsk,  whence
he  sailed  in  a  small  boat  down  the  Lena  to  Ya-
kutsk. Permission  being  refused  to  go  to  Okhotsk,
he  accompanied  Capt.  Billings,  in  the  Russian  ser-
vice, back  to  Irkutsk,  where,  on  24  Feb.,  1788,  he
was  arrested  by  order  of the empress. Accom-
panied  by  two  guards, he was  conducted with
speed to  the  frontiers  of  Poland,  and  there  dis-
missed  with an intimation that he  would be
hanged  if  he  entered  Russia. The  reason  for  this
summary  expulsion of Ledyard has never  been
satisfactorily  explained. He  returned  to  London
in  the  spring,  to  use  his  own  words,  "  disappointed,
ragged,  and  penniless,  but  with  a  whole  heart,"
and  was  cordially  received  by  Sir  Joseph Banks
and  others  who  had  befriended  him. Undaunted
by  adversity,  he  eagerly  accepted  an  offer  from  the
Association for  promoting  the discovery  of  the
inland  parts  of  Africa  to  undertake  an  expedition
into the interior  of that continent; and when
asked  how  soon  he  would  be  ready  to  start,  replied:
"  To-morrow  morning." He  departed  from  Eng-
land in June,  intending  to  cross  Africa in  a
westerly  direction  from  Sennaar,  and  had  reached
Cairo,  when he  became  ill. His  death  was  con-
sidered a  great  loss  to  the  society. For  capacity
of  endurance, resolution,  and physical  vigor  he
was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  modern  trav-
ellers. Thomas  Jefferson  says  of  him: "In  1786,
while  at  Paris,  I  became acquainted  with John
Ledyard,  of  Connecticut,  a  man  of  genius,  of  some
science,  and  of fearless  courage  and enterprise.
...  I  suggested  to  him  the  enterprise  of  explor-
ing the  western  part  of  our  continent  by  passing
through  St.  Petersburg  to  Kamtchatka  and  procur-
ing a  passage  thence  in  some  of  the  Russian  ves-
sels to  Nootka  sound,  whence  he  might  make  his
way  across the  continent  to  the  United States;
and  I  undertook  to have  the  permission  of  the
empress  of  Russia  solicited." Many  extracts  from
Ledyard's journals and private  correspondence
with  Jefferson  and  others  are  given  in  his  "  Life."
by  Jared  Sparks  (Cambridge,  1828 ;  London,  1828
and 1834).  which is  also  included in Sparks's
"American  Biography."


650


LEE


LEE


LEE,  Albert  Lindley,  soldier,  b.  in  Fulton,
Oswego  co.,  N.  Y.,  1G  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  college  in  1853,  studied  law,  and  re-
moved to  Kansas,  where  he  was  judge  of  the  state
supreme  court  in  1861.  He  became  major  of  the
7th  Kansas  cavalry  in  that  year,  was  made  colonel
in  1862,  and  on  29  Nov.  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  He  commanded  the
cavalry  in  the  Red  River  expedition  of  1864,  and
was  in  the  advance  when  the  Confederate  attack
was  made  at  Sabine  Cross-roads,  after  which  he
was  superseded  by  Gen.  Richard  Arnold.  He  re-
signed on  4  May,  1865,  and  since  the  war  has
passed  much  of  his  time  in  Europe.

LEE,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lvme,  Conn.,
7  May,  1745;  d.  in  Lisbon,  Conn.,  25  Aug.,  1832.
He  was  graduated  at  Yal  5  in  1766,  and,  after  study-
ing theology  for  two  years,  began  preaching  in
1768,  being  in  that  year  ordained  pastor  of  the
Trinitarian  Congregational  church  at  Hanover
(now  Lisbon),  Conn.  Here  he  spent  his  life,  dis-
charging his  clerical  duties  until  within  a  twelve-
month of  his  death.  From  1807  till  1823  he  was  a
member  of  the  corporation  of  Yale  college,  and  in
1809  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard.
Among  Dr.  Lee's  publications  are  "  An  Inquiry
whether  it  be  the  Duty  of  Man  to  be  Willing  to
Suffer  Damnation  for  the  Divine  Glory  "  (1786) ;
"  The  Declensions  of  Christianity  an  Argument  for
its  Truth  "  (1793) ;  and  "  Sermons  on  Various  Im-
portant Subjects  "  (1803).

LEE,  Ann,  religious  teacher,  b.  in  Manchester,
England,  29  Feb.,  1736 ;  d.  in  Watervliet,  N.  Y.,  8
Sept.,  1784.  She  was  the  daughter  of  a  black-
smith, and,  after  working  in  a  cotton-factory  and
as  cook  in  an  infirmary,  while  yet  a  young  girl
married  Abraham  Stanley,  also  a  blacksmith,  by
whom  she  had  four  children,  all  of  whom  died  in
infancy.  When  she  was  about  twenty-two  years
old  Ann  came  under  the  influence  of  James  Ward-
ley,  who  was  at  that  time  the  chief  exponent  of  the
Camisards,  or  French  Prophets,  who  had  fled  to
England  from  France  on  account  of  persecution
and  found  willing  followers,  especially  among  the
Quakers.  Ann  joined  the  new  sect  that  was  found-
ed in  1747,  and  called  from  their  physical  contor-
tions "Shaking  Quakers."  She  was  naturally  of
an  excitable  temperament,  and  her  experience  in
the  performance  of  these  peculiar  religious  exer-
cises was  most  singular  and  painful.  At  times  her
flesh  wasted  away  under  the  discipline,  and  she  be-
came so  weak  that  she  had  to  be  fed  like  a  child,
while  on  other  occasions  she  would  enjoy  "  inter-
vals of  releasement,"  in  which  she  asserted  that
her  strength  had  been  miraculously  renewed  and
her  soul  filled  with  heavenly  visions  and  divine
revelations.  By  1770  she  had  grown  greatly  in
favor  among  her  people,  and  being  persecuted  and
imprisoned  in  that  year  by  the  secular  authorities,
she  was  acknowledged  on  her  release  to  be  their
spiritual  mother  in  Christ.  She  now  also  claimed
to  be  the  incarnation  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  the
"  second  appearing  of  Christ,"  as  really  and  fully
as  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  incarnation  of  infinite
power  or  Christ's  first  appearing,  and  therefore  did
not  hesitate  to  call  herself  "Ann  the  Word."  She
now  began  to  declare  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty
against  marriage,  and  for  this  she  was  again  im-
prisoned, this  time  on  a  charge  of  misdemeanor.
On  her  release  she  returned  to  the  attack  on  what
she  termed  "  the  root  of  human  depravity,"  which
so  enraged  her  fellow-townsmen  that  she  was  shut
up  for  several  weeks  in  a  mad-house.  Thus  har-
assed and  persecuted  on  English  soil,  she  de-
clared that  she  had  "  a  special  revelation  "  to  mi-


grate to  this  country,  and  with  several  of  her  so-
ciety, that  had  similar  revelations  she  arrived  in
New  York  in  May,  1774.  In  the  spring  of  1776
she  went  to  Albany  and  established  at  Watervliet,
eight  miles  from  that  city,  a  congregation  that  she
called  "The  Church  of  Christ's  Second  Appear-
ing," and.  after  formally  dissolving  her  marriAgfl
relation,  became  its  recognized  head.  The  new
sect  soon  aroused  the  hostility  of  the  authorities,
Ann  being  accused  by  some  of  witchcraft  and  by
others  of  secret  correspondence  with  the  British,
probably  because  she  was  opposed  to  war.  She  was
arrested  on  a  charge  of  high  treason  and  impris-
oned in  Albany  during  the  summer  of  1776,  but
was  subsequently  removed  to  the  jail  at  Pough-'
keepsie,  N.  Y.,  where  she  remained  until  pardoned
by  Gov.  George  Clinton  in  1777.  It  was  not,  how-
ever, until  1780  that  the  society  increased  materi-
ally in  numbers.  At  the  beginning  of  that  year
an  unusually  extensive  revival  occurred  at  New
Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  in  which  Mother  Lee  took  an  ac-
tive part.  She  succeeded  in  securing  many  con-
verts and  in  establishing  a  branch  society  at  that
place.  In  1781  she  set  out,  in  company  with  her
elders,  on  an  extended  preaching  tour  through  the
New  England  states,  where  she  founded  societies
at  Harvard,  Mass.,  and  other  places.  She  did  not
live  long  after  her  return  to  Watervliet,  but  died  a
natural  death  in  spite  of  her  claim  that  when  she
left  this  world  she  would  "  ascend  in  the  twinkling
of  an  eye  to  heaven."  Notwithstanding  her  fanati-
cal excesses,  it  must  be  admitted  that  Ann  was  a
remarkable  woman.  She  was  entirely  without
education,  but  founded  a  sect  and  inspired  perfect
faith  in  her  divine  mission,  although  it  was  sought
to  invalidate  her  claims  by  plausible  charges  that
her  life  was  shamefully  impure.

LEE,  Benjamin,  sailor,  b.  in  Taunton,  Eng-
land, 26  Feb.,  1765;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  15
Aug.,  1828.  He  entered  the  British  navy  as  a
midshipman,  having  as  companions  Lord  Nelson
and  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  and  commanded  a  bat-
tery of  guns  in  the  naval  battle  between  Admiral
Rodney  and  Count  de  Grasse  off  the  island  of
Guadeloupe,  12  April,  1782.  Having  challenged  a
superior  officer  for  countermanding  his  humane
order  relative  to  certain  prisoners,  he  was  con-
demned by  court-martial  to  be  shot  for  insubordi-
nation, but  was  saved  through  the  intervention  of
the  Duke  of  Clarence,  afterward  William  IV.,  the
sentence  of  death  being  commuted  to  dismissal
from  the  service.  It  is  related  that  on  being  set
ashore  he  at  once  sent  a  fresh  challenge  to  the
same  officer,  which  was  accepted,  and  Lee  is  said
to  have  left  his  adversary  dead  on  the  field.  He
then  came  to  the  United  States,  entered  the  mer-
chant marine  as  captain,  and  was  one  of  the  first
to  carry  the  flag  of  his  adopted  country  to  the  far
east.  After  thirteen  years  on  the  ocean  he  retired
to  a  farm,  and  subsequently  declined  a  commission
as  1st  lieutenant  of  the  frigate  "  Constitution  *'
that  was  offered  to  him  by  President  Adams. — His
son.  Alfred,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Cambridge.  Mass.,
9  Sept.,  1807;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  12  April,
1887,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1827.  He
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  New
London,  Conn.,  where  he  practised  for  two  years,
but  afterward  went  to  the  General  theological
seminarv,  New  York  city,  and  was  graduated  in
1837.  He  was  admitted  to  deacon's  orders  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  by  Bishop  Brownell.  21  May,  1837.
and  to  priest's  orders,  by  the  same  bishop,  in  Hart-
ford, 12  June,  1838.  He  officiated  for  a  short  time
in  St.  James's  church,  Poquetanoc,  Conn.,  and  in
September,  1838,  became  rector  of  Calvary  church,


LEE


LEE


657


Rochdale,  Pa.  This  post  he  occupied  for  three
years.  He  was  elected  first  bishop  of  Delaware,
and  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul  s  chapel,  New
York,  12  Oct.,  1841.  The  new  bishop  took  up  his
residence  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  and  in  1842  assumed
the  rectorship  of  St.  Andrew's  church  in  that  city,
which  post  he  held  during  the  remainder  of  his
life.  On  the  death  of  Bishop  Smith  in  May,  1884,
he  became  presiding  bishop  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  the  United  States.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Trinity  in  1841,
the  same  degree  from  Harvard  in  18(50,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  from  Delaware  college  in  1877.  Bishop
Lee  was  of  the  same  school  of  churchmanship  with
Bishop  Griswold,  Bishop  Mcllvaine,  Bishop  Bedell,
Dr.  Muhlenberg,  and  others  of  the  older  evangeli-
cals. He  was  also  a  scholar  of  excellent  attain-
ments, and  was  a  member  of  the  American  com-
pany of  the  revisers  of  the  New  Testament  (1881).
Among  his  publications  were  "  Life  of  St.  Peter"
(New  York,  1852) :  "  Life  of  St.  John "  (1854) :
"Treatise  on  Baptism"  (1854);  "Memoir  of  Miss
Susan  Allibone  "  (1856) ;  "  Harbinger  of  Christ "
(1857);  and  "Eventful  Nights  in  Bible  History"
(1886).  In  addition,  he  published  several  charges
to  the  clergy,  single  sermons,  addresses,  and
pastoral  letters. — Alfred's  son,  Benjamin,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  26  Sept.,  1833,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1852,  and  at  the  New  York  medical  college  in  1856,
receiving  a  prize  for  his  thesis  on  "  The  Mechan-
ics of  Medicine."  After  studying  abroad  he  es-
tablished himself  in  practice  in  New  York  city,
in  1862  edited  the  "American  Medical  Monthly,"
and  in  1862-'3  was  surgeon  of  the  22d  New  York-
regiment.  In  1865  he  removed  to  Philadelphia.
Dr.  Lee  has  made  a  specialty  of  orthopedic  surgery
and  the  treatment  of  nervous  diseases.  He  is  the
inventor  of  the  method  of  self-suspension  as  a
means  of  treating  spinal  affections.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  various  medical  associations,  has  been  treas-
urer of  the  Pennsylvania  medical  society  since
1873,  and  in  1884  was  president  of  the  American
academy  of  medicine.  In  1885  he  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  newly  created  State  board  of
health,  of  which  he  is  now  (1887)  secretary  and
executive  officer.  As  a  member  of  the  committee
on  medical  legislation  of  the  State  medical  society,
he  has  been  instrumental  in  securing  the  passage
of  laws  for  regulating  the  practice  of  medicine,  and
for  the  registration  of  physicians.  Besides  contribu-
tions to  medical  literature,  he  has  published  "  Cor-
rect Principles  of  Treatment  for  Angular  Curvature
of  the  Spine"  (Philadelphia,  1867) ;  and  "  Tracts  on
Massage,"  original  and  translated  (1885-7).

LEE,  Benjamin  Franklin,  clergyman,  b.  in
Gouldtown,  N.  J.,  18  Sept.,  1841.  He  is  of  African
descent,  and  was  educated  at  Wilberforce  univer-
sity, Ohio.  He  entered  the  ministry  in  1869,  was
appointed  to  the  chair  of  pastoral  theology,  homi-
letics,  and  ecclesiastical  history  in  Wilberforce
university  in  1873,  and  elected  its  president  in
1876.  He  was  chosen  to  represent  his  church  at
the  Ecumenical  conference  in  London  in  1881,
and  at  the  Methodist  centennial  in  Baltimore  in
1884.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by  Wil-
berforce university,  Ohio,  in  1883,  and  elected  editor
of  the  "Christian  Recorder"  in  1884.  He  has
written  "Wesley  the  Worker"  (New  York.  1880),
and  "  The  Causes  of  the  Success  of  Methodism."

LEE,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Dernhall,  Cheshire.
England,  in  1731 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Oct.,
1782.  He  was  the  youngest  son  of  Gen.  John  Lee,
of  Dernhall,  and  Isabella,  daughter  of  Sir  Henry
Bunbury,  of  Stanney. He  is  said  to  have  received


y&<a  ^Z^«— -


a  commission  in  the  army  at  the  age  of  eleven.
However  this  may  have  been,  he  is  known  to  have
studied  at  the  free  grammar-school  of  Bury  St.  Ed-
munds, and  afterward  at  an  academy  in  Switzer-
land. He  acquired
some  familiarity  with
Greek  and  Latin  and
a  thorough  knowl-
edge of  French.  In
the  course  of  his  ram-
bles about  Europe
he  afterward  became
proficient  in  Spanish,
Italian,  and  German.
He  applied  himself
diligently  to  the  study
of  the  military  art.
On  2  May.  1751,  short-
ly after  his  father's
death,  he  received  a
lieutenant's  commis-
sion in  the  44th  regi-
ment,  of which his

father  had  been  colonel.  The  regiment  was  or-
dered to  America  in  1754,  where  it  was  one  of  the
two  European  regiments  that  took  part  in  Gen.
Edward  Braddock's  expedition  to  Fort  Duquesne,
and  Lee  was  present  at  the  disastrous  defeat  of
Braddock  at  Monongahela  in  the  following  year.
The  remains  of  the  shattered  army  were  in  the
autumn  of  1755  taken  northward  to  Albany  and
Schenectady,  where  they  went  into  winter-quar-
ters. Lee  was  present  at  several  conferences  be-
tween Sir  William  Johnson  and  the  chiefs  of  the
Six  Nations,  and  became  much  interested  in  the
Indians.  His  relations  with  them  soon  became  so
friendly  that  he  was  adopted  into  the  Mohawk
tribe  of  the  Bear  under  the  curiously  prophetic
name  of  "  Ounewaterika,"  or  "Boiling  Water."
His  captain's  commission  in  the  44th,  which  he
purchased  for  £900,  was  dated  11  June.  1756.  He
was  wounded  in  the  disastrous  assault  upon  Ticon-
deroga,  1  July,  and  was  soon  afterward  stationed
on  Long  Island,  where  an  army  surgeon,  with
whom  he  had  quarrelled,  attempted  to  assassinate
him,  and  nearly  succeeded.  It  was  remarked  about
this  time  that  Capt.  Lee  had  a  fault-finding  dis-
position with  an  extremely  caustic  tongue.  He
was  fond  of  abusing  his  superior  officers,  and  was
by  no  means  nice  in  his  choice  of  epithets.  As
commander  of  foraging  parties  he  pillaged  friend
and  foe  with  impartial  violence,  and  showed  him-
self on  many  occasions  arrogant  and  insubordinate.
In  the  next  campaign  he  was  present  at  the  cap-
ture of  Fort  Niagara,  and  was  sent  with  a  small
party  to  follow  the  route  of  the  few  French  who
escaped.  This  was  the  first  party  of  English
troops  that  ever  crossed  Lake  Erie.  Their  march
led  them  to  Fort  Duquesne  (now  Pittsburg),
whence  they  marched  all  the  way  to  Crown  Point
to  meet  Gen.  Amherst.  In  the  final  campaign  of
1760  Lee's  regiment  was  part  of  the  force  led  by
Amherst  down  the  St.  Lawrence  to  Montreal,  and
after  the  capture  of  that  town  he  returned  to  Eng-
land. He  was  promoted,  10  Aug.,  1761,  to  the
rank  of  major  in  the  103d  regiment,  which  was  dis-
banded two  years  later;  but  Lee  was  continued  a
major  on  half-pay.  In  1762  the  British  govern-
ment sent  a  small  army  to  assist  Portugal  in  driv-
ing out  the  invading  Spaniards.  Burgoyne  com-
manded a  division  in  this  army,  and  Lee  accom-
panied him  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in
the  Portuguese  service.  The  expedition  was  brill-
iantly successful,  and  Lee  received  honorable  men-
tion for  personal  gallantry  in  the  action  at  Villa


658


LEE


LEE


Velha.  On  his  return  to  England  he  busied  him-
self with  a  scheme  for  founding  two  new  colonies
in  America — one  on  the  Ohio  river  below  the
Wabash,  the  other  on  the  Illinois.  Inducements
were  to  be  held  out  for  emigrants  from  Switzer-
land and  Germany  as  well  as  New  England ;  but
the  ministry  refused  to  sanction  the  scheme.
About  this  time  he  wrote  several  pamphlets,  re-
viewing the  colonial  policy  of  the  government  in
language  so  arrogant  and  bitter  as  to  make  ene-
mies of  the  ministry,  while  on  the  other  hand  his
censorious  and  quarrelsome  temper  prevented  his
making  many  friends  among  the  opposition  party.
In  his  endeavors  after  military  promotion  he  was
disappointed,  and  in  1764  he  made  his  way  to  Po-
land, where  he  received  an  appointment  on  the
staff  of  King  Stanislaus  Augustus.  Two  years
afterward,  in  accompanying  the  Polish  embassy  to
Turkey,  he  narrowly  escaped  freezing  to  death  on
the  Balkan  mountains,  and  again  in  Constantino-
ple came  near  being  buried  in  the  ruins  of  his
house,  which  was  destroyed  by  an  earthquake.  In
1766  he  returned  to  England  and  spent  two  years
in  a  fruitless  attempt  to  obtain  promotion.  His
anger  at  the  ministry  was  vented  so  freely  that  he
soon  acquired  the  reputation  of  a  disappointed  and
vindictive  place-hunter.  In  1769  he  returned  to
Poland,  was  appointed  major-general  in  the  Polish
army,  and  served  in  a  campaign  against  the  Turks.
On  this,  as  on  other  occasions,  he  expressed  the
opinion  that  the  commanders  under  whom  he
served  were  fools.  After  barely  escaping  with  his
life  from  a  violent  fever,  he  went  to  Vienna  and
spent  the  winter  there.  During  the  spring  of  1770
he  travelled  in  Italy,  where  he  lost  two  fingers  in  a
duel  with  an  officer  whom  he  killed.  He  then
went  by  way  of  Minorca  to  Gibraltar,  whence  he
returned  in  the  autumn  to  England,  where  he
wrote  his  ironical  epistle  to  David  Hume,  and
other  papers.  He  spent  the  summer  of  1772  in
France  and  Switzerland,  seeking  relief  from  rheu-
matism. On  25  May  of  that  year  he  was  promoted
lieutenant-colonel  on  half-pay,  but  was  unable  to
obtain  further  recognition  from  the  government.

It  now  seems  to  have  occurred  to  him  that  the
troubles  in  America  might  afford  a  promising  ca-
reer for  a  soldier  of  fortune.  He  arrived  in  New
York,  10  Nov.,  1773,  in  the  midst  of  the  agitation
over  the  tea  duties,  and  the  next  ten  months  were
spent  in  a  journey  through  the  colonies  as  far  as
Virginia  in  one  direction  and  Massachusetts  in  the
other.  In  the  course  of  this  journey  Lee  made  the
acquaintance  of  nearly  all  the  leaders  of  the  Revo-
lutionary party,  and  won  high  favor  from  the  zeal
with  which  he  espoused  their  cause.  At  this  time
he  rendered  some  real  services  with  tongue  and
pen,  while  his  self-seeking  motives  were  hidden  by
the  affected  earnestness  of  his  arguments  in  behalf
of  political  liberty  and  the  real  sincerity  of  his  in-
vectives against  the  British  government.  The  best
of  his  writings  at  this  time  was  the  "  Strictures  on
a  Friendly  Address  to  all  Reasonable  Americans,
in  Reply  to  Dr.  Myles  Cooper"  (1774),  in  which
the  arguments  of  the  Tory  president  of  King's  col-
lege were  severely  handled.  This  pamphlet  was
many  times  reprinted  and  exerted  considerable  in-
fluence. While  the  1st  Continental  congress  was
in  session  at  Philadelphia,  Lee  was  present  in  that
city  and  was  ready  with  his  advice  and  opinions.
He  set  himself  up  for  a  military  genius,  and  there
was  no  campaign  in  modern  European  history
which  he  could  not  expound  and  criticise  with  the
air  of  a  man  who  had  exhausted  the  subject.  The
American  leaders,  ill  acquainted  with  military  sci-
ence and  flattered  by  the  prospect  of  securing  the


aid  of  a  great  European  soldier,  were  naturally
ready  to  take  him  at  his  own  valuation  ;  but  he
felt  that  one  grave  obstacle  stood  in  the  way  of  his
appointment  to  the  chief  command.  He  wrote  to
Edmund  Burke,  16  Dec,  1774,  that  he  did  not
think  the  Americans  "would  or  ought  to  confide
in  a  man,  let  his  qualifications  be  ever  so  great,
who  has  no  property  among  them."  To  remove
this  objection  he  purchased,  for  about  £5,000  in
Virginia  currency  (equal  to  about  £3,000  sterling),
an  estate  in  Berkeley  county,  in  the  Shenandoah
valley,  near  that  of  his  friend  Horatio  Gates.  He
did  not  complete  this  purchase  till  the  last  of
May,  1775,  while  the  2d  Continental  congress  was
in  session.  A  letter  to  a  friend  at  this  time  in-
dicates that  he  was  awaiting  the  action  of  the
congress,  and  did  not  finally  commit  himself  to
the  purchase  until  virtually  sure  of  a  high  mili-
tary command.  To  pay  for  the  estate  he  borrowed
£3,000  of  Robert  Morris,  to  whom  he  mortgaged
the  property  as  security,  while  he  drew  bills  on
his  agent  in  England  for  the  amount.  On  17
June  he  received  as  high  a  command  as  congress
thought  it  prudent  to  give  him,  that  of  second
major-general  in  the  Continental  army.  The  rea-
sons for  making  Washington  commander-in-chief
were  generally  convincing;  and  as  the  only  Con-
tinental army  existing  was  the  force  of  16,000
New  England  men  with  which  Gen.  Artemas
Ward  was  besieging  Boston,  it  was  not  deemed
politic  to  place  a  second  in  command  over  Ward.
Some  of  Lee's  friends,  and  in  particular  Thomes
Mifflin,  afterward  active  in  the  Conway  cabal,
urged  that  he  should  at  least  have  the  first  place
after  Washington  ;  but  John  Adams  declared  that,
while  the  New  England  army  would  cheerfully
serve  under  Washington,  it  could  not  be  expect-
ed to  acquiesce  in  having  another  than  its  own
general  in  the  next  place.  Accordingly,  Ward
was  appointed  first  of  the  major-generals  and  Lee
second.  The  British  adventurer,  who  had  cher-
ished hopes  of  receiving  the  chief  command,  was
keenly  disappointed.  For  the  present  he  repressed
his  spleen  against  Washington,  but  made  no  secret
of  his  contempt  for  Ward,  whom  he  described  as
"a  fat  old  gentleman  who  had  been  a  popular
church-warden,  but  had  no  acquaintance  whatever
with  military  affairs."  When  Lee  was  informed  of
his  appointment,  19  July,  he  begged  leave,  before
accepting  it,  to  confer  with  a  committee  of  con-
gress with  regard  to  his  private  affairs.  The  com-
mittee being  immediately  appointed,  he  made  it  a
condition  of  his  entering  the  American  service
that  he  should  be  indemnified  by  congress  for  any
pecuniary  loss  he  might  suffer  by  so  doing,  and
that  this  reimbursement  should  be  made  as  soon  as
the  amount  of  such  loss  should  be  ascertained.
Congress  at  once  assented  to  this  condition,  and
Lee  accepted  his  appointment.  Three  days  after-
ward he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  British  secretary  of
war,  Lord  Barrington,  resigning  his  commission  as
lieutenant-colonel  and  the  half-pay  that  up  to  this
moment  he  had  been  willing  to  receive  from  a  gov-
ernment against  which  he  was  concerting  measures
of  armed  resistance.

Having  thus  entered  the  American  service,  Lee
accompanied  Washington  in  his '  journey  to  Cam-
bridge, and  at  every  town  through  which  they
passed  he  seemed  to  be  quite  as  much  an  object  of
curiosity  and  admiration  as  the  commander-in-
chief.  According  to  Lee's  own  theory  of  the  rela-
tionship between  the  two,  his  was  the  controlling
mind.  He  was  the  trained  and  scientific  Euro-
pean soldier  to  whose  care  had  been  in  a  measure
intrusted  this  raw  American  general  who  for  politi-


LEE


LEE


659


oal  reasons  had  been  placed  in  command  over  him.
In  point  of  fact,  Lee's  military  experience,  as
sketched  above,  had  been  scarcely  more  extensive
than  Washington's.  Such  little  reputation  as  he
had  in  Europe  was  not  that  of  a  soldier,  but  of  an
unscrupulous  political  pamphleteec  Yet  if  he  had
been  the  hero  of  a  dozen  great  battles,  if  he  had
rescued  Portugal  from  the  Spaniard  and  Poland
from  the  Turk,  he  could  not  have  claimed  or  ob-
tained more  deference  in  this  country  than  he  did.
On  arriving  at  Cambridge  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  left  wing,  with  his  headquarters  at
Winter  Hill,  in  what  is  now  Somerville.  The  only
incident  that  marked  his  stay  at  Cambridge  was  a
correspondence  with  his  old  friend  Burgoyne,  then
lately  arrived  in  Boston,  which  led  to  a  scheme  for
a  conference  between  Lee  and  Burgoyne,  with  a
view  to  the  restoration  of  an  amicable  understand-
ing between  the  colonies  and  the  mother  country.
The  scheme,  being  regarded  unfavorably  by  the
Provincial  congress  of  Massachusetts,  was  aban-
doned. In  December,  1775,  when  Sir  Henry  Clin-
ton was  preparing  to  start  from  Boston  on  his
southern  expedition,  fears  were  entertained  for
Rhode  Island  and  New  York,  and  accordingly  Lee
was  sent  to  Newport,  where  his  military  genius
displayed  itself  in  the  arrest  of  a  few  Tory  citizens.
Thence  he  proceeded  in  January  to  New  York,
where  he  did  good  service  in  beginning  the  fortifi-
cations needed  for  the  city  and  neighboring  strate-
gic points.  On  the  news  of  Montgomery's  death,
Lee  was  appointed  to  command  the  army  in  Cana-
da: but  scarcely  had  he  been  informed  of  this  ap-
pointment when  his  destination  was  changed.  It
had  become  clear  that  Clinton's  expedition  was
aimed  at  some  point  in  the  southern  states,  and
Lee  was  accordingly  put  in  command  over  the
southern  department,  and  in  March  went  to  Vir-
ginia. His  recommendation  to  the  Virginians  to
raise  and  discipline  a  cavalry  force  was  sensible
and  useful.  On  7  May  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Patrick
Henry,  strongly  advocating  a  declaration  of  inde-

Sendence.  Shortly  after  this  Clinton,  re-enforced
y  Sir  Peter  Parker's  fleet  with  fresh  troops  under
Lord  Cornwallis,  arrived  in  Charleston  harbor ;
and  Gen.  Lee,  following  him,  reached  that  city  on
the  same  day,  4  June.  Preparations  had  already
been  made  to  resist  the  enemy,  and  Col.  William
Moultrie  was  constructing  his  famous  palmetto
fort  on  Sullivan's  island.  Lee  blustered  and  found
fault  as  usual,  sneered  at  the  palmetto  fort,  and
would  have  ordered  Moultrie  to  abandon  it ;  but
President  Rut-ledge  persuaded  him  to  let  Moultrie
have  his  way.  In  the  battle  of  28  June  between
the  fort  and  the  fleet,  Moultrie  won  a  brilliant  vic-
tory, the  credit  of  which  was  by  most  people  incon-
siderately given  to  Lee.  On  the  departure  of  the
discomfited  British  fleet,  the  "  hero  of  Charleston,"
as  he  was  now  called,  prepared  to  invade  Florida;
but  early  in  September  he  was  ordered  to  report  to
congress  at  Philadelphia.  The  question  of  his  in-
demnification had  been  laid  before  congress  in  a
letter  from  Rutledge,  dated  4  July,  and  action
was  now  taken  upon  it.  The  bills  for  £3,000
drawn  upon  his  agent  in  England  to  repay  the
sum  advanced  by  Robert  Morris  had  been  pro-
tested for  lack  of  funds,  as  Lee's  property  in  Eng-
land had  been  sequestrated.  Congress  accordingly
voted,  7  Oct.,  to  advance  $30,000  to  Gen.  Lee  by
way  of  indemnification.  Should  his  English  estate
ever  be  recovered,  he  was  to  repay  this  sum.

Lee  then  went  to  New  York,  where  he  arrived
on  14  Oct.,  and  took  command  of  the  right  wing
of  Washington's  army  upon  Harlem  heights.  By
the  resignation  of  Gen.  Ward  in  the  spring  Lee


had  become  senior  major-general,  and  in  the  event
of  disaster  to  Washington  he  might  hope  at  length
to  realize  his  wishes  and  Income  commander-in-
chief.  The  fall  of  Fort  Washington,  16  Nov.,
seemed  to  afford  Lee  the  opportunity  desired.  At
that  moment  Washington,  whose  defensive  move-
ments had  been  marked  by  most  consummate
skill,  had  placed  half  of  his  army  on  the  New  Jer-
sey side  of  the  river,  in  order  to  check  any  move-
ment of  the  British  toward  Philadelphia.  'He  had
left  Lee  at  Northcastle,  with  the  other  half  of  the
army,  about  7,000  men,  with  instructions  to  await
his  orders  and  move  promptly  upon  receiving
them.  As  soon  as  the  nature  of  Howe's  designs
had  become  apparent,  Washington  sent  an  order
to  Lee  to  cross  the  Hudson  river  and  effect  a
junction  of  the  two  parts  of  the  army.  But  Lee
pretended  to  regard  the  order  in  the  light  of  mere
advice,  raised  objections,  and  did  not  stir.  While
Washington  was  now  obliged  to  fall  back  through
New  Jersey,  in  order  to  avoid  fighting  against
overwhelming  odds,  his  messages  to  Lee  grew
more  and  more  peremptory  ;  but  Lee  disregarded
them.  Many  people  were  throwing  the  blame  for
the  loss  of  Fort  Washington  upon  the  commander-
in-chief,  and  were  contrasting  him  unfavorably
with  the  "  hero  of  Charleston,"  and  Lee  busied
himself  in  writing  letters  calculated  to  spread  and
increase  this  disaffection  toward  Washington.  The
latter  had  left  Heath  in  command  in  the  High-
lands, with  very  explicit  instructions,  which  Lee
now  tried,  but  in  vain,  to  overrule.  On  2  Dec,
Washington  had  retreated  as  far  as  Princeton,
with  a  force  diminished  to  3,000  men.  On  the
same  day.  after  a  fortnight's  delay,  Lee  crossed  the
Hudson  and  proceeded  by  slow  marches  to  Morris-
town,  with  his  force  diminished  to  4,000  men.  The
terms  of  service  of  many  of  the  soldiers  had  ex-
pired, and  the  prospect  was  so  dismal  that  few
were  willing  to  re-enlist.  At  this  moment  Gates
was  coming  down  from  Ticonderoga  with  seven
regiments  sent  by  Schuyler  to  Washington's  assist-
ance ;  but  Lee  interposed,  and  diverted  three  of
these  regiments  to  Morristown.  By  this  time
Washington  had  retreated  beyond  the  Delaware,
and  most  people  considered  his  campaign  hope-
lessly ruined.  Lee's  design  in  thus  acting  inde-
pendently seems  to  have  been  to  operate  upon  the
British  flank  from  Morristown.  a  position  of  which
Washington  soon  afterward  illustrated  the  great
value.  The  insubordinate  commander  wished  to
secure  for  himself  whatever  advantage  might  be
gained  from  such  a  movement.  For  some  unex-
plained reason,  he  made  his  headquarters  at  Bask-
ingridge,  four  miles  from  his  army,  and  here  he  was
captured,  13  Dec,  by  a  party  of  British  dragoons.
His  troops,  thus  opportunely  relieved  of  such
a  commander,  were  promptly  marched  by  Sullivan
to  Washington's  assistance  in  time  to  take  part  in
the  glorious  movement  upon  Trenton  and  Prince-
ton. The  capture  of  Lee  was  considered  a  grave
misfortune  by  the  Americans,  who  did  not  possess
the  clew  to  his  singular  behavior.  Of  his  conduct  in
captivity,  which  would  soon  have  afforded  such  a
clew,  nothing  whatever  was  known  until  eighty
years  afterward.  Lee  was  taken  to  New  York  and
confined  in  the  city  hall,  where  he  was  courteously
treated,  but  he  well  understood  that  his  life  was
in  danger  in  case  the  British  government  should
regard  him  as  a  deserter  from  the  army.  Sir
William  Howe  wrote  home  for  instructions,  and  in
reply  was  directed  to  send  his  prisoner  to  England
for  trial.  Lee  had  already  been  sent  on  board
ship,  when  a  letter  from  Washington  put  a  stop
to  these  proceedings. The  letter  informed  Howe


660


LEE


that  Washington  held  five  Hessian  field-officers  as
hostages  for  Lee's  personal  safety.  This  was  the
beginning  of  a  discussion  that  lasted  about  a  year,
involving  the  exchange  of  several  letters  between
Howe  and  his  government  on  the  one  hand  and
Howe  and  Washington  on  the  other,  until  at
length,  12  Dec,  1777,  Howe  was  instructed  to  con-
sider Lee  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  subject  to  ex-
change whenever  convenient.  During  the  interval,
while  his  fate  was  in  suspense,  Lee  was  busy  in
operations  on  his  own  account.  First,  he  assured
the  brothers  Howe  that  he  was  opposed  to  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  and  hoped,  if  he
could  obtain  an  interview  with  a  committee  from
congress,  to  be  able  to  open  negotiations  for  an
honorable  and  satisfactory  adjustment  of  all  exist-
ing difficulties.  The  Howes,  who  were  well  dis-
posed toward  the  Americans  and  sincerely  anxious
for  peace,  allowed  him  to  ask  for  the  interview;
but  congress  refused  to  grant  it.  Lee's  extraordi-
nary conduct  before  his  capture  had  somewhat
injured  his  reputation,  and  there  were  vague  sus-
picions, though  no  one  knew  exactly  what  to
suspect  him  of.  These  doubts  affected  the  sound-
ness of  his  judgment  rather  than  of  his  character.
His  behavior  was  considered  wayward  and  eccen-
tric, but  was  not  seen  to  be  treacherous.  The
worst  that  was  now  supposed  about  him  was  that
he  had  suffered  himself  to  be  hoodwinked  by  the
Howes  into  requesting  a  conference  that  could
answer  no  good  purpose.  As  soon  as  the  confer-
ence was  refused,  he  straightway  went  over  to  the
enemy,  and  sought  to  curry  favor  with  the  Howes
by  giving  them  aid  and  counsel  for  the  next  cam-
paign against  the  Americans.  He  went  so  far  as
to  write  out  for  them  a  plan  of  operations.  After
the  disastrous  result  of  the  campaigns  of  1777,  the
brothers  did  not  wish  to  disclose  the  secret  of  their
peculiar  obligations  to  such  an  adviser,  and  Lee's
papers  remained  hidden  in  their  domestic  archives
until  1857.  A  fac-simile  of  it  is  given  in  George
H.  Moore's  monograph  on  the  "  Treason  of  Charles
Lee "  (New  York,  1858).  The  paper  is  in  Lee's
handwriting,  folded  and  indorsed  as  "  Mr.  Lee's
Plan— 29th  March,  1777."  The  indorsement  is  in
the  handwriting  of  Henry  Strachey,  secretary  to
the  royal  commissioners,  Lord  and  Sir  William
Howe.  .In  this  paper  Lee  expressly  abandons  the
American  cause,  enters  " sincerely  and  zealously"
into  the  plans  of  the  British  commanders,  and
recommends  an  expedition  to  Chesapeake  bay,
essentially  similar  to  that  which  was  actually  un-
dertaken in  the  following  summer.  This  advice
seems  to  throw  light  upon  the  movements  of  Gen.
Howe  in  July  and  August,  1777,  which  were  for-
merly regarded  as  so  strange.  I  f  anything  had  been
known  about  these  treacherous  shifts  on  the  part
of  Lee,  he  certainly  would  never  have  been  taken
back  into  the  American  service.  As  nothing  was
known  about  the  matter,  he  was  exchanged  early
in  May,  1778,  and  joined  Washington's  army  at
Valley  Forge.  It  is  not  altogether  easy  to  see  why
he  should  have  returned  to  his  place  in  the  Amer-
ican army  unless  it  may  have  been  with  the  inten-
tion of  playing  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  nor,
except  upon  some  such  theory,  is  it  easy  to  see  why
the  British  commander  should  have  acquiesced  in
his  return.  Possibly  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  who  had
lately  superseded  Sir  William  Howe,  may  have
known  nothing  of  Lee's  tergiversation ;  but  the
facts  seem  compatible  with  the  supposition  that  in
this  case  Sir  Henry  was  willing  to  profit  by  treach-
ery in  the  American  camp,  as  afterward  in  his
conspiracy  with  Arnold.  Perhaps  he  was  only
acting  upon the  declared  opinion  of  Sir  Joseph


LEE

Yorke,  that  such  a  man  as  Charles  Lee  was  "  the
worst  present  the  Americans  could  receive."  In
the  campaign  of  1778  Lee  proved  himself  to  be
such.  When,  in  June,  Sir  Henry  Clinton  evacuated
Philadelphia,  it  was  his  purpose  to  retreat  across
New  Jersey  to  New  York  without  a  battle,  if  pos-
sible. It  was  Washington's  object  to  attack  Clin-
ton on  his  retreat  and  cripple  him.  Lee  at  first
endeavored  to  dissuade  Washington  from  making
such  an  attack.  Then,  when  it  was  resolved  to
make  the  attack  upon  the  rear  division  of  the
British  army,  with  the  view  of  cutting  it  off  from
the  advanced  division,  Lee  showed  such  unwilling-
ness to  undertake  the  task  that  Washington  as-
signed it  to  Lafayette.  Each  of  the  opposing
armies  numbered  about  15,000  men,  and  each  was
marching  in  two  divisions,  three  or  four  miles
apart.  The  American  advance,  of  about  G,000
men  under  Lafayette,  was  to  attack  the  British
rear  division  upon  its  left  flank  and  engage  it  un-
til Washington,  with  the  main  body,  should  come
up  and  complete  its  discomfiture.  At  the  last
moment  Lee  changed  his  mind  and  solicited  the
command  of  the  advance,  which  Lafayette  grace-
fully gave  up  to  him.  Washington's  orders  to  Lee
were  explicit  and  peremptory.  On  the  morning  of
28  June,  Lee  overtook  the  enemy  near  Monmouth
Court-House ;  but  the  fighting  had  scarcely  begun
when  his  conduct  became  so  strange  and  his  orders
so  contradictory  as  to  excite  uneasiness  on  the
part  of  Lafayette,  who  sent  a  messenger  back  to
Washington,  begging  him  to  make  all  possible
haste  to  the  front.  When  the  commander-in-
chief,  with  his  main  force,  had  passed  Freehold
church  on  the  way  toward  the  scene  of  action,  he
was  astonished  at  the  spectacle  of  Lee's  division
in  disorderly  retreat,  with  the  enemy  close  at  their
heels.  In  a  fierce  outburst  of  wrath  he  upbraid-
ed Lee  for  his  behavior,  then  rallied  the  troops,
and  repelled  the  enemy.  Later  in  the  day  he  sent
Lee  to  the  rear.  During  the  night  Clinton  with-
drew from  the  field,  leaving  his  wounded  behind.
Lee's  extraordinary  conduct  in  failing  to  grasp
the  opportunity  that  all  believed  within  his  reach
excited  indignant  comment  among  officers  and
soldiers,  and  he  now  wrote  two  angry  letters  to
the  commander-in-chief,  to  which  Washington  re-
plied by  placing  him  under  arrest.  He  was  tried
by  court-martial  on  three  charges:  1.  Disobedi-
ence of  orders  in  not  attacking  the  enemy.  2..
Misbehavior  before  the  enemy  in  making  an  un-
necessary, disorderly,  and  shameful  retreat.  3.
Disrespect  to  the  commander-in-chief.  On  12
Aug.  he  was  found  guilty  on  all  three  charges,  and
suspended  from  command  in  the  army  for  the
term  of  one  year.  For  a  long  time  his  conduct  in
the  battle  of  Monmouth  seemed  utterly  unintel-
ligible ;  the  discoveries  since  made  regarding  his
behavior  while  in  captivity  do  not  yet  clear  it  up,
but  they  certainly  make  it  appear  susceptible  of  the
worst  possible  interpretation.  On  learning  the
sentence  of  the  court-martial,  which  was  presently
confirmed  by  congress,  Lee's  spite  against  Wash-
ington became  quite  ungovernable,  and  his  venom-
ous tongue  soon  got  him  into  trouble.  In  a  duel
with  Washington's  aide-de-camp,  Col.  Laurens,  he
was  wounded  in  the  arm.  After  some  time  he
addressed  an  impudent  letter  to  congress,  and  was
immediately  dismissed  from  the  army.  He  retired
in  disgrace  to  his  estate  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,
and  lived  there  long  enough  to  witness  the  triumph
of  the  cause  he  had  done  so  much  to  injure.  On  a
visit  to  Philadelphia  he  was  suddenly  seized  with
fever,  and  died  in  a  tavern,  friendless  and  alone.
His  last  words were :  "  Stand  by  me,  my  brave


LEE


LEE


661


grenadiers."  In  his  will  he  had  expressed  a  wish
that  he  might  not  be  buried  within  a  mile  of  any
church  or  meeting-house,  as  since  his  arrival  in
America  he  had  kept  so  much  bad  company  in  this
world  that  he  did  not  wish  to  continue  it  in  the
next.  He  was  buried,  however,  in  the  cemetery  of
Christ  church,  and  his  funeral  was  attended  by  the
president  of  congress  and  other  eminent  citizens.
Gen.  Lee  was  one  of  the  numerous  persons
credited  with  the  .authorship  of  "Junius.  In  a
letter  dated  at  Dover,  Del.,  1  Feb.,  1803,  published
in  the  "  Wilmington  Mirror  "  and  copied  into  the
"St.  James  Chronicle,"  London,  Thomas  Rodney
gave  the  substance  of  a  conversation  between  him-
self and  Gen.  Lee  in  1773.  Lee  observed  that  not
a  man  in  the  world  but  himself,  not  even  the  pub-
lisher, knew  the  secret  of  the  authorship  of  "Ju-
nius." Rodney  naturally  replied  that  no  one  but
the  author  himself  could  make  such  a  remark  as
that.  "  I  have  unguardedly  committed  myself,"
said  Lee,  "  and  it  would  be  folly  to  deny  to  you
that  1  am  the  author ;  but  1  must  request  you  will
not  reveal  it  during  my  life,  for  it  never  was  nor
ever  will  be  revealed  by  me  to  any  other."  Lee
then  went  on  to  point  out  several  circumstances
corroborative  of  his  claim.  Such  a  statement,
from  a  gentleman  of  so  high  a  character  as  Mr.
Rodney,  at  once  attracted  attention  in  Europe  and
America.  Two  intimate  friends  of  Lee  maintained
opposite  sides  of  the  question.  Ralph  Wormeley,
of  Virginia,  published  a  letter  in  which  he  argued
that  Lee  was  very  far  from  possessing  the  knowl-
edge of  parliamentary  history  exhibited  in  the  pages
of  "Junius."  Daniel  Carthy,  of  North  Carolina,
published  a  series  of  articles  in  the  "  Virginia  Ga-
zette "  in  refutation  of  Wormeley.  Dr.  Thomas
Girdlestone,  of  Yarmouth,  England,  followed  on
the  same  side  in  a  small  volume  entitled  "  Facts
tending  to  prove  that  Gen.  Lee  was  never  Absent
from  this  Country  for  any  Length  of  Time  during
the  Years  1767-72,  and  that  he  was  the  Author  of
'Junius' "  (London,  1813).  The  first  part  of  Dr.
Girdlestone's  title  points  to  the  fatal  obstacle  to  his
hypothesis.  The  simple  fact  is,  that  Lee  was  ab-
sent in  such  remote  countries  as  Poland  and
Turkey  at  the  very  dates  when  "Junius"  was  pub-
lishing letters  exhibiting  such  minute  and  detailed
acquaintance  with  affairs  every  day  occurring  in
London  as  could  only  have  been  possessed  by  an
eye-witness  living  on  the  spot.  This  fact  makes  it
impossible  that  Lee  should  have  written  the  "  Let-
ters of  Junius";  and  the  statement  of  Mr.  Rod-
ney only  goes  to  show  that  in  other  than  military
matters  Lee  was  willing  to  claim  what  did  not
belong  to  him.  The  most  interesting  thing  to-
d&y  in  Girdlestone's  volume  is  the  portrait  of  Lee
which  stands  as  frontispiece.  It  was  taken  from  a
drawing  by  Barham  Rushbrooke,  which,  though
designed  as  a  caricature,  was  "  allowed,  by  all  who
knew  Gen.  Lee,  to  be  the  only  successful  delinea-
tion either  of  his  countenance  or  person."  It  was
taken  on  his  return  from  Poland,  in  his  uniform
as  aide  to  King  Stanislaus,  and  shows  the  inevitable
dog.  Lee  was  very  fond  of  dogs,  and  was  seldom
seen  without  half  a  dozen  at  his  heels.  He  was  slov-
enly in  dress,  dirty  in  person,  repulsive  in  feature,
and  rude  in  manner,  always  ready  with  disagree-
able and  sarcastic  remarks.  His  eccentricities
were  so  marked  as  perhaps  to  afford  some  ground
for  the  plea  of  insanity  whereby  to  palliate  his
misdemeanors.  The  biography  of  Charles  Lee
has  not  yet  been  properly  written.  His  essays  and
miscellaneous  papers  were  edited,  with  an  inter-
esting biographical  sketch,  by  Edward  Langworthy,
under  the  title  "  Memoirs  of  the  late  Charles  Lee,


Esq."  (London,  1792).  The  sketch  by  Jared
Sparks  ("American  Biography,"  2d  series,  viii.,
Boston,  1846)  is  carefully  written,  but  has  little
value  to-day,  because  the  author  knew  nothing  of
that  treasonable  correspondence  with  the  Howes
which  modifies  so  profoundly  our  view  of  Lee's
whole  career  in  America.  George  H.  Moore  an-
nounced in  1860  a  biography  and  collection  of
essays,  with  documents  never  before  published:
but  this  much -needed  book  has  not  yet  made
its  appearance.  Dr.  Moore's  monograph  above
cited  contains  much  information  not  easily  to  be
found  elsewhere  ;  the  portrait  which  stands  as  its
frontispiece  is  reduced  from  the  folio  print  pub-
lished in  London  during  the  Revolutionary  war.
No  relationship  is  traceable  between  Charles  Lee
and  the  illustrious  Lees  of  Virginia.

LEE,  Charles  Alfred,  phvsician.  b.  in  Salis-
bury, Conn..  3  March,  1801 ;  d.  in  Peekskill,  N.  Y.,
14  Feb.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1822,  and  at  Berkshire  medical  college  in  1825.  In
1826  he  settled  in  New  York,  and  with  Dr.  James
Stewart  founded  the  Northern  dispensary  of  that
city,  of  which  he  was  long  the  chief  physician.
Dr.  Lee  held  professorships  at  various  times,
chiefly  of  materia  medica  and  obstetrics,  in  the
medical  departments  of  the  University  of  New
York  and  elsewhere.  He  was  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  medical  college  of  the  University
of  New  York,  and  of  the  Buffalo  medical  college,
of  which  he  was  professor  emeritus  at  the  time  of
his  death.  His  attention  during  his  later  years
was  devoted  to  the  subject  of  the  treatment  of  the
insane,  and  his  views  on  the  colonization  or  out-
door system,  which  he  personally  investigated  while
he  was  in  Europe  in  1865,  were  adopted  after  his
return  by  some  of  the  chief  institutions  for  the  in-
sane in  this  country.  For  some  years  he  conducted
the  "  New  York  Journal  of  Medicine,"  and  he  edited
the  American  edition  of  Copeland's  "  Dictionary  of
Practical  Medicine"  (New  York,  1844-'58).  Be-
sides writing  numerous  medical  articles,  he  was
the  author  of  several  successful  text-books,  "  Ele-
ments of  Geology  for  Popular  Use "  (New  York),
and  "  Human  Physiology.

LEE,  Chauncey,  clergyman,  b.  in  Coventry,
Conn.,  10  July,  1718 ;  d.  in  Hartwick,  N.  Y..  5
Nov.,  1842.  His  father,  Jonathan,  was  the  first
minister  that  settled  in  Salisbury,  Conn.  Chaun-
cey was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1784,  and,  after
practising  law  for  a  short  time,  studied  theology,
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  Sunderland,  Vt.,  in  1790.  He  officiated
successively  there,  at  Colebrook,  N.  Y.,  and  at
Marlborough,  Conn.,  till  1835,  when  he  retired
from  active  duty.  He  was  skilled  in  music,  com-
posed verses,  and  was  a  classical  scholar.  Colum-
bia gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1823.  His
publications  include  an  arithmetic  (Boston,  1797);
a  "Poetical  Version  of  the  Book  of  Job"  (1807);
"Sermons  for  Revivals"  (1824);  and  "Letters
from  Aristarchus  to  Philemon"  (1833).

LEE,  Day  Kellogg,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sempro-
nius,  N.  Y.,  10  Sept.,  1816;  d.  in  New  York  city,
2  June,  1869.  He  entered  the  ministry  in  1835,
and  was  pastor  of  various  Universalist  churches
until  1865,  when  he  settled  in  New  York  city.
Tufts  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in
1864.  and  the  theological  school  of  St.  Lawrence
university,  Canton,  N.  Y.,  that  of  D.  D.  in  1868,
His  publications  include  three  volumes  on  the
labor  question,  entitled  "  Summerfield,  or  Life  on  a
Farm  *  (Auburn,  N.  Y.,  1852) ;  "  The  Master  Build-
er, or  Life  at  a  Trade"  (New  York,  1854);  and
"  Merrimack,  or  Life  at  a  Loom  "  (1854).


662


LEE


LEE


LEE,  Eliza  Buckminster,  author,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  in  1794;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  22
June,  1864.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Rev.  Joseph
Buckminster,  from  whom,  and  from  her  brother,
Joseph  S.  Buckminster,  she  acquired  a  classical
education  and  a  fondness  for  literary  pursuits.
She  married  Thomas  Lee,  of  Boston,  and  passed  the
greater  part  of  her  life  in  that  city  and  in  its
vicinity.  Her  career  as  an  author  began  with
"  Sketches  of  New  England  Life "  (Boston,  1837),
which  was  followed  by  "  Delusion "  (1839).  She
then  published  a  translation  from  the  German  of
the  "  Life  of  Jean  Paul  Richter  "  (New  York,  1842),
and  "Walt  and  Vult,  or  the  Twins"  (1845),  from
Richter's  "  Flegeljahre."  Her  other  writings  are
"Naomi,  or  Boston  Two  Hundred  Years  Ago"
(Boston,  1848) ;  "  Memoir  of  Dr.  Joseph  Buckmin-
ster and  of  his  Son,  Rev.  Joseph  Stevens  Buckmin-
ster" (1849);  "Florence,  the  Parish  Orphan"
(1850) ;  "  Parthenia,  or  the  Last  Days  of  Pagan-
ism "  (1858) ;  and  a  translation  of  Berthold  Auer-
bach's  "  Barefoot  Maiden  "  (1860).

LEE,  Ezra,  soldier,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,  in  1749 ;
d.  there,  29  Oct.,  1821.  In  August,  1776,  he  was
selected  by  Gen.  Samuel  H.  Parsons,  with  the  ap-
proval of  Washington,  for  the  hazardous  enterprise
of  affixing  to  the  British  ship  Eagle,  then  lying  in
New  York  harbor,  an  infernal  machine  called  the
"  Marine  Turtle,"  the  invention  of  David  Bushnell
(q.  v.).  The  attempt  was  only  partially  successful,
owing  to  the  thickness  of  the  ship's  copper  sheath-
ing, but  Lee  landed  safely  after  remaining  several
hours  in  the  water,  and  received  the  congratulations
of  Washington,  who  afterward  employed  him  on  se-
cret service.  Lee  made  a  similar  attempt  a  short
time  afterward  with  Bushnell's  machine  and  en-
deavored to  destroy  a  British  frigate  that  lay
opposite  Bloomingdale,  N.  Y.,  but  was  discovered
and  compelled  to  abandon  the  enterprise.  He  sub-
sequently participated  in  the  battles  of  Trenton,
Brandywine,  and  Monmouth.

LEE,  Gideon,  merchant,  b.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,
27  April,  1778 ;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  21  Aug.,  1841.
He  was  a  shoemaker  by  trade,  began  business  on
his  own  account  in  Worthington,  Mass.,  and,  re-
moving to  New  York  city  in  1807,  entered  the
leather  trade,  and,  as  agent  for  the  Hampshire
Leather  Manufactory,  established  an  extensive  and
lucrative  business.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature in  1822,  became  mayor  of  New  York  in
1833,  and  displayed  courage  and  energy  in  sup-
pressing the  election  riots  of  1833.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Jackson  Democrat  in  1834  and
served  till  1837,  and  in  1840  he  was  a  presidential
elector.  His  son-in-law,  Charles  M.  Leupp,  a  lover
and  patron  of  American  art,  and  a  member  of  the
Century  Club,  was  associated  with  him  in  the  leath-
er trade,  and  succeeded  to  his  business.

LEE,  Hannah  Farnham  Sawyer,  author,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  in  1780;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
27  Dec,  1865.  She  was  the  daughter  of  a  physician
of  Newburyport,  married  George  Gardiner  Lee.
of  Boston,  early  in  life,  and  resided  in  the  latter
city  for  many  years.  Her  first  acknowledged  pub-
lication was  an  appendix  to  Hannah  Adams's
memoir  of  herself  (Boston,  1832).  This  was  suc-
ceeded by  "Grace  Seymour"  (New  York,  1835),
and  "Three  Experiments  in  Living"  (1838).  a  work
suggested  by  the  commercial  disasters  of  the  time,
which  passed  through  more  than  thirty  editions  in
the  United  States,  and  as  many  as  ten  in  England.
Her  works  exercised  a  wide  and  healthful  influence
on  the  youth  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  nineteenth
century.  Her  other  writings  include  many  tracts
and  essays  that  were  published  anonymously,  and


"  Eleanor  Fulton,"  a  sequel  to  "  Three  Experiments
in  Living"  (Boston,  1838);  "Familiar  Sketches
of  the  Old  Painters "  (1838) ;  "The  Huguenots  in
France  and  America  "  (1842) ;  "  Stories  from  Life  "
(1849);  "  Memoir  of  Pierre  Toussaint "  (1853) ;  and
"  Hisory  of  Sculptors  and  Sculpture  "  (1854).

LEE,  Henry,  pioneer,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1758:
d.  in  Mason  county,  Ky.,  in  1846.  He  was  well
educated,  and  studied  surveying,  which  profession
he  pursued  for  many  years  in  Mason  county,
Ky.,  having  been  one  of  the  early  settlers  in  that
state.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legisla-
ture from  the  district  of  Kentucky,  and  also  of  the
convention  that  adopted  the  constitution  of  the
United  States.  He  was  elected  to  the  convention
at  Danville  in  1787,  was  one  of  the  commissioners
that  located  the  seat  of  government  at  Frankfort,
and  county  lieutenant  for  all  the  territory  north
of  Licking  river.  He  then  studied  law,  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  quarter  sessions  and  associate
judge  of  the  circuit  court  for  Mason  county,  and
was  also  for  many  years  president  of  the  Washing-
ton branch  of  the  Bank  of  Kentucky.  He  was
a  sagacious  man,  of  excellent  business  habits,  and
amassed  a  large  fortune.  His  personal  appearance
was  imposing,  as  he  was  tall  and  powerfully  built.

LEE,  Henry  Washington,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Hamden,  Conn.,  29  July,  1815;  d.  in  Davenport,
Iowa,  26  Sept.,  1874.  He  received  his  education
and  training  for  college  at  the  Episcopal  academy,
Cheshire,  Conn.,  removed  to  Massachusetts,  opened
a  private  school  at  Taunton,  and  studied  theology
while  engaged  in  school-work.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  Grace  church,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  27
May,  1838,  by  Bishop  Griswold,  and  priest  in  St.
Anne's  church,  Lowell,  9  Oct.,  1839,  by  the  same
bishop.  He  served  part  of  his  diaconate  in  New
Bedford,  but  in  October,  1839,  he  removed  to
Springfield,  Mass.,  and  became  rector  of  Christ
church,  2  April,  1840.  Three  years  later  he  ac-
cepted the  rectorship  of  St.  Luke's  church,  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  which  post  he  occupied  for  eleven  years.
He  was  elected  first  bishop  of  Iowa,  and  conse-
crated in  St.  Luke's  church,  Rochester,  18  Oct.,
1854.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Ho-
bart  college  in  1850,  and  from  the  University  of
Rochester  in  1852.  Bishop  Lee  received  also  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Cambridge,
England,  in  1867.  He  made  no  contributions  to
church  literature.

LEE,  James,  merchant,  b.  in  Scotland  in  1795 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  16  June,  1874.  For  more
than  forty  years  he  was  a  prosperous  merchant  in
New  York  city,  and  was  principally  engaged  in  the
Scotch  trade.  He  was  for  a  long  time  connected
with  the  New  York  society  library,  and  Brown's
statue  of  Washington  on  Union  square  was  erected
mainly  through  his  instrumentality.  When  a  rich
and  penurious  merchant,  in  answer  to  his  appeal
for  a  subscription,  answered  that  a  statue  was  un-
necessary, as  Gen.  Washington  was  enshrined  in
the  hearts  of  his  countrymen,  Mr.  Lee  answered :

"  Well,  Mr.  R ,  if  he  is  in  your  heart,  he  is  in

a  d — d  tight  place."

LEE,  Jesse,  missionary,  b.  in  Prince  George
county,  Va.,  12  March,  1758;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md..
12  Sept.,  1816.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  removed
to  North  Carolina,  and,  entering  the  ministry  of
the  Methodist  church,  preached  his  first  sermon  in
1779.  In  1780  he  was  drafted  into  the  militia  to
repel  the  British  invasion  of  South  Carolina,  and
on  his  refusal  to  do  active  duty  was  impressed  as  a
chaplain,  serving  four  months  in  that  capacity.
His  first  appointment  was  near  Eden  ton.  N.  C,
and  in  1783  he  was  received  into  the  conference  on


LEE


LEE


663


trial.  He  was  appointed  to  the  Salisbury  circuit  in
1784,  and  accompanied  Bishop  Asbury  on  a  tour  of
labor  that  extended  from  Norfolk,  Va.,  to  the  ex-
treme southwest  of  North  Carolina.  Together  they
reorganized  the  various  circuits  that  nearly  had
been  destroyed  by  the  war.  After  three  years  in
North  Carolina,  Virginia,  New  Jersey,  and  Mary-
land, he  was  sent  in  1781)  to  Stamford  circuit,  Conn.,
where  his  preaching  excited  general  attention.
Having  visited  and  established  classes  in  Norwalk,
New  Haven,  and  several  adjacent  towns,  he  arrived
in  Boston  in  1790,  and  preached  his  first  sermon
on  the  common.  For  six  years  he  travelled
throughout  New  England,  preaching  in  barns,
private  houses,  and  on  the  highway,  forming  new
circuits  and  directing  the  labors  of  his  assistants.
He  became  an  assistant  to  Bishop  Asbury  in  1796,
and  held  conferences  and  superintended  churches.
His  subsequent  life  was  passed  for  the  most  part
in  the  south  as  pastor  and  presiding  elder.  In  1808
he  advocated  a  delegated  general  conference,  a  plan
that  he  had  urged  fourteen  years  before,  and  on  its
adoption  the  general  conference  became  the  su-

Sreme  authority  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
[e  was  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  house  of  representa-
tives in  1807,  1812,  and  1813,  and  from  1814  until
his  death  he  was  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  senate.
Lee's  labors  in  New  England  earned  him  the  title
of  the  "Apostle  of  Methodism."  He  published
"A  History  of  Methodism  "  (1807),  which  was  the
first  work  on  the  subject,  and  an  authority  in  the
early  history  of  that  church.  See  "  Life  and  Times
of  Jesse  Lee,"  by  Leroy  M.  Lee  (Richmond,  Va..
1848). — His  nephew,  Lerov  Madison,  clergyman,
b.  in  Petersburg,  Va..  30  April,  1808;  d.  in  Ash-
land, Va.,  20  April,  1882,  studied  law,  but  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  church  in  1828.  He
occupied  many  important  stations  in  the  Virginia
conference  till  183(3,  when  he  became  editor  of  the
Richmond  "  Christian  Advocate."  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  general  conference  in  1844,  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  the  events  that  resulted  in  the  division
of  the  church,  and  represented  the  Virginia  con-
ference in  the  Louisville,  Ky.,  conference  of  1845,
when  the  organization  of  the  Methodist  church,
south,  was  effected.  He  retired  from  the  editorial
management  of  the  "Christian  Advocate  "  in  1858,
resumed  the  work  of  the  itinerant  ministry,  and
became  in  1874  presiding  elder  of  the  Petersburg
district  of  the  Virginia  conference.  Besides  oc-
casional sermons,  and  the  life  of  his  uncle,  men-
tioned above,  he  published  "  Advice  to  a  Young
Convert " (Richmond,  1834);  and  "The  Great  Sup-
per not  Calvanistic  "  (1855).

LEE,  Luther,  clergyman,  b.  in  Schoharie.  N.  Y..
30  Nov.,  1800.  He  joined  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1821,  soon  began  to  preach,  and  in  1827
entered  the  Genesee  conference,  becoming  an  itin-
erant missionary,  preacher,  and  successful  temper-
ance lecturer.  He  began  to  preach  against  slavery
in  1836,  was  mobbed  several  times,  and  in  1841
established  and  edited  "  The  New  England  Christian
Advocate,"  an  anti-slavery  journal,  at  Lowell,  Mass.
He  subsequently  edited"  The  Sword  of  Truth,"
and  in  1842  seceded  from  the  Methodist  church,
began  a  weekly  journal,  "The  True  Wesleyan,"
and  when  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  connection  was
organized,  became  pastor  of  that  church  in  Syra-
cuse, N.  Y.  He  was  the  first  president  of  the  first
general  conference  of  the  new  church,  was  editor
of  the  organ  of  that  body,  "The  True  Wesleyan,"
till  1852,  and  after  that  date  was  successively  pastor
of  churches  in  Syracuse  and  Fulton,  N.  Y.  In
1854-'o  he  edited  a  periodical  entitled  "  The  Evan-
gelical Pulpit." He  became  president  and  profes-


sor of  theology  in  the  Michigan  union  college  at
Leoni  in  1856,  resigning  the  next  year  to  officiate
in  churches  in  Ohio.  From  1864  till  1867  he  was
connected  with  Adrian  college,  Mich.,  and  at  the
latter  date  returned  to  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church,  slavery,  which  was  the  cause  of  the  or-
ganization of  the  Wesleyan  connection,  having
ceased  to  exist.  Since  1867  he  has  been  a  member
of  the  Michigan  conference,  and  is  now  (1887)  su-
perannuated. His  publications  include  "  Universal-
ism  Examined  and  Refuted"  (New  York,  1836);
"The  Immortality  of  the  Soul"  (1846);  "Revival
Manual "  (1850) ;  "Church  Polity  "  (1850);  "Slav-
ery Examined  in  the  Light  of  the  Bible "  (1855) ;
and  "  Elements  of  Theology  "  (1856).

LEE,  Richard,  statesman,  b.  in  Shropshire,
England,  about  1590;  d.  in  Virginia  after  1660,
was  descended,  in  the  ninth  generation,  from  Sir
Walter  Lee,  of  Lee  Hall,  parish  of  Widenburg,
Cheshire,  who  was  living  in  1330,  and  whose  an-
cestors had  long  been  seated  at  the  same  place.
Walter's  descendant,  Sir  Robert  Lee,  of  Hulcoto.
Bucks,  b.  15  June,  1543;  d.  in  August,  1616,  married,
in  1561,  Lucy,  daughter  of  Thomas  Pigott,  of  Beau-
champton,  and  had  eight  sons.  The  eldest,  Sir
Henry,  was  one  of  the  first  baronets  created  by
James  I.  in  1612,  and  was  grandfather  of  Sir  Ed-
ward, raised  to  the  peerage  in  1674  as  Earl  of
Lichfield.  The  seventh,  Richard,  the  subject  of  this
article,  was  member  of  the  privy  council  of  Charles
I.,  and  early  in  the  reign  of  that  monarch  emi-
grated to  Virginia  with  a  number  of  followers,
whom  he  settled  upon  lands  improved  at  his  own
expense.  He  made  several  voyages  to  England,
bringing  back  settlers  each  time,  and  finally  made
his  home  in  Northumberland  county.  For  many
years  he  was  secretary  to  Sir  William  Berkeley.
On  the  death  of  Charles  I.,  Berkeley  and  Leo
declared  allegiance  to  his  son,  and  invited  the
fugitive  royalists  to  come  to  Virginia.  More  than
300  came  toward  the  end  of  1649.  In  the  fol-
lowing year  Charles  II.  was  invited  to  come  him-
self to  Virginia  as  its  ruler.  In  1652  the  victorious
parliament  sent  an  expedition  to  Virginia,  and  a
treaty  was  made  in  virtue  of  which  Berkeley  was
removed  and  a  provisional  government  established.
While  Charles  II.  was  at  Breda,  Lee  visited  him
there,  to  learn  whether  he  could  undertake  to  pro-
tect the  colony  in  case  it  should  again  declare  its
allegiance  to  him  ;  but,  as  no  assurance  of  support
could  be  obtained,  he  returned  to  Virginia,  and
took  no  further  measures  until  Cromwell's  death.
Berkeley  and  Lee  then  issued  a  proclamation  of
allegiance  to  Charles  II.  as  "King  of  England,
France,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  Virginia."  The
assembly  nevertheless  consulted  the  dictates  of
prudence  in  acknowledging  obedience  to  Richard
Cromwell.  In  recognition  of  its  loyalty,  Charles
afterward  allowed  Virginia  to  quarter  its  arms
with  those  of  England,  France,  Scotland,  and  Ire-
land, with  the  motto  "  En  dat  Virginia  quintam  " ;
after  the  union  of  England  with  Scotland,  in  1707,
this  was  changed  to  "  En  dat  Virginia  quartern."
"  Behold.  Virginia  makes  the  fourth."  Hence,
according  to  the  younger  Richard  Henry  Lee,  the
title  of  "  Old  Dominion,"  often  given  to  Virginia.
According  to  William  Lee,  his  great-grandson,  the
founder  of  the  Lees  of  Virginia  was  "a  man  of
good  stature,  comely  visage,  enterprising  genius,
sound  head,  vigorous  spirit,  and  generous  nature  "
— qualities  that  may  be  recognized  in  many  of  his
descendants. — His  second  son,  Richard,  d.  in  Vir-
ginia after  1690,  was  educated  at  Oxford,  and  de-
voted his  life  to  study,  being  especially  proficient
in  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew. He  was  a  member


684


LEE


LEE


of  the  governor's  council.  He  married  Miss  Corbin.
of  Staffordshire,  and  left  five  sons,  Richard,  Phil-
ip, Thomas.  Francis,  Henry,  and  one  daughter,
who  married  the  second  William  Fitzhugh. —
Thomas,  third  son  of  the  preceding,  d.  in  Virginia
in  1750,  was  for  many  years  president  of  the  coun-


cil. He  organized  a  company  for  the  exploration
and  settlement  of  lands  in  the  Ohio  valley,  but  the
scheme  was  premature  and  unsuccessful.  It  is
said  that  he  once  remarked  to  one  of  his  friends
that  he  "  had  no  doubt  this  country  would  in  time
declare  itself  independent  of  Great  Britain,  and
that  the  seat  of  its  government  would  be  near  the
little  falls  of  the  Potomac  river."  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  had  just  been  appointed  royal  gov-
ernor of  Virginia.  During  his  life  the  original
manor-house,  built  by  Richard,  was  burned,  and
Queen  Caroline  sent  him  a  sum  of  money  with
which  to  replace  it.  He  then  built  Stratford
House,  which  is  represented  in  the  illustration,
and  which  is  still  standing.  He  married  Hannah,
daughter  of  Col.  Philip  Ludwell,  of  Green  Spring,
near  Williamsburg,  whose  father  had  been  gov-
ernor of  North  Carolina.  By  this  marriage  he  had
six  sons,  Philip  Ludwell,  Thomas  Ludwell,  Rich-
ard Henry,  Francis  Lightfoot,  William,  and  Ar-
thur, and  two  daughters. — His  second  son,  Thomas
Ludwell,  statesman,  b.  in  Stafford,  Va.,  about
1730;  d.  in  1777,  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  He  took  an  active  part  in  public
affairs,  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house  of
burgesses,  a  delegate  to  the  conventions  of  July
and  December,  1775,  and  was  also  a  member  of
the  committee  of  safety.  In  the  convention  of
May,  1776,  he  was  appointed  one  of  a  commit-
tee to  draft  a  declaration  of  rights  and  a  plan
of  government.  On  the  organization  of  the  Vir-
ginia state  government  he  was  one  of  the  five
"  revisors,"  and  was  afterward  elected  a  judge  of
the  general  court. — Richard  Henry,  statesman,
b.  in  Stratford,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  20  Jan.,
1732;  d.  in  Chantilly,  Va.,  19  June,  1794,  was
third  son  of  Thomas.  At  an  early  age  he  was
sent  over  to  England  and  educated  at  the  academy
of  Wakefield  in  Yorkshire.  In  1752  he  returned
to  Virginia.  The  wealth  of  his  family  was  such
that  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  earn  a  liv-
ing, but,  without  any  view  to  professional  prac-
tice, he  applied  himself  with  great  diligence  to  the
study  of  law.  Not  only  English  but  Roman  law
occupied  his  attention,  and  he  was  an  earnest
student  of  history.  In  1757  he  was  appointed
justice  of  the  peace  for  Westmoreland  county.  In
1761  he  was  elected  to  the  house  of  burgesses,  of
which  he  remained  a  member  until  1788.  Extreme
diffidence  for  some  time  prevented  his  taking  any
part  in  the  debates.  His  first  speech  was  on  a
motion  "  to  lay  so  heavy  a  duty  on  the  importation
of  slaves  as  effectually  to  put  an  end  to  that


iniquitous  and  disgraceful  traffic  within  the  colony
of  Virginia."  On  this  occasion  his  hatred  of
slavery  overcame  his  diffidence,  and  he  made  a
powerful  speech  containing  the  germs  of  the  prin-
cipal arguments  used  in  later  days  by  the  northern
Abolitionists.  He  was  an  energetic  opponent  of
the  stamp-act,  and  in  1765  formed  an  association
of  citizens  of  Westmoreland  county  for  the  pur-
pose of  deterring  all  persons  from  undertaking  to
sell  stamped  paper.  A  Tory  gentleman  in  the
neighborhood  accepted  the  office  of  stamp-collector,
and  boasted  that  he  would  force  the  stamped  pa-
per upon  the  people  in  spite  of  all  opposition.
Mr.  Lee,  being  then  captain  _of  a  volunteer  com-
pany of  light  horse,  at  once  went  with  his  men  to
this  gentleman's  house  and  made  him  deliver  up
his  commission  as  collector  and  all  the  stamped
paper  in  his  possession,  and  bind  himself  by  oath
never  again  to  meddle  with  such  matters ;  the
commission  and  the  obnoxious  paper  were  there-
upon burned  with  due  ceremony  in  a  bonfire  on
the  lawn. At  the  news  of  the  Townshend  acts  of

1767,  Mr.  Lee  moved,  in  the  house  of  burgesses,  a
petition  to  the  king,  setting  forth  in  pointed
terms  the  grievances  of  the  colonies. In  July,

1768,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  John  Dickinson,  suggest-
ing that  all  the  colonies  should  appoint  select
committees  "  for  mutual  information  and  corre-
spondence between  the  lovers  of  liberty  in  every
province."  The  suggestion  was  in  harmony  with
the  views  of  the  famous  "circular  letter'*  of  the
Massachusetts  assembly,  written  by  Samuel  Adams
and  lately  sent  forth  to  all  the  colonies.  There
has  been  some  discussion  as  to  whether  Adams  or
Lee  is  to  be  credited  with  the  first  suggestion  of
those  remarkable  "  committees  of  correspondence  "
which  organized  the  American  Revolution.  The
earliest  sugges-
tion of  such  a
step,  however,  is
to  be  found  in  a
letter  from  the
great  Boston
preacher,  Jona-
than Mayhew,  to
James  Otis,  in
June,  1766.  The
letter  just  men-
tioned from  Lee
to  Dickinson
seems  to  have
come  next  in
point  of  date,
and  at  the  same
time  Christopher
Gadsden  appears  y.  /
to  have  received  /ft "  t^a^<y%tf*ry'~£e&/
from  Lee  a  letter e  " /

of  similar  purport.  Mr.  Lee  may  or  may  not  have
heard  of  Mayhcw's  suggestion.  The  idea  was  one
that  might  naturally  have  occurred  to  several  of
these  eminent  men  independently.  The  machinery
of  committees  of  correspondence  was  first  actually
set  in  motion  by  Samuel  Adams,  as  between  the
towns  of  Massachusetts,  in  1772.  The  project  of  in-
tercolonial committees  was  first  put  into  practical
shape  by  the  Virginia  house  of  burgesses  in  the
spring  of  1773,  on  motion  of  the  youthful  Dabney
Carr,  brother-in-law  of  Thomas  Jefferson.  Mr.  Lee
was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  committee  then  ap-
pointed, and  about  this  time  he  wrote  to  Samuel
Adams  a  letter,  which  was  the  beginning  of  the  life-
long friendship  between  the  two  great  leaders.  In
August,  1774,  Mr.  Lee  was  chosen  delegate  to  the
1st  Continental  congress  just  about  to  assemble  at


LEE


LEE


665


Philadelphia.  He  was  member  of  the  committees
for  stating  the  rights  of  the  colonies,  for  enforcing
commercial  non-intercourse  with  Great  Britain,  and
for  preparing  suitable  addresses  to  the  king  and  to
the  colonies— Canada,  New  Brunswick,  Nova  Sco-
tia, Georgia,  and  the  Floridas — that  had  not  sent
delegates  to  the  congress.  In  the  2d  congress
he  drew  up  the  address  to  the  people  of  Great
Britain,  which,  along  with  a  last  petition  to  the
king,  was  carried  over  to  London  by  Richard
Penn  in  August,  1775.  About  this  time  Mr.  Lee
was  chosen  lieutenant  of  Westmoreland  county,
an  office  which,  after  the  analogy  of  the  lord-lieu-
tenancy of  a  county  in  England,  gave  him  com-
mand of  the  militia ;  hence  he  is  often  addressed
or  described,  in  writings  of  the  time,  as  "  Colonel
Lee."  For  more  than  a  year  he  had  openly  and
warmly  advocated  a  declaration  of  independence ;
and  after  the  Virginia  convention,  17  May,  1776,
had  instructed  its  delegates  in  congress  to  propose
such  a  measure,  it  was  Lee  who  took  the  foremost
part.  On  7  June  he  moved  "  that  these  united
colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and
independent  states ;  and  that  all  political  connec-
tion between  them  and  the  state  of  Great  Britain
is,  and  ought  to  be,  totally  dissolved."  The
motion  was  seconded  by  John  Adams.  Congress
deferred  action  for  three  weeks,  in  order  that  more
definite  instructions  might  be  received  from  the
middle  colonies.  During  the  interval  Mr.  Lee  was
called  home  by  the  illness  of  his  wife,  so  that  Mr.
Jefferson  was  appointed  in  his  place  as  chairman
of  the  committee  for  preparing  a  draft  of  the  pro-
posed declaration.  For  the  same  reason,  the  task
of  defending  the  motion,  when  taken  up  for  dis-
cussion, fell  mainly  upon  John  Adams,  who  had
seconded  it.  During  the  next  four  years  Mr.  Lee
served  on  more  than  a  hundred  committees,  and
his  labors  in  congress  were  so  arduous  as  to  injure
his  health,  so  that  he  was  several  times  obliged  to
go  home  and  devote  himself  to  recruiting  his
strength.  In  1780-'2  he  did  not  take  his  seat  in
congress,  inasmuch  as  the  affairs  of  Virginia
seemed  to  require  his  presence  in  the  assembly  of
that  state.  Besides  the  business  of  defence  against
the  British  army  then  operating  in  the  southern
states,  two  questions  of  great  importance  were
then  debated  in  Virginia.  The  one  related  to  the
propriety  of  making  a  depreciated  paper  currency
a  legal  tender  for  debts,  the  other  was  brought  up
by  a  proposal  to  repudiate  all  debts  to  British
merchants  contracted  by  citizens  of  Virginia  be-
fore the  beginning  of  the  war.  In  these  debates
Mr  Lee  took  strong  ground  against  paper  money,
and  he  vehemently  condemned  the  repudiation  of
debts,  declaring  that  it  were  better  to  be  "  the
honest  slaves  of  Great  Britain  than  to  become  dis-
honest freemen."  After  the  peace  he  devoted
much  time  to  considering  the  best  method  of
funding  the  public  debt  of  the  state,  and  providing
for  the  revival  of  public  credit.  On  30  Nov.,  1784,
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  Continental  con-
gress. At  the  end  of  the  presidential  term  of  one
year  he  returned  to  Virginia,  but  in  1787  was  sent
again  to  the  congress.  He  was  not  a  member  of  the
convention  at  Philadelphia  which  in  the  summer
of  that  year  framed  our  Federal  constitution  ;  and
when  the  new  constitution  was  reported  to  con-
gress, he  earnestly  opposed  its  adoption.  He
thought  it  provided  for  a  consolidated  national
power  that  would  ultimately  destroy  the  state
governments  and  end  in  a  centralized  despotism.
His  correspondence  at  this  time  with  Samuel
Adams,  who  was  inclined  to  entertain  the  same
fears,  is  very  instructive. These  misgivings  were


shared  by  Patrick  Henry  and  many  other  patriotic
Virginians,  and  the  first  senators  elected  by  their
state  were  Lee  and  Grayson,  in  opposition  to  two
Federalists,  one.  of  whom  was  James  Madison,  who
had  been  foremost  in  the  constructive  work  of  the
great  convention.  As  senator,  Mr.  Lee  proposed
the  tenth  amendment  to  the  constitution  in  these
words:  "  The  powers  not  delegated  bv  the  consti-
tution to  the  United  States,  nor  prohibited  by  it  to
the  states,  are  reserved  to  the  states  respectively."
The  amendment,  as  adopted,  substituted  the  word
"  granted  "  for  "  delegated,"  and  added  at  the  end
the  words  "  or  to  the  people."  Though  at  first  an
Anti-Federalist,  Mr.  Lee  came  to  be  a  warm  sup-
porter of  Washington's  administration,  and  es-
pecially approved  of  his  course  in  the  affair  of
"citizen"  Genet.  In  1792  he  was  obliged  by  fail-
ing health  to  resign  his  seat  in  the  senate  and
retire  to  his  estate  at  Chantilly,  where  he  spent  the
last  two  years  of  his  life.

Mr.  Lee  was  tall  and  graceful  in  person  and
striking  in  feature.  His  voice  was  clear  and  rich,
and  his  oratory  impressive.  He  did  not  waste  time
in  rhetoric,  but  spoke  briefly  and  to  the  point.  His
ideas  were  so  lucid  and  his  expression  so  forcible
that  when  he  sat  down  after  a  few  weighty  words
it  used  to  seem  as  if  there  were  no  more  to  be  said
on  the  subject.  His  capacity  for  work  was  great,
though  sometimes  limited  by  poor  health  ;  as  Dr.
Rush  said,  "His  mind  was  like  a  sword  toe  large
for  its  scabbard."  He  was  twice  married,  and  left,
by  his  first  wife,  a  Miss  Aylett,  two  sons  and  two
daughters ;  by  his  second,  a  Miss  Pinkard.  two
daughters.  His  life  has  been  written  by  his
grandson,  Richard  Henry  Lee,  of  Leesburg,  Va.,
"  Memoir  of  the  Life  of  Richard  Henry  Lee,  and
his  Correspondence"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1825).
See  also  Bishop  Meade's  "Old  Churches,  Ministers,
and  Families  of  Virginia,"  vol.  ii.,  pp.  135-143. —
Francis  Lightfoot,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Stratford.  Westmoreland  co.,
Va.,  14  Oct.,  1734 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  3  April,
1797,  was  fourth
son  of  Thomas
Lee.  He  was  ed-
ucated at  home,
having  for  tutor
a  Scotch  clergy-
man named
Craig.  In  1705
he  was  elected  to
the  house  of  bur-
gesses for  Lou-
don county.  In
1772  he  married
Rebecca,  daugh-
ter of  Col.  John
Tayloe,  of  Rich-
mondcounty,and
established  his
residence  in  that
county,  which  he
was  forthwith  chosen  to  represent  in  the  house
of  burgesses.  He  was  elected  delegate  to  the  Con-
tinental congress,  15  Aug.,  1775,  on  the  resigna-
tion of  Col.  Bland,  and  was  re-elected  in  the  three
following  years.  He  signed  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  and  was  a  member  of  the  committee
that  drew  up  the  articles  of  confederation.  He
rendered  good  service  in  the  debates  on  the  New-
foundland fisheries  and  the  navigation  of  the
Mississippi,  insisting  that  no  peace  should  be
made  with  Great  Britain  unless  she  conceded  the
American  demands  upon  both  these  points.  In
the  spring  of  1779  he  retired  from  congress,  and,


CP^l&'tsCtj


666


LEE


LEE


except  for  a  brief  service  in  the  Virginia  legisla-
ture, took  no  further  part  in  public  affairs.  A
short  sketch  of  his  life  is  to  be  found  in  the
ninth  volume  of  Sanderson's  "Biography  of  the
Signers  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence  "
(Philadelphia,  1827).— William,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Stratford,  Va.,  in  1737;  d.  at  Green  Spring,  Va.,
27  June,  1795,  was  fifth  son  of  Thomas  Lee.  He
engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  London,  and
was  for  a  time  agent  for  Virginia.  In  1773  he
was  elected  sheriff  of  Middlesex,  and  in  l??-'*
alderman  of  London.  After  the  breaking  out  of
the  war  he  accompanied  his  brother  Arthur  to
France,  where  early  in  1777  he  was  appointed
commercial  agent  for  the  United  States  at  Nantes.
He  was  afterward  appointed  commissioner  to  the
Hague,  and  to  Berlin  and  Vienna,  but,  owing  to
the  unwillingness  of  the  neutral  powers  to  offend
Great  Britain  by  receiving  an  American  commis-
sioner, he  was  obliged  to  remain  a  great  part  of
the  time  in  Paris.  In  1778  an  Amsterdam  mer-
chant, Jan  de  Neufville,  procured  a  loan  for  the
United  States  from  Holland,  and  was  allowed  by
Van  Berckel,  burgomaster  of  Amsterdam,  to  meet
Lee  at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  to  confer  with  him  about
the  matter.  During  the  conference  Lee  and  Neuf-
ville drew  up  a  commercial  treaty  to  be  adopted
by  congress  and  the  states-general.  This  docu-
ment, with  Neufs'ille's  signature,  re-enforced  by
that  of  Van  Berekel,  was  sent  to  Philadelphia,  and
in  October,  1780,  was  found  among  the  papers  of
Henry  Laurens,  who  was  taken  prisoner  by  a  Brit-
ish cruiser  while  on  his  way  to  the  Hague  to  nego-
tiate a  loan.  This  document  furnished  the  Brit-
ish ministry  with  a  pretext  for  declaring  war
upon  Holland.  During  1779  William  Lee  was  con-
cerned in  his  brother  Arthur's  quarrel  with  Frank-
lin at  Paris,  which  ended  in  the  recall  of  the  two
brothers  by  congress. — Arthur,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Stratford,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  20  Dec,  1740 ;
d.  in  Urbana,  Middlesex  co.,  Va.,  12  Dec,  1792,
was  sixth  and  youngest  son  of  Thomas  Lee.  He
was  educated  at  Eton,  whence  he  went  to  the
University  of  Edinburgh  and  obtained  the  degree
of  M.  D.  He  gave  especial  attention  to  botany
and  to  materia  medica :  and  his  Latin  treatise  on
the  botanical  character  and  medicinal  uses  of
Peruvian  bark  obtained  a  prize  and  was  published
by  the  university.  After  taking  his  degree,  he
travelled  in  Holland  and  Germany,  then  returned
to  Virginia  and  began  the  practice  of  medicine  at
Williamsburg.  But  presently,  in  the  excitement
that  ensued  upon  the  passage  of  the  stamp-act,  he
made  up  his  mind  to  go  to  London  and  study
law,  with  a  view  to  a  political  career,  and  in  the
hope  of  being  able  to  do  good  service  in  England
as  an  advocate  of  the  constitutional  rights  of  the
Americans.  In  1766  he  was  accordingly  settled  in
London  as  a  student  in  the  Temple.  He  con-
tinued the  study  of  law  until  1770,  and  before  he
left  England  in  1776  he  acquired  a  lucrative  prac-
tice. He  took  an  active  part  in  the  discussions  con-
cerning the  Townshend  acts  and  other  measures
relating  to  America,  and  won  fame  as  the  author  of
the  "  Monitor's  Letters,"  "  An  Appeal  to  the  Eng-
lish Nation,"  and  "  Junius  Americanus."  He  was
one  of  the  leading  members  of  a  society  of  gentle-
men called  "  Supporters  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,"  in
which  the  measures  of  the  ministry  were  discussed.
One  of  the  published  resolutions  of  this  society  re-
quired "from  any  candidate  whom  the  members
of  the  society  would  support  for  election  to  parlia-
ment a  pledge  to  seek  the  restoration  to  America
of  the  essential  right  of  taxation  by  their  own
representatives,  and  a  repeal  of  all  acts  passed  in


violation  of  this  right  since  the  year  1763."  John
Wilkes  was  a  member  of  this  society,  and  Mr.  Lee,
as  author  of  the  resolution  just  mentioned,  sus-
tained an  interesting  discussion  with  the  myste-
rious writer  of  the  "  Letters  of  Junius."  During
these  years  Mr.  Lee  numbered  among  his  friends
such  men  as  Burke,  Priestley,  Dunning,  Barre,  and
Sir  William  Jones,  and  was  chosen  a  fellow  of  the
Royal  society.  In  1770  he  was  appointed  by  the
assembly  of  Massachusetts  to  serve  as  agent  for
that  colony  in  London,  in  association  with  Frank-
lin. In  August,  1775,  he  was  associated  with
Richard  Penn  in  the  fruitless  attempt  to  lay  before
the  king  the  last  petition  from  the  Continental  con-
gress. In  November  of  that  year  the  congress  ap-
pointed Franklin,  Jay,  and  Dickinson  a  committee
for  the  purpose  of  secretly  corresponding  with  the
friends  of  the  colonies  in  other  parts  of  the  world,
and  this  committee  appointed  Mr.  Lee  their  secret
agent  in  London.  In  this  capacity  he  entered  into
negotiations  with  the  French  government,  at  first
through  the  mediation  of  Caron  de  Beaumarchais,
afterward  directly  with  Count  Vergennes.  He
spent  the  spring  and  summer  of  1776  in  Paris,  and
in  the  autumn  was  appointed  by  congress  joint
commissioner  with  Dr.  Franklin  and  Silas  Deane
for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  treaty  of  alliance
with  France.  In  the  following  summer  he  was
intrusted  with  special  missions  to  the  courts  of
Spain  and  Prussia,  After  the  conclusion  of  the
French  treaty,  it  was  decided  to  appoint  a  minis-
ter plenipotentiary  in  place  of  the  joint  commis-
sion, and  Franklin  was  accordingly  appointed  in
October,  1778,  while  Lee  continued  for  another
year  to  serve  as  sole  commissioner  to  Spain  and
acting  commissioner  to  Prussia.  During  his  resi-
dence in  Paris  he  became  involved  in  bitter  quar-
rels with  his  fellow-commissioners,  and  was  con-
nected with  the  unjust  charges  against  Silas
Deane  which  led  to  the  virtual  exile  of  that  unfor-
tunate gentleman.  It  may  be  said  in  Lee's  behalf
that  appearances  were  against  Deane  at  the  time,
and  his  conduct  was  never  satisfactorily  explained
until  the  discovery  of  Beaumarchais's  papers  by
M.  de  Lomenie  in  a  Paris  garret  in  1857.  It  can
hardly  be  questioned,  however,  that  Lee  gave
abundant  evidence  of  a  morbidly  suspicious  and
quarrelsome  disposition.  By  the  autumn  of  1779
his  attacks  upon  Franklin  had  become  so  virulent,
and  his  conduct  in  general  so  troublesome,  that  he
was  recalled  by  congress.  In  1781  he  was  elected
member  of  the  Virginia  assembly,  and  from  1782
till  1785  was  a  member  of  the  Continental  congress.
In  1784  he  was  appointed  on  a  commission  for
making  treaties  with  the  northwestern  tribes  of
Indians,  and  travelled  on  this  business  through  the
western  districts  of  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.
From  1784  till  1789  he  was  a  member  of  the
"  Board  of  Treasury "  by  which  the  desperate
financial  affairs  of  the  confederation  were  man-
aged. The  last  three,  years  of  his  life  were  spent
on  his  estate  at  Urbana.  He  was  opposed  to  the
adoption  of  the  Federal  constitution.  His  biogra-
phy has  been  written  by  his  grand-nephew,  Rich-
ard Henry  Lee,  "  Life  of  Arthur  Lee,  with  his  Po-
litical and  Literary  Correspondence  "  (2  vols.,  Bos-
ton, 1829).  A  large  number  of  his  papers  on  politi-
cal and  diplomatic  subjects  were  deposited  in  the
library  of  Harvard  university,  and  a  descriptive
catalogue  of  them  has  been  published  in  the
"  University  Bulletin,"  edited  by  Justin  Winsor
(1879).  A  full  account  of  the  quarrels  at  Paris  is
given  in  the  second  volume  of  Parton's  "  Life  of
Franklin."  See  also  Lomenie's  "Beaumarchais  et
son  temps"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1858). — Henry, sol-


LEE


LEE


667


dier,  b.  at  Leesylvama,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  29
Jan.,  1756 ;  d.  on  Cumberland  island,  Ga.,  25  March,
1818,  was  grandson  of  Henry,  the  younger  brother
of  Thomas  Lee,  of  Stratford.  His  father,  also
named  Henry,  was  for  many  years  a  member  of
the  house  of  burgesses.  His  mother  was  Miss
Lucy  Grymes,  for  whom  Washington  in  early  youth
entertained  an  unrequited  passion ;  she  is  once  or

twice  alluded  to  in
Washington's  cor-
respondence as  the
"  Lowland  beauty."
Henry  Lee  was
graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1774,  and
two  years  after  ward,
at  the  nomination
of  Patrick  Henry,
he  was  appointed
captain  of  one  of
the  six  companies
of  Virginia  caval-
ry that  formed  the
legion  commanded
by  Col.  Theodoric
Bland.  In  Septem-
ber, 1777,  Capt.  Lee,
with  his  company,
joined  Washing-
ton's army  in  Pennsylvania.  In  January,  1778,  he
was  promoted  for  gallant  conduct  to  the  rank  of
major,  and  placed  in  command  of  an  independent
partisan  corps,  consisting  of  two  troops  of  horse,
to  which  a  third  troop,  together  with  a  small  body
of  infantry,  was  afterward  added.  This  peculiar
corps  came  to  be  known  as  "  Lee's  legion,"  and
its  young  commander  received  the  affectionate
nickname  of  "Light-horse  Harry."  With  great
skill  and  daring,  on  19  July,  1779,  he  surprised  the
British  garrison  at  Paulus  Hook,  and  carried  off
160  prisoners,  losing  but  five  of  his  own  men.
For  this  affair  he  was  presented  by  congress  with
a  gold  medal.  In  the  autumn  of  1780,  after  the
disastrous  battle  of  Camden,  having  been  promoted
lieutenant-colonel,  he  was  sent  to  South  Carolina
with  his  legion,  to  join  the  army  just  reorganized
under  command  of  Gen.  Greene.  In  the  famous
retreat  through  North  Carolina  in  February,  1781,
Lee's  legion  covered  the  rear  of  the  American
army  and  was  engaged  in  some  lively  skirmishing
with  Tarleton's  dragoons.  When  Greene  crossed
the  Dan  into  Virginia,  he  left  Lee  on  the  south
side  of  the  river,  to  act  in  concert  with  Pickens  in
watching  and  harassing  the  enemy  and  keeping  up
the  spirits  of  the  Whigs  in  that  part  of  the  country.
In  the  discharge  of  these  duties  Lee  was  unsuccess-
ful in  his  attempts  to  surprise  Tarleton.  but  de-
feated a  body  of  400  Loyalists  under  Col.  Pyle.
His  legion  was  actively  engaged  in  the  desperate
battle  at  Guilford,  where  it  proved  itself  more  than
a  match  for  Tarleton's  dragoons.  When  Greene  re-
turned into  South  Carolina  to  drive  Lord  Rawdon
from  Camden,  he  detached  Lee  and  Marion  to
operate  against  Fort  Watson,  which  commanded
Rawdon's  communications  with  the  sea-coast.  By
a  very  skilful  operation  Fort  Watson  was  forced
to  surrender,  and  consequently  Rawdon,  although
victorious  in  the  battle  of  Hobkirk's  Hill,  was
compelled,  by  the  cutting  of  his  line  of  communi-
cations, to  abandon  the  all-important  strategic
point  of  Camden.  Col.  Lee  next  captured  Fort
Motte  and  Fort  Granby,  and  on  5  June,  after  a
siege  of  sixteen  days,  Augusta  surrendered  to  him.
He  then  rejoined  Greene,  and  was  engaged  in  the
siege  of  Ninety-Six. In  the  brilliant  battle  of  Eu-


taw  Springs,  8  Sept.,  he  played  a  very  important
part,  and  captured  great  numbers  of  the  enemy  in
the  pursuit  that  followed.  Throughout  this  event-
ful year  Col.  Lee  showed  himself  remarkably  fer-
tile in  conceiving  plans,  and  swift  in  executing
them.  At  the  close  of  the  campaign  he  returned
to  Virginia,  married  his  second  cousin,  Matilda,
daughter  of  Philip  Ludwell  Lee,  and  thus  came
into  possession  of  Stratford  House,  where  he  spent
the  latter  part  of  his  life.  In  1786  he  was  chosen
delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,  and  in  1788
was  a  member  of  the  convention  called  by  Vir-
ginia to  decide  upon  the  ratification  of  the  Federal
constitution.  In  the  remarkable  debates  that  fol-
lowed in  the  convention  he  earnestly  and  ably
seconded  the  efforts  of  Madison  and  Marshall  in
defence  of  the  constitution,  and  won  distinction
for  his  eloquence.  In  1789-'91  he  was  member  of
the  Virginia  legislature,  and  in  1792-'5  was  gov-
ernor of  the  state.  When  the  whiskey  insurrec-
tion, in  the  summer  of  1794,  broke  out  "in  western
Pennsylvania,  President  Washington  appointed
Lee  as  general  to  command  the  army  of  15,000
men  sent  against  the  insurgents.  The  presence  of
so  large  a  force  made  it  possible  to  quell  the  insur-
rection without  bloodshed.  In  1799  Gen.  Lee  was
elected  to  congress,  and  on  the  death  of  Gen.
Washington  he  was  appointed  to  deliver  an  oration
commemorating  the  services  of  that  great  man.
Upon  this  occasion  Lee  uttered  the  famous  phrase,
"  First  in  war,  first  in  peace,  first  in  the  hearts  of
his  countrymen."  In  1801  Gen.  Lee  retired  into
private  life.  In  August,  1812,  he  happened  to  be
in  Baltimore  at  the  time  of  the  riot  occasioned  by
the  conduct  of  the  "Federal  Republican,"  a  Feder-
alist newspaper,  in  opposing  the  war ;  and  in  the
effort  to  defend  the  property  of  his  friend,  the
editor,  from  the  violence  of  the  mob.  Gen.  Lee  re-
ceived injuries  from  which  he  never  recovered.
He  visited  the  West  Indies  in  the  hope  of  restoring
his  health,  but  died  on  his  journey  homeward,
while  stopping  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Shaw,  daughter
of  his  old  friend,  Gen.  Greene.  By  his  first  wife,
Matilda  Lee,  he  had  a  son  and  a  daughter  ;  by  his
second  wife,  Anne  Carter,  he  had  three  sons  and
two  daughters.  His  "Memoirs  of  the  War  in  the
Southern  Department  of  the  United  States"  (Phila-
delphia, 1812;  second  ed.,  with  additions  by  his
son,  Henry  Lee,  Washington.  1827;  third  ed.,  re-
vised, with  a  biogrpphy  of  the  author,  by  his  son,
R.  E.  Lee.  New  York,  18C9),  written  in  1809,  is
an  excellent  book.  There  is  no  full  and  satis-
factory biography  of  Gen.  Lee.  An  engraving  of
his  portrait  by  Stuart,  with  a  brief  biographical
notice,  may  be  found  in  the  third  volume  of  "The
National  Portrait  Gallery."  by  James  B.  Long-
acre  and  James  Herring  (Philadelphia,  1836). — His
brother,  Charles,  attorney-general,  b.  in  1758;  d.
in  Fauquier  county,  Va.,  24  June,  1815,  studied  law
in  Philadelphia  under  Jared  Ingersoll,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  He  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the
Continental  congress,  and  afterward  served  as  a
member  of  the  Virginia  assembly.  He  was  naval
officer  of  the  district  of  the  Potomac  till  1795.  when
he  was  appointed  on  10  Dec.  U.  S.  attorney-gen-
eral. This  office  he  filled  until  1801.  He  was  sub-
sequently offered  the  chief-justiceship  of  the  su-
preme court  by  President  Jefferson,  but  declined.
— His  son,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Westmoreland
county,  Va.,  in  1787;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  30  Jan.,
1837,  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  college
in  1808.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  having  been
appointed  by  President  Madison  a  major  in  the
12th  regiment,  designed  chiefly  for  interior  de-
fence, but  soon  went  to  the  Canadian  frontier  as


LEE


LEE


aide  to  Gen.  James  Wilkinson  and  afterward  to  Gen.
George  Izard.  On  his  return  from  Canada  he  met
in  New  York  Lord  Jeffrey,  the  "Edinburgh"  re-
viewer, and  both  men  were  much  sought  after  in
society  on  account  of  their  brilliant  conversational
powers.  At  the  close  of  the  war  Major  Lee  retired
to  his  estate  in  Virginia.  He  was  first  impelled  to
authorship  by  the  publication  of  Judge  William
Johnson's  "  Life  of  Gen.  Greene,"  in  which  he  con-
sidered that  both  his  father's  good  name  and  that
of  the  latter's  "  Legion  "  were  unjustly  assailed.
He  resolved  to  defend  both,  and  did  so  in  an  octavo
volume  entitled  '•  The  Campaign  of  1781  in  the
Carolinas  "  (Philadelphia,  1824).  Major  Lee,  hav-
ing been  by  education  and  conviction  attached  to
the  Federal  school  in  politics,  was  proscribed  by
the  dominant  party.  On  the  nomination  of  Gen.
Jackson,  who  had,  in  1812,  opposed  this  proscrip-
tion, he  became  one  of  the  most  influential  advo-
cates of  the  latter's  election,  publishing  a  series  of
essays  in  his  support. As  a  reward  he  was  ap-

Eointed  consul  at  Algiers,  where  he  went  in  1829 ;
ut,  the  appointment  not  being  confirmed  by  the
senate,  he  remained  there  less  than  a  year.  Jour-
neying through  Italy  on  his  way  home,  he  met
Madame  Mere,  the  mother  of  Napoleon.  His  ad-
miration of  the  latter's  Italian  campaigns  induced
him  to  vindicate  Napoleon  from  slander.  He  was
somewhat  delayed  in  the  execution  of  this  task  by
the  necessity  of  entering  the  field  again  in  defence
of  his  father's  memory  from  assaults  in  the  pub-
lished writings  of  Jefferson.  After  the  completion
of  his  "  Observations  on  the  Writings  of  Thomas
Jefferson"  (New  York,  1832;  Philadelphia,  1839),
he  devoted  himself  to  his  "  Life  of  Napoleon,"  of
which  only  one  volume  was  published  before  his
death  (New  York,  1835).  Subsequently  tins  instal-
ment, together  with  the  additional  matter  he  had
prepared,  was  issued  in  a  single  volume  with  the
title,  "The  Life  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  down
to  the  Peace  of  Tolentino,  and  the  Close  of  his
First  Campaign  in  Italy"  (London  and  Paris).
— Richard  Henry's  grandson,  Samuel  Phillips,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Fairfax  county,  Va.,  13  Feb.,
1812,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1825,  was  com-
missioned lieutenant  in  1837,  commander  in  1855,
captain  in  18G2,  commodore  in  1866,  and  rear-
admiral  in  1870.  In  1861  he  commanded  the  war-
sloop  "  Oneida  "  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Jackson  and
Fort  St.  Philip,  and  in  various  battles  on  the
Mississippi  river  from  New  Orleans  to  Vicksburg.
In  1862  he  was  ordered  to  the  command  of  the
North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron.  He  was  as-
signed to  the  Mississippi  squadron  in  1864,  and  in
December  of  this  year,  when  Gen.  John  B.  Hood
was  advancing  upon  Nashville,  and  the  safety  of
the  National  troops  under  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas
largely  depended  on  the  prompt  arrival  of  re-en-
forcements and  supplies,  Lee  kept  open  Cumber-
land river,  which  was  the  only  channel  of  com-
munication. During  this  campaign  he  received
a  vote  of  thanks  from  congress.  He  was  president
of  the  board  to  examine  volunteer  officers  for  ad-
mission into  the  regular  navy  in  1866-'7,  and  at
the  latter  date  commanded  the  North  Atlantic
fleet.  In  1873  he  was  retired.  He  published
"  The  Cruise  of  the  '  Dolphin '  "  in  the  "  Reports  of
the  U.  S.  Naval  Department"  (Washington,  1854).
— Another  grandson  of  Richard  Henry,  Richard
Henry,  author,  b.  in  Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  in
1794;  d.  in  Washington,  Pa.,  3  Jan.,  1865,  was  son
of  Ludwell  Lee.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson
in  1812  and  studied  law,  but  in  1833  accepted  a
chair  in  Washington  college,  Pa.  He  took  orders
in  1856,  and  was  rector  of  a  church  there  till  his


death.  He  published  "  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of
Richard  Henry  Lee"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1825);
"Life  of  Arthur  Lee"  (2  vols.,  Boston.  1829);  and
"  Life  of  Harriet  Preble  "  (New  York,  1856).

LEE,  Rohert  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Stratford,
Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  19  Jan.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Lex-
ington, Va.,  12  Oct.,  1870.  He  was  the  son  of  the
Revolutionary  general  Henry  Lee  (q.  v.),  known
as  "  Light-Horse  Harry,"  was  graduated  from  the
U.  S.  military  academy  at  West  Point  in  1829,
ranking  second  in  a  class  of  forty-six,  and  was
commissioned  as  a  2d  lieutenant  in  the  engineers.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican  war  he  was  as-
signed to  duty  as  chief  engineer  of  the  army  under
Gen.  Wool,  his  rank  being  that  of  captain.  His
abilities  as  an  engineer,  and  his  conduct  as  a  sol-
dier, won  the  special  admiration  of  Gen.  Scott,
who  attributed  the  fall  of  Vera  Cruz  to  his  skill,
and  repeatedly  singled  him  out  for  commendation.
Lee  was  thrice  brevetted  during  the  war,  his  last
brevet  to  the  rank  of  colonel  being  for  services  at
the  storming  of  Chapultepec.  In  1852  he  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  military  academy  at
West  Point,  where  he  remained  for  about  three
years.  He  wrought  great  improvements  in  the
academy,  notably  enlarging  its  course  of  study  and
bringing  it  to  a  rank  equal  to  that  of  the  best
European  military  schools.  In  1855  he  was  ap-
pointed lieutenant-colonel  of  the  2d  regiment  of
cavalry,  and  assigned  to  duty  on  the  Texan  fron-
tier, where  he  remained  until  near  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  with  the  exception  of  an  interval
when,  in  1859,  he  was  ordered  to  Washington  and
placed  in  command  of  the  force  that  was  sent
against  John  Brown  at  Harper's  Ferry.

On  20  April,  1861,  three  days  after  the  Virginia
convention  adopted  an  ordinance  of  secession,  he
resigned  his  commission,  in  obedience  to  his  con-
scientious conviction  that  he  was  bound  by  the  act
of  his  state.  His  only  authenticated  expression  of
opinion  and  sentiment  on  the  subject  of  secession
is  found  in  the  following  passage  from  a  letter
written  at  the  time  of  his  resignation  to  his  sister,
the  wife  of  an  officer  in  the  National  army :  "  We
are  now  in  a  state  of  war  which  will  yield  to  noth-
ing. The  whole  south  is  in  a  state  of  revolution,
into  which  Virginia,  after  a  long  struggle,  has  been
drawn ;  and  though  I  recognize  no  necessity  for
this  state  of  things,  and  would  have  forborne  and
pleaded  to  the  end  for  redress  of  grievances,  real  or
supposed,  yet  in  my  own  person  I  had  to  meet  the
question  whether  I  should  take  part  against  my
native  state.  With  all  my  devotion  to  the  Union,
and  the  feeling  of  loyalty  and  duty  of  an  Ameri-
can citizen,  I  have  not  been  able  to  make  up  my
mind  to  raise  my  hand  against  my  relatives,  my
children,  my  home.  I  have  therefore  resigned  my
commission  in  the  army,  and,  save  in  defence  of  my
native  state — with  the  sincere  hope  that  my  poor
services  may  never  be  needed — I  hope  I  may  never
be  called  upon  to  draw  my  sword."

Repairing  to  Richmond,  he  was  made  command-
er-in-chief of  the  Virginia  state  forces,  and  in
May,  1861,  when  the  Confederate  government  was
removed  from  Montgomery  to  Richmond,  he  was
appointed  a  full  general  under  that  government.
During  the  early  months  of  the  war  he  served  in-
conspicuously in  the  western  part  of  Virginia.  In
the  autumn  Lee  was  sent  to  the  coast  of  South
Carolina,  where  he  planned,  and  in  part  construct-
ed, the  defensive  lines  that  successfully  resisted  all
efforts  directed  against  them  until  the  very  end  of
the  war.  He  was  ordered  to  Richmond,  and  on  13
March,  1862,  assigned  to  duty  '•  under  the  direction
of  the  president,"  and  "  charged  with  the  conduct


LEE


LEE


669


of  military  operations  in  the  armies  of  the  Confed-
eracy." The  campaign  of  the  preceding  year  in  Vir-
ginia had  embraced  but  one  battle  of  importance,
that  of  Bull  Run  or  Manassas,  and  the  Confederate
success  there  had  not  been  followed  by  anything
more  active  than  an  advance  to  Centreville  and
Fairfax  Court-House,  with  advanced  posts  on  Ma-
son's and  Munson's  hills.  Meantime  McClellan
had  been  engaged  in  reorganizing  the  National
army,  and  converting  the  raw  levies  into  disci-
plined troops.  When  he  was  finally  ready  to  ad-
vance, the  Confederates  retired  to  the  south  side  of
the  Rappahannock,  and  when  McClellan  trans-
ferred his  base  to  Fort  Monroe  and  advanced  upon
Richmond  by  way  of  the  peninsula,  Gen.  Joseph
E.  Johnston  removed  his  army  to  Williamsburg,
leaving  Jackson's  division  in  the  valley  and  E well's
on  the  line  of  the  Rappahannock.  Johnston  fell
back  in  May  to  make  his  stand  in  defence  of  Rich-
mond immediately  in  front  of  the  town.  Mc-
Clellan advanced  to  a  line  near  the  city  with  his
army  of  more  than  100,000  men,  and,  under  the
mistaken  impression  that  Johnston's  force  out-
numbered his  own,  waited  for  McDowell,  who  was
advancing  with  40,000  men  from  the  neighborhood
of  Fredericksburg  to  join  him.  To  prevent  the
coming  of  this  re-enforcement,  Lee  ordered  Ewell
to  join  Jackson,  and  directed  the  latter  to  attack
Ranks  in  the  valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  drive  him
across  the  Potomac,  and  thus  seem  to  threaten
Washington  city.  Jackson  executed  the  task  as-
signed him  with  such  celerity  and  success  as  to
cause  serious  apprehension  in  Washington.  Mc-
Dowell was  recalled,  and  the  re-enforcement  of
McClellan  was  prevented.  The  latter  now  estab-
lished himself  on  the  Chickahominy,  with  a  part
of  his  army  thrown  across  that  stream.  A  flood
came  at  the  end  of  May,  and,  believing  that  the
swollen  river  effectually  isolated  this  force,  Gen.
Johnston  attacked  it  on  31  May,  hoping  to  crush
it  before  assistance  could  reach  it  from  the  north-
ern side  of  the  river.  Thus  resulted  the  battle  of
Seven  Pines,  or  Fair  Oaks,  in  which  Johnston  was
seriously  wounded  and  rendered  unfit  for  further
service  for  a  time.  McClellan  fortified  his  lines,
his  left  wing  lying  near  White  Oak  Swamp,  on  the
south  of  the  Chickahominy,  his  right  extending  up
the  river  to  Mechanicsville,  and  his  depot  being  at
the  White  House  on  the  York  river  railroad  and
the  Pamunkey  river.

Now,  for  the  first  time,  Gen.  Lee  had  direct
command  of  a  great  army  confronting  an  enemy
strongly  posted,  and  his  capacity  as  a  strategist
and  commander  was  first  demonstrated  in  that
bloody  and  brilliant,  but  only  in  part  successful,
series  of  manoeuvres  and  contests  known  as  "  the
seven  days'  battle."  He  determined  to  adopt  that
offensive  defence  which  was  always  his  favorite
method.  Instead  of  awaiting  MeClellan's  attack,
he  resolved  to  defend  Richmond  by  dislodging
the  foe  that  threatened  it.  His  plan  was  secretly
to  bring  Jackson's  force  to  his  aid,  and,  while
holding  McClellan  in  check  on  the  south  side  of
the  river  with  a  part  of  his  force  securely  in-
trenched, to  transfer  the  rest  of  it  to  the  north
side,  turn  the  enemy's  flank,  and  move  down  the
river  in  his  rear,  threatening  his  communications
and  compelling  him  to  quit  his  intrenchments  for
a  battle  in  the  open,  or  to  abandon  his  position
altogether  and  retreat.  The  first  necessity  was  to
fortify  the  lines  south  of  the  river.and  when  that  was
done,  Gen.  J.  E.  B.  Stuart,  with  a  cavalry  column,
was  sent  to  march  around  MeClellan's  position,
ascertain  the  condition  of  the  roads  in  his  rear,  and
gather  such other information as was  needed.


Jackson,  with  his  entire  force,  was  brought  to  Ash-
land, on  the  Fredericksburg  railroad,  from  which
point  he  was  to  move  on  25  June  to  the  neighbor-
hood of  Atlee's  Station,  and  turn  the  enemy's  po-
sitions at  Mechanicsville  and  Beaver  Dam  on  the
next  day.  A.  P.  Hill's  division  was  to  cross  the
river  at  Meadow  Bridge  as  soon  as  Jackson's  move-
ment should  uncover  it,  and  Longstreet  and  D.  II.
Hill  were  to  cross  in  their  turn  when  the  passage
should  be  clear.  There  was  a  delay  of  one  day  in
Jackson's  movement,  however,  so  that  he  did  not
turn  the  position  at  Beaver  Dam  until  the  2?th.
A.  P.  Hill,  after  waiting  until  the  afternoon  of  the
26th  for  the  movement  of  Jackson  to  accomplish
the  intended  purpose,  pushed  across  the  river  at
Meadow  Bridge  and  drove  out  the  force  that  occu-
pied Mechanicsville.  Longstreet  and  D.  H.  Hill
also  crossed,  and  the  next  morning  the  works  at
Beaver  Dam  were  turned  and  the  Confederates
pushed  forward  in  their  march  down  the  river,
Jackson  in  advance  with  D.  H.  Hill  for  support,
while  Longstreet  and  A.  P.  Hill  were  held  in  re-
serve, and  upon  the  right,  to  attack  McClellan  in
flank  and  rear,  should  lie  seriously  oppose  Jackson's
advance  toward  the  York  river  railroad.  There
was  some  miscarriage  of  plans,  due  to  a  mistake
in  Jackson's  movement,  and,  in  consequence,  Long-
street  and  Hill  encountered  the  right  wing  of
MeClellan's  force  in  a  strong  position  near  Gaines's
Mills  before  the  advance  under  Jackson  was  en-
gaged at  all.  The  resistance  of  the  National
troops  was  stubborn,  and  it  was  not  until  after
Jackson  came  up  and  joined  in  the  conflict  that
the  position  was  forced.  The  National  troops
suffered  severely,  and  were  finally  driven  across
the  river.  Lee  now  commanded  MeClellan's
communications,  and  no  course  was  open  to  the
National  general  but  to  save  his  army  by  a  retreat
to  the  James  river,  during  which  severe  battles
were  fought  at  Savage's  Station  and  Frazier's  Farm.
The  series  of  manoeuvres  and  battles  ended  in  a
fierce  conflict  at  Malvern  Hill,  where  the  Confed-
erates suffered  terribly  in  a  series  of  partial  and
ill-directed  assaults  upon  a  strong  position  taken
by  the  retreating  foe.  The  bloody  repulses  thus
inflicted  consoled  the  retreating  army  somewhat
for  their  disaster,  but  could  not  repair  the  loss  of
position  already  suffered  or  do  more  than  delay
the  retreat.  The  operations  outlined  above  had
brought  MeClellan's  movement  against  Richmond
to  naught,  and  their  moral  effect  was  very  great;
but  Lee  was  convinced  that  he  had  had  and  lost
an  opportunity  to  compel  the  actual  surrender  of
his  enemy,  though  stronger  than  himself  in  num-
bers, and  regarded  MeClellan's  escape  upon  any
terms  as  a  partial  failure  of  his  plans,  due  to  acci-
dental miscarriages.  (For  a  further  account  of
this  campaign,  see  McClellan,  George  Brinton.)
Having  driven  McClellan  from  his  position  in
front  of  Richmond,  and  having  thus  raised  what
was  in  effect  the  siege  of  that  city,  Gen.  Lee's  de-
sire was  to  transfer  the  scene  of  operations  to  a
distance  from  the  Confederate  capital,  and  thus
relieve  the  depression  of  the  southern  people  which
had  followed  the  general  falling  back  of  their
armies  and  the  disasters  sustained  in  the  west.
McClellan  lay  at  Harrison's  Landing,  below  Rich-
mond, with  an  army  that  was  still  strong,  and
while  the  Confederate  capital  was  no  longer  in  im-
mediate danger,  the  withdrawal  of  the  army  de-
fending it  would  invite  attack  and  capture  unless
MeClellan's  withdrawal  at  the  same  time  could  be
forced.  For  effecting  that,  Lee  calculated  upon
the  apparently  excessive  concern  felt  at  the  north
for  the  safety  of  Washington. If  he  could  so  dis-


670


LEE


LEE


pose  of  his  forces  as  to  put  Washington  in  actual
or  seeming  danger,  he  was  confident  that  McClel-
lan's  army  would  be  speedily  recalled.

In  the  mean  time,  Gen.  John  Pope,  in  command
of  another  National  army,  had  advanced  by  way
of  the  Orange  and  Alexandria  railroad,  with  the
purpose  of  effecting  a  junction  with  McClellan,
and  it  was  necessary  to  meet  the  danger  from  that
quarter  without  exposing  Richmond,  as  already
explained ;  for  if  the  people  of  the  north  laid  ex-
cessive stress  upon  the  preservation  of  Washington
from  capture,  the  people  of  the  south  held  Rich-
mond in  a  like  sentimental  regard.  Jackson  was
ordered,  on  13  July,  to  Gordonsville  with  his  own
and  Ewell's  divisions,  and  he  moved  thence  to
Orange  Court-House,  where  A.  P.  Hill  was  ordered
to  join  him  at  the  end  of  the  month.  With  this
force  Jackson crossed the Rapidan,  attacked a

part  of  Pope's
army  at  Cedar
Mountain  on
9  Aug.,  and
gained  an  ad-
vantage, hold-
ing the  ground
until  Pope  ad-
vanced in  force
two  days  later,
when  he  retired
to  the  south  of
the  river.  Lee
now  hurried
troops  forward
as  rapidly  as
possible,  and
on  14  Aug.
took  personal
command  on
the  Rapidan.
His  force  was
slightly  supe-
rior to  Pope's,  and,  as  the  National  commander
seemed  at  that  time  unaware  of  the  presence  of  the
main  body  of  the  Confederate  army,  Lee  hoped,  by
a  prompt  attack,  to  take  him  somewhat  unpre-

fmred.  The  movement  was  planned  for  19  Aug.,
>ut  there  was  a  delay  of  a  day,  and  in  the  mean
time  Pope  had  become  aware  of  his  danger  and
withdrawn  behind  the  Rappahannock,  where  he
had  posted  his  army  in  a  strong  position  to  oppose
a  crossing.  Finding  the  advantage  of  position  to
be  with  the  enemy,  Lee  moved  up  the  river.  Pope
keeping  pace  with  him  until  a  point  near  Warren-
ton  Springs  was  reached.  There  Lee  halted  and
made  a  demonstration  as  if  to  cross,  on  24  Aug.,
while  Jackson,  crossing  about  eight  miles  above,
made  a  rapid  march  around  Bull  Run  Mountain
and  through  Thoroughfare  Gap,  to  gain  the  ene-
my's rear.  The  movement  was  completely  suc-
cessful, and  on  the  26th  Jackson  reached  Manassas
Junction,  capturing  the  supply  depots  there.  As
soon  as  Pope  discovered  the  movement  he  with-
drew to  protect  his  communications.  Longstreet
at  once  marched  to  join  Jackson,  following  the
same  route  and  effecting  a  junction  on  the  morn-
ing of  29  Aug..  on  the  same  field  on  which  the
first  battle,  of  Manassas  or  Bull  Run  was  fought  in
1861.  Pope's  army,  re-enforced  from  McClellan's,
was  in  position,  and  battle  was  joined  that  after-
noon. The  National  assaults  upon  Lee's  lines  on
that  day  and  the  next  were  determined  but  unsuc-
cessful, and  on  30  Aug.  the  Confederates  succeeded
in  driving  their  enemy  across  Bull  Run  to  Centre-
ville.  Lee,  re-enforced,  turned  the  position  on  1
Sept.,  and  Pope  retired  toward  Washington.


The  way  was  now  clear  for  the  further  offensive
operations  that  Lee  contemplated.  The  transfer
of  McClellan's  invading  force  to  Washington  had
been  made  imperative,  and  Lee's  army,  encouraged
by  success,  was  again  filled  with  that  confidence  in
itself  and  its  leader  which  alone  can  make  an  army
a  fit  tool  with  which  to  undertake  aggressive  en-
terprises. He  determined  to  transfer  the  scene  of
operations  to  the  enemy's  territory.  The  plan  in-
volved the  practical  abandonment  of  his  commu-
nications so  far  as  the  means  of  subsisting  his  army
was  concerned,  but  the  region  into  which  he  planned
to  march  was  rich  in  food  and  forage,  and,  with  the
aid  of  his  active  cavalry  under  Stuart,  he  trusted  to
his  ability  to  live  upon  the  country.  The  move-
ment was  begun  at  once,  and  on  5  Sept.  the  army,
45,000  strong,  crossed  the  Potomac  and  took  up  a
position  near  Frederick,  Md.,  from  which  it  might
move  at  will  against  Washington  or  Baltimore  or
invade  Pennsylvania.  A  strong  garrison  of  Na-
tional troops  still  held  Harper's  Ferry,  to  Lee's
surprise  and  somewhat  to  the  disturbance  of  his
plans,  as  it  was  necessaiy  for  him  to  have  the  route
to  the  valley  of  Virginia  open  to  his  ammunition-
trains.  On  10  Sept.,  therefore,  he  directed  Jackson
to  return  to  the  south  side  of  the  river  and  advance
upon  Harper's  Ferry  from  the  direction  of  Martins-
burg,  while  McLaws  should  seize  Maryland  Heights,
Walker  hold  Loudon  Heights,  and  D.  H.  Hill  post
himself  at  Boonsboro'  Pass  to  prevent  the  escape
of  the  garrison.  Having  made  these  dispositions,
Lee  moved  to  Hagerstown  to  collect  subsistence
and  to  await  the  capture  of  Harper's  Ferry  by  his
lieutenant,  after  which  the  several  divisions  were
to  unite  at  Boonsboro'  or  Sharpsburg,  as  occasion
should  determine.

McClellan  was  at  this  time  advancing  at  the  head
of  the  National  army  from  Washington,  but  with
unusual  deliberation.  By  one  of  those  mishaps
which  play  so  large  a  part  in  military  operations,
a  copy  of  Lee's  order,  giving  minute  details  of  his
dispositions  and  plans,  fell  into  McClellan's  hands,
and  that  general,  thus  fully  apprised  of  the  exact
whereabouts  of  every  subdivision  of  Lee's  tempo-
rarily scattered  forces,  made  haste  to  take  advan-
tage of  his  adversary's  unprepared  situation.  Mak-
ing a  rapid  march,  on  14  Sept.  he  fell  upon  D.  H.
Hill's  division  at  Boonsboro'  Pass.  Hill  resisted
stubbornly  and  held  his  ground  until  assistance  ar-
rived. During  the  night  Lee  withdrew  to  Sharps-
burg, where  news  soon  reached  him  of  the  surrender
of  Harper's  Ferry  with  about  11.000  men  and  all
its  stores.  By  the  16th  the  army  was  again  united,
except  that  A.  P.  Hill's  division  had  remained  at
Harper's  Ferry  to  care  for  the  prisoners  and  stores.
Meantime  McClellan  had  reached  Sharpsburg  also,
and  on  the  17th  battle  was  joined.  (For  an  account
of  the  battle,  see  McClellan.)  Neither  side  having
gained  a  decisive  victory,  neither  was  disposed  to
renew  the  contest  on  the  18th,  and  the  day  was

fiassed  in  inactivity.  During  the  night  following
jee  recrossed  the  Potomac  and  marched  to  the
neighborhood  of  Winchester,  where  he  remained
until  late  in  October,  the  enemy  also  remaining  in-
active until  that  time,  when  Lee  retired  to  the  line
of  the  Rappahannock.  The  conflict  at  Sharpsburg
or  Antietam  is  called  a  drawn  battle,  and  it  was
such  if  we  consider  only  the  immediate  result.
Neither  army  overcame  the  other  or  gained  a  de-
cisive advantage,  and  neither  was  in  condition,  at
the  end  of  the  affair,  to  make  effective  pursuit
should  the  other  retire.  But  McClellan  had  had
the  best  of  it  in  the  fight,  and  Lee's  invasion  of
northern  territory  was  brought  to  an  end  ;  the  bat-
tle was  thus  in  effect  a  victory  for  the  National


LEE


LEE


671


arms.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  include  the  cap-
ture of  the  garrison  at  Harper's  Ferry,  Lee  had  in-
flicted greater  loss  upon  the  enemv"  than  he  had
himself  suffered.  So  far  as  the  definite  objects
with  which  he  had  undertaken  the  campaign  were
concerned,  it  had  been  successful.  Richmond  had
been  relieved  of  present  danger.  The  moral  situa-
tion had  been  reversed  for  a  time.  From  standing
on  the  defensive,  and  hard  pressed  in  front  of  their
own  capital,  the  Confederates  had  been  able  to
inarch  into  their  enemy's  country,  overthrowing
an  army  on  their  way,  and  to  put  the  National
capital  upon  its  defence.  The  spirits  of  the  south-
ern army  and  people  were  revived,  and  from  that
time  until  the  last  hour  of  the  war  the  confidence
of  both  in  the  skill  of  their  commander  was  implicit
and  unquestioning.  Lee  was  thenceforth  their  re-
liance and  the  supreme  object  of  their  devotion.

Gen.  Burnside,  having  succeeded  McClellan  in
command  of  the  National  army,  adopted  a  new
plan  of  campaign  that  should  threaten  Richmond
by  an  advance  over  a  short  line,  and  at  the  same
time  keep  Washington  always  covered.  He  made
his  base  upon  the  Potomac  at  Acquia  Creek,  and
planned  to  cross  the  Rappahannock  at  Fredericks-
burg. The  head  of  his  column  reached  Falmouth,
opposite  Fredericksburg,  on  17  Nov.  Lee  moved
promptly  to  meet  this  new  advance,  and  occupied
a  line  of  hills  in  rear  of  the  town,  which  commanded
the  plain  below  and  afforded  excellent  conditions
for  defence.  Here  he  posted  about  half  his  army,
under  Longstreet.  while  D.  H.  Plill  was  at  Port
Royal,  twenty  miles  below,  and  Jackson  lay  be-
tween, prepared  to  support  either  wing  that  might
be  attacked.  Lee's  total  force  numbered  about
80,000  men  of  all  arms  ;  Burnside's  about  120.000,
of  whom  100,000  were  thrown  across  the  river  on
the  day  of  the  battle.

The  crossing  was  made  on  12  Dec.  in  two  col-
umns, the  one  at  Fredericksburg  and  the  other
three  miles  below.  No  serious  opposition  was  made
to  the  crossing,  it  being  Lee's  plan  to  await  attack  in
his  strong  position  on  the  crests  of  the  hills  rather
than  risk  an  action  in  the  plain  below.  Burnside
spent  the  12th  in  preparation,  and  did  not  advance
to  the  assault  until  the  next  morning  about  ten
o'clock.  Two  points  of  attack  were  chosen,  one
upon  the  Confederate  right,  the  other  upon  the
left.  The  attack  upon  the  Confederate  right  was
for  a  time  successful,  breaking  through  the  first
line  of  defence  at  a  weak  point,  but  it  was  quickly
met  and  repelled  by  Jackson,  who  had  hurried  to
the  point  of  danger  The  National  troops  were
forced  back  and  pressed  almost  to  the  river,  where
a  heavy  artillery  fire  checked  Jackson's  pursuit,
and  upon  his  return  to  the  original  line  of  defence
the  battle  in  that  quarter  ended  in  Confederate  suc-
cess, but  with  about  equal  losses  to  the  two  armies.
On  the  other  side  of  the  field  the  assaults  were  re-

[)eated  and  determined,  and  resulted  in  much  graver
oss  to  the  assailants  and  much  less  damage  to  the
Confederates.  The  nature  of  the  ground  forbade
all  attempts  to  turn  Lee's  left,  and  the  National
troops  had  no  choice  but  to  make  a  direct  advance
upon Marye's  Heights. Here Lee  was strongly

(>osted  with  artillery  so  placed  as  to  enfilade  the
ine  of  advance.  A  little  in  front  of  his  main  line,
and  on  the  side  of  the  hill  below,  lay  a  sunken  road,
flanked  by  a  stonewall  running  athwart  the  line
of  the  National  advance,  and  forming  a  thoroughly
protected  ditch.  Into  this  road  about  2,000  infant-
ry had  been  thrown,  and  Burnside's  columns,  as
they  made  their  successive  advances  up  a  narrow
field,  swept  by  the  artillery  from  above,  came  sud-
denly upon  this  concealed  and  well-protected  force,


and  encountered  a  withering  fire  of  musketry  at
short  range,  which  swept  them  back.  The  nature
of  the  obstacle  was  not  discovered  by  the  National
commanders,  and  assault  after  assault  was  made,
always  with  the  same  result,  until  the  approach  of
night  put  an  end  to  the  conflict.  The  next  day
Lee  waited  for  the  renewal  of  the  assault,  which  he
had  repelled  with  a  comparatively  small  part  of  his
force,  but.  although  Burnside  remained  on  the  Con-
federate side  of  the  river,  he  made  no  further  at-
tempt to  force  his  adversary's  position.  He  had
lost  nearly  13,000  men.  while  Lee's  loss  was  but  a
little  more  than  5,000.  The  National  army  recrossed
the  river  on  the  15th.  and  military  operations  were
suspended  for  the  winter.  (For  a  further  account
of  this  battle,  see  Burnside,  Ambrose  Everett.)

Gen.  Joseph  Hooker,  who  succeeded  Burnside  in
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  planned  a
spring  campaign,  the  purpose  of  which  was  to  force
Lee  out  of  his  intrenched  position  at  Fredericks-
burg and  overcome  him  in  the  field.  His  plan  of
operations  was  to  throw  a  strong  detachment  across
the  river  below  Fredericksburg,  threatening  an  as-
sault upon  the  works  there,  while  with  the  main
body  of  his  army  he  should  cross  the  river  into  the
region  known  as  the  Wilderness  above  the  Con-
federate position,  thus  compelling  Lee  to  move  out
of  his  intrenchments  and  march  to  meet  his  ad-
vance at  Chancellorsville.  Lee's  army  had  been
weakened  by  detachments  to  57.000  "men,  while
Hooker's  strength  was  about  120,000,  and  the  Na-
tional commander  hoped  to  compel  the  further  di-
vision of  his  adversary's  force  by  occupying  a  part
of  it  at  Fredericksburg.  The  plan  was  admirably
conceived,  and  n<  operation  of  the  war  so  severely
tested  the  skill  of  Lee  or  so  illustrated  his  charac-
ter as  did  the  brief  campaign  that  followed.

About  the  end  of  April,  1863,  the  plan  was  put
in  operation.  Sedgwick,  with  30,000  men,  crossed
below  Fredericksburg,  while  Hooker,  with  the  main
body,  crossed  at  the  fords  above  and  marched
through  the  Wilderness  to  gain  a  position  upon
the  Confederate  flank.  Leaving  about  9,000  men
in  the  works  at  Fredericksburg,  Lee  marched  on
1  May  to  meet  Hooker's  advance,  which  he  encoun-
tered near  Chancellorsville.  He  attacked  the  ad-
vance force  at  once,  and  it  retired  upon  the  main
body,  which  occupied  a  strong  position  and  seemed
disposed  to  act  upon  the  defensive.  Notwithstand-
ing the  great  inferiority  of  his  force  (48,000  men),
Lee  decided  upon  the  hazardous  experiment  of
dividing  it.  Retaining  about  12,000  or  14.000  men
with  whom  to  make  a  demonstration  in  front,  he
sent  Jackson  with  the  remainder  of  the  army  to
march  around  Hooker's  right  flank  and  strike  him
in  the  rear.  The  manoeuvre  was  extremely  hazard-
ous, but  was  made  necessary  by  the  situation,  and
was  fully  justified  by  its  success.  Jackson  made
his  march  without  discovery  of  his  purpose,  and,
late  in  the  afternoon  of  2  May,  came  upon  Hooker's
rear  with  a  suddenness  and  determination  that
threw  a  part  of  the  National  army  into  confusion
and  gave  the  Confederates  a  great  advantage.  The
contest  lasted  until  after  nightfall,  and  the  armies
lay  upon  their  arms  throughout  the  night.  Jack-
son having  received  a  mortal  wound  from  the  fire
of  his  own  men,  the  command  of  his  force  devolved
upon  Stuart,  who  renewed  the  attack  early  next  day
and  pressed  it  with  vigor  until  about  ten  o'clock,
when  a  junction  was  formed  with  the  troops  under
Lee,  operating  from  in  front.  The  whole  line  then
advanced  with  great  impetuosity,  under  the  im-
mediate command  of  Gen.  Lee.  and  the  enemy  was
driven  with  great  loss  from  the  field,  retiring  to
the  works  that  defended  the  river  crossings.  •


672


LEE


LEE


Meantime  Sedgwick  had  carried  the  position  at
Fredericksburg,  and  was  advancing  on  Lee's  right
flank.  He  had  reached  a  point  within  six  miles  of
Chancellorsville  before  forces  detached  for  the
purpose  could  check  his  advance.  On  the  next
day  Early  came  up,  and  Lee  succeeded  in  driving
Sedgwick  across  the  river.  A  storm  interfered
with  plans  for  pressing  Hooker's  retreat,  and  by
the  6th  he  had  withdrawn  completely  from  the
southern  side  of  the  river,  and  was  resuming  his
position  opposite  Fredericksburg.  Lee  also  re-
turned to  his  works,  facing  the  enemy,  with  the
river  between.  It  was  now  incumbent  upon  Gen.
Lee  to  determine,  so  far  as  the  matter  was  within
his  control,  where  and  how  the  campaign  of  the
approaching  summer  should  be  carried  on.  His
policy  was  in  a  general  sense  defensive,  but  it  was
open  to  him  to  choose  between  a  rigid  adherence
to  that  policy  and  the  adoption  of  offensive  meas-
ures with  a  defensive  intent.  He  wished  to  avoid
the  depressing  moral  effect  of  a  second  near  ap-
proach of  the  enemy  to  Richmond,  and,  notwith-
standing the  inferiority  of  his  force  to  that  which  he
was  likely  to  encounter,  he  resolved  to  risk  another
attempt  to  transfer  operations  to  northern  soil.

His  army  now  consisted  of  three  corps,  under
Longstreet,  Ewell,  and  A.  P.  Hill.  Early  in  June
Ewell  was  sent  into  the  valley  of  Virginia  with
orders  to  drive  out  Gen.  Milroy's  small  force  and
advance  toward  the  Potomac.  As  soon  as  he  had
cleared  the  lower  valley,  Longstreet  took  up  his
march,  moving  northward  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge,
and,  in  exact  fulfilment  of  Gen.  Lee's  expectation,
Hooker  withdrew  from  in  front  of  Fredericksburg
and  retired  to  cover  and  defend  Washington,  es-
tablishing his  army  south  of  the  Potomac,  near
Leesburg,  to  await  the  further  development  of  his
adversary's  plans.  A.  P.  Hill  now  followed  Ewell's
line  of  march,  and  Longstreet  also  passed  into  the
valley.  Ewell  had  crossed  the  Potomac,  and  Lee
followed  with  the  other  two  corps,  arriving  at
Chambersburg  on  27  June,  Ewell  being  then  at
Carlisle.  Stuart,  in  command  of  the  cavalry,  had
been  left  to  observe  the  enemy,  with  orders  to
cross  the  river  and  place  himself  on  Ewell's
right  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  National  army
should  have  left  Virginia.  Some  discretion  was
given  to  him,  however,  and  in  the  exercise  of  it  he
made  a  successful  march  around  the  National
army,  but  meantime  left  Lee  without  cavalry  in  an
enemy's  country,  and  without  that  information  of
the  enemy's  movements  which  was  indispensable  to
the  wise  ordering  of  his  own.  Moreover,  Stuart's
absence  misled  Lee.  Confident  that  his  cavalry
commander,  who  was  a  marvel  of  alertness  and
promptitude,  would  not  delay  to  join  him  after  the
passage  of  the  river  by  the  adversary.  Lee  argued
from  his  absence  that  the  main  body  of  the  enemy
was  still  south  of  the  river,  and  perhaps  planning  a
counter-operation  against  Richmond,  while  in
fact  the  entire  army  under  Meade  was  hastening
toward  Gettysburg,  where  Lee  encountered  its  ad-
vance on  1  July,  unexpectedly  and  under  a  com-
plete misapprehension  as  to  its  strength.  Helh's
division,  which  constituted  Lee's  advance,  met  the
enemy  first,  and  was  directed  to  ascertain  his
strength,  with  orders  to  avoid  a  general  engage-
ment if  he  should  find  anything  more  than  cavalry
E resent.  Heth  undertook  to  feel  of  the  force  in
is  front,  and,  as  it  consisted  of  infantry  and  artil-
lery in  large  bodies,  he  was  soon  hotly  engaged  in
spite  of  his  endeavor  to  confine  his  operation  to  a
reconnoissance.  When  Lee  arrived  on  the  field,  it
was  evident  that  a  general  engagement  was  not  to
be  avoided,  and  he  ordered  up  such  re-enforcements


a?  were  at  hand,  at  the  same  time  sending  direc-
tions for  the  remainder  of  his  forces  to  hasten  for-
ward. Two  divisions  of  Hill's  corps  and  two  of
Ewell's  were  brought  into  action,  and  during  the
afternoon,  after  a  sharp  contest,  the  enemy  was
driven  to  a  position  south  of  the  town,  where  he
occupied  a  line  of  hills  and  awaited  a  renewal  of
the  attack.  In  the  absence  of  his  cavalry,  Lee  was
without  any  other  information  as  to  the  strength
or  the  purposes  of  his  enemy  than  that  which  he
could  get  from  the  prisoners  taken,  from  whom  he
learned  that  Meade's  entire  army  was  approaching.
It  was  important,  if  possible,  to  seize  the  position
held  by  the  enemy  before  further  bodies  of  Meade's
troops  should  arrive,  as  the  line  of  hills  afforded
many  advantages  to  the  commander  who  could  oc-
cupy it,  and  Lee  directed  Ewell  to  gain  possession
of  it  if  possible,  leaving  him  certain  discretion,
however,  in  the  exercise  of  which  Ewell  delayed
the  attempt,  to  await  the  arrival  of  his  remaining
division,  and  so  the  opportunity  was  lost.  It  was
Lee's  intention  to  attack  with  his  whole  available
force  on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  but  it  was  not
until  late  in  the  afternoon  that  Longstreet,  whose
troops  had  been  some  miles  in  the  rear,  was  ready
to  bear  his  important  part  in  the  assault,  and  in  the
mean  time  the  greater  part  of  Meade's  force  had
arrived  and  taken  position.  The  assault  was  made
at  four  o'clock,  with  Ewell  on  the  left.  Hill  in  the
centre,  and  Longstreet  on  the  right.  The  plan  was
for  Longstreet  to  carry  the  position  occupied  by
the  enemy's  left,  Ewell  and  Hill  making  demon-
strations on  the  left  and  centre,  but  converting
their  operations  into  a  real  attack  should  it  appear
that  troops  from  their  front  were  withdrawn  to  aid
in  opposing  Longstreet.  This  was  done,  and  a  part
of  the  enemy's  works  was  carried  by  the  Confeder-
ate left,  but  relinquished  because  of  Rhodes's  in-
ability to  render  support  to  Early  as  promptly  as
had  been  intended.  Meantime  Longstreet  had
forced  back  the  enemy's  left  for  some  distance,  and
gained  a  favorable  position  for  further  operations.
The  day  came  to  an  end  with  no  decisive  result,  but
Lee  was  encouraged  to  believe  that  by  a  carefully
concerted  assault  on  the  next  day  he  might  win  a
victory  that  would  go  far  to  decide  the  issue  of  the
war  in  favor  of  the  Confederates,  or  at  any  rate  to
compensate  for  the  continued  disasters  suffered  by
the  Confederate  arms  in  the  west,  and  perhaps
compel  the  withdrawal  of  the  National  forces  from
that  quarter  for  the  defence  of  the  middle  and
eastern  states.  The  value  of  such  a  victory,  if  he
could  achieve  it,  would  be  incalculable,  and,  as
Longstreet  has  declared,  the  army  under  Lee's
command  at  that  time  "  was  in  condition  to  under-
take anything."  It  was  therefore  decided  to  make
a  supreme  effort  on  the  next  day  to  carry  the
enemy's  position  and  put  him  to  rout.  Longstreet,
strengthened  by  three  brigades  under  Pickett,  and
additionally  re-enforced  from  Hill's  corps,  was  to
make  the  main  assault  upon  the  enemy's  right,
while  Ewell  should  attack  his  left  and  Hill  menace
his  centre.  There  was  some  slight  miscarriage  in
preparation,  however,  which  resulted  in  Ewell's  be-
coming engaged  before  Longstreet  advanced  to  the
assault.  Moreover,  for  reasons  that  have  since  been
the  subject  of  somewhat  acrimonious  controversy,
and  the  discussion  of  which  would  be  manifestly
improper  in  this  place,  Longstreet's  attack  was  not
made  with  his  entire  force,  as  had  been  intended  :
and  although  by  that  charge,  which  has  become
historically  famous  as  perhaps  the  most  brilliant
feat  of  arms  performed  by  Confederates  on  any
field,  Pickett's  division  succeeded  in  carrying  the
hill  in  their  front  and  entering  the  enemy's  lines,  it


LEE


LEE


673


was  left  without  adequate  support  and  was  quickly
hurled  back,  broken,  and  almost  annihilated.

This  in  effect  ended  the  battle,  of  Gettysburg.
As  at  Antietarn,  so  on  this  field,  no  decisive  vic-
tory had  been  won  by  either  array,  but  Lee's  su-
preme effort  had  ended  in  a  repulse,  and  the  ad-
vantage rested  with  the  National  arms.  "  It  is
with  an  invading  army  as  with  an  insurrection :
an  indecisive  action  is  equivalent  to  a  defeat."
Lee  was  not  driven  from  the  field,  and  his  army
was  still  unbroken  ;  but  he  had  failed  to  overthrow
his  adversary,  and  his  project  of  successful  inva-
sion of  the  enemy's  country  was  necessarily  at  an
end.  He  tarried  a  day  in  inactivity,  and  then  retired
without  serious*  molestation  to '  Virginia,  whither
Meade  followed.  The  two  armies  having  returned
to  the  line  of  the  Rapidan,  and  neither  being  dis-
posed to  undertake  active  operations,  the  campaign
of  1863  ended  in  August.  The  campaign  of  1864
was  begun  by  the  advance  of  the  National  army
under  Gen.  Grant,  who  crossed  the  Rapidan  on  4
May  with  about  120,000  men,  including  non-com-
batants, teamsters,  etc.  Lee's  force  at  that  time
was  about  66,000  men,  not  including  commissioned
officers,  teamsters,  and  other  non-combatants,  but
he  determined  to  attack  his  adversary  as  quickly
as  possible.  There  followed  a  succession  of  stub-
bornly contested  battles  and  movements  by  flank
from  the  Wilderness,  where  the  adversaries  first
met.  by  way  of  Spottsylvania  Court-House  and
Cold  Harbor,  to  Petersburg,  for  an  account  of
which,  and  of  the  siege  of  Petersburg,  see  Grant,
Ulysses  S.  Grant  sat  down  before  Petersburg
about  the  middle  of  June,  and  prepared  for  a  pa-
tient siege  of  that  place  and  of  Richmond,  to  which
it  afforded  a  key.  By  extending  his  lines  farther
and  farther  to  the  south,  and  pressing  his  left  for-
ward, he  forced  Lee  to  stretch  his  own  correspond-
ingly, until  they  were  drawn  out  to  dangerous
tenuity,  there  being  no  source  from  which  the  Con-
federate commander  could  draw  re-enforcements,
while  his  already  scant  force  was  slowly  wasting
away  under  the  operations  of  the  siege.  Grant  was
gradually  enveloping  the  position,  and  pushing  back
the  Confederate  right,  so  as  to  secure  the  lines
of  railway  leading  to  the  south,  and  it  was  mani-
festly only  a  question  of  time  when  Petersburg,
and  Richmond  with  it,  must  fall  into  the  hands  of
the  enemy.  By  all  military  considerations  it  was
the  part  of  wisdom  for  the  Confederates  to  with-
draw from  the  obviously  untenable  position  while
there  was  yet  opportunity  for  them  to  retire  to  the
line  of  the  Roanoke,  and  there  is  the  best  authority
for  saying  that  if  he  had  been  free  to  determine
the  matter  for  himself,  Lee  would  have  abandoned
Richmond  many  weeks  before  the  date  of  its  ac-
tual fall,  and  would  have  endeavored,  by  concen-
tration, to  win  important  advantages  in  the  field,
where  strategy,  celerity  of  movement,  and  advan-
tages of  position  might  offset  disparity  of  forces.
But  the  Confederate  government  had  decided  upon
the  policy  of  holding  Richmond  at  all  hazards,  and
Lee  was  bound  by  its  decision.  The  end  of  his
power  of  resistance  in  that  false  position  came
early  in  the  spring  of  1865.  Grant  broke  through
his  defences,  south  of  Petersburg,  and  compelled
the  hasty  evacuation  of  the  entire  Richmond  line
on  2  April.  Meantime  Sherman  had  successfully
transferred  his  base  from  northern  Georgia  to  Sa-
vannah, and  was  following  Johnston  in  his  retreat
toward  North  Carolina  and  Virginia.  Lee  made
an  ineffectual  attempt  to  retreat  and  form  a  junc-
tion with  Johnston  somewhere  south  of  the  Roa-
noke ;  but  the  head  of  Grant's  column  was  so  far  in
advance  on  his  left  as  to  be  able  to  beat  him  back

VOL.  III. — 43


toward  the  upper  James  river,  capturing  a  large
portion  of  his  force,  and  the  small  remnant,  in
a  state  of  actual  starvation,  was  surrendered  on
9  April,  at  Appomattox  Court-House,  its  total
strength  being  fewer  than  10,000  men.

The  war  being  at  an  end,  Lee  withdrew  at  once
from  public  affairs,  betaking  himself  to  the  work
of  a  simple  citizen,  not  morosely,  or  in  sullen  vexa-
tion 'of  spirit,  but  manfully,  and  with  a  firm  con-
viction of  duty.  He  frankly  accepted  the  result,
and  used  his  great  influence  for  the  restoration  of
friendly  relations  between  the  lately  warring  sec-
tions, for  the  prompt  return  of  his  soldiers  to
peaceful  pursuits,  and  for  the  turning  of  their  de-
votion to  the  southern  cause  into  a  patriotic  pride
of  American  citizenship.  He  became  president  of
Washington  college,  at  Lexington,  Va.  (now  Wash-
ington and  Lee  university),  and  passed  the  remain-
der of  his  life  in  earnest  work  as  an  educator  of
youth.  Physically,  intellectually,  and  morally,  Lee
was  a  man  of  large  proportions  and  unusual  sym-
metry. Whether  or  not  he  possessed  the  highest  or-
der of  genius,  he  had  a  mind  of  large  grasp,  great
vigor  and  activity,  and  perfect  self-possession.  He
was  modest  in  his  estimate  of  himself,  but  not  lack-
ing in  that  self-confidence  which  gives  strength.
His  mind  was  pure,  and  his  character  upright  in
an  eminent  degree.  His  ruling  characteristic  was
an  inflexible  devotion  to  duty,  as  he  understood  it,
accompanied  by  a  f>erfect  readiness  to  make  any
and  every  sacrifice  of  self  that  might  be  required
of  hiin  by  circumstance.  In  manner  he  was  digni-
fied, courteous,  and  perfectly  simple;  in  temper
he  was  calm,  with  the  placidity  of  strength  that
is  accustomed  to  rigid  self-control.  He  was  a  type
of  perfectly  healthy  manhood,  in  whicli  body  and
mind  are  equally  under  the  control  of  clearly  de-
fined conceptions  of  right  and  duty.  Descended
from  men  who  had  won  distinction  by  worth,  and
allied  to  others  of  like  character,  he  was  deeply
imbued  with  a  sense  of  his  obligation  to  live  and
act  in  all  things  worthily.  As  a  military  com-
mander he  had  thorough  knowledge  of  the  art  of
war.  and  large  ability  in  its  practice.  His  combi-
nations were  sound,  and  where  opportunity  per-
mitted, brilliant,  and  his  courage  in  undertaking
great  enterprises  with  scantily  adequate  means  was
supported  by  great  skill  in  the  effective  employ-
ment of  such  means  as  were  at  his  command.  The
tasks  he  set  himself  were  almost  uniformly  such  as
a  man  of  smaller  courage  would  have  shrunk  from,
and  a  man  of  less  ability  would  have  undertaken
only  to  meet  disaster.  His  military  problem  was
so  to  employ  an  inferior  force  as  to  baffle  the  de-
signs of  an  enemy  possessed  of  a  superior  one.  His
great  strength  lay  in  that  form  of  defence  which
involves  the  employment  of  offensive  manoeuvres
as  a  means  of  choosing  the  times,  places,  and  con-
ditions of  conflict.  A  military  critic  has  said  that
he  lacked  the  gift  to  seize  upon  the  right  moment
for  converting  a  successful  defence  into  a  success-
ful attack,  and  the  judgment  appears  to  be  in
some  measure  sound.  In  the  seven  days'  fight
around  Richmond  his  success  was  rendered  much
less  complete  than  it  apparently  ought  to  have  been
by  his  failure  so  to  handle  his  force  as  to  bring  its
full  strength  to  bear  upon  his  adversary's  retreating
column  at  the  critical  moment.  At  Fredericksburg
he  seems  to  have  put  aside  an  opportunity  to  crush
the  enemy  whom  he  had  repelled,  when  he  neglected
to  press  Burnside  on  the  river  bank,  and  permitted
him  to  withdraw  to  the  other  side  unmolested.
After  his  victory  at  Chancellorsville  a  greater
readiness  to  press  his  retreating  foe  would  have
promised  results  that  for  lack  of  that  readiness


674


LEE


LEE


were  not  achieved.  A  critical  study  of  his  cam-
paigns seems  also  to  show  that  he  erred  in  giving  too
much  discretion  to  his  lieutenants  at  critical  junc-
tures, when  his  own  fuller  knowledge  of  the  entire
situation  and  plan  of  battle  or  campaign  should
have  been  an  absolutely  controlling  force.  It  is  no
reflection  upon  those  lieutenants  to  say  that  they
did  not  always  make  the  wisest  or  most  fortunate
use  of  the  discretion  thus  given  to  them,  for  with
their  less  complete  information  concerning  matters
not  immediately  within  their  purview,  their  decis-
ions rested,  of  necessity,  upon  an  inadequate  knowl-
edge of  the  conditions  of  the  problem  presented.
Instances  of  the  kind  to  which  we  refer  are  found
in  Stuart's  absence  with  the  cavalry  during  all  that
part  of  the  Gettysburg  campaign  which  preceded
the  battle,  and  in  Ewell's  failure  to  seize  the  strong
position  at  Gettysburg  while  it  was  still  possible  to
do  so.  In  both  these  cases  Lee  directed  the  doing
of  that  which  wisdom  dictated;  in  both  he  left  a
large  discretion  to  his  lieutenant,  in  the  conscien-
tious exercise  of  which  an  opportunity  was  lost.

Three  days  after  Gen.  Lee's  death  his  remains
were  buried  beneath  the  chapel  of  the  university
at  Lexington.  In  accordance  with  his  request,  no
funeral  oration  was  pronounced.  For  a  view  of
Gen.  Lee's  residence,  "  Arlington  House,"  see  Cus-
tis,  George  W.  P.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  45.  The  corner-stone
of  a  monument  to  his  memory  was  laid  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  on  27  Oct.,  1887.  There  is  a  recumbent
statue  by  Valentine  over  his  grave,  and  a  bronze
statue  on  a  column  in  New  Orleans.  A  portrait  of
nim  was  painted  from  life  by  John  Elder,  for  the
commonwealth  of  Virginia,  which  is  now  in  the
senate  chamber  at  Richmond ;  another  by  Elder,
for  the  city  of  Savannah,  is  in  the  council  chamber
of  that  city ;  and  still  another  is  at  the  University
of  Virginia.  The  vignette  is  copied  from  an  early
portrait,  while  the  steel  engraving  is  from  a  photo-
graph taken  in  Richmond,  during  the  last  year  of
the  war.  Gen.  Lee  edited,  with  a  memoir,  a  new
edition  of  his  father's  "  Memoirs  of  the  Wars  of
the  Southern  Department  of  the  United  States"
(New  York,  1869).  See  "Life  and  Campaigns  of
Robert  Edward  Lee,"  by  E.  Lee  Childe  (London,
1875);  "Life  of  Robert  E.  Lee,"  bv  John  Esten
Cooke  (New  York.  1871) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  Rob-
ert E.  Lee,"  by  Edward  A.  Pollard  (1871) ;  "  Per-
sonal Reminiscences  of  Robert  E.  Lee,"  by  John  W.

Jones (1874);  "Four
Years  with  Gen.
Lee,"  by  Walter  H.
Taylor  "(1877) ;  and
"  Memoirs  of  Robert
E.  Lee,"  by  Gen.  A.
L.  Long  (1886).  A
life  of  Gen.  Lee  is
now  (1887)  in  prepa-
ration by  Col.Charles
Marshall,  aide  -  de-
camp on  his  staff,
1861-5,  to  whom  the
original  papers  of
J / yjWjT /"  Gen.  Lee  have  been

i i ^^7^  committed by the

family.  —  His  wife,
Mary  Randolph
Custis,  b.  at  Arling-
ton House,  Alexan-
dria co.,  Va.,  in  1806;  d.  in  Lexington,  Va.,  6  Nov.,
1873,  was  the  only  daughter  of  George  Washington
Parke  Custis,  the  adopted  son  of  Washington,  and
the  grandson  of  his  wife.  In  June,  1831,  she  mar-
ried Robert  E.  Lee,  by  which  event  he  came  into
possession  of  Arlington,  on  the  Potomac  river,  and


..-<■<_,


of  the  White  House,  on  the  Pamunkey.  Mrs.  Lee
had  strong  intellectual  powers,  and  persistently  fa-
vored the  Confederate  cause.  She  was  in  Rich-
mond during  the  civil  war,  and  afterward  accompa-
nied her  husband  to  Lexington,  where  she  resided
until  her  death.— His  eldest  son,  George  Washing-
ton Custis,  soldier,  b.  at  Arlington,  Va.,  16  Sept.,
1832,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1854  at  the  head  of  his  class.  He  was  commis-
sioned 2d  lieutenant  of  engineers  and  assigned  to
the  engineer  bureau  at  Washington.  In  the  spring
of  1855  he  was  assigned  to  duty  on  Amelia  island,
Fla.,  where  he  was  engaged  in  constructing  the  fort
at  the  mouth  of  St.  Mary's  river,  and  in  the  autumn
of  1857  was  ordered  to  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  for  the
construction  of  the  works  at  Fort  Point.  In  Octo-
ber, 1859,  he  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  and  or-
dered to  the  engineer  bureau  at  Washington,
where  he  remained  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  when  he  resigned  his  commission  and  entered
the  Confederate  service.  He  was  commissioned
major  of  engineers  of  the  provisional  army  of  Vir-
ginia, 10  May,  1861,  and  on  1  July  was  appointed
captain  in  the  Confederate  corps  of  engineers.  He
located  and  constructed  the  fortifications  around
Richmond,  and  on  31  Aug.,  1861,  was  appointed
aide-de-camp  to  Jefferson  Davis,  with  the  rank  of
colonel  of  cavalry.  On  25  June,  1863,  he  was  com-
missioned brigadier-general  and  assigned  to  a  bri-
gade organized  for  local  defence  around  Rich-
mond. In  the  autumn  of  1864  he  was  commis-
sioned major-general  and  given  the  command  of  a
division  in  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  which
he  led  bravely  and  skilfully  till  he  was  captured
at  Sailor's  Creek.  In  October,  1865,  he  became
professor  of  military  and  civil  engineering  and
applied  mechanics  in  Virginia  military  institute,
and  in  February,  1871,  succeeded  his  father  as
president  of  Washington  college  (now  Washington
and  Lee  university).  Tulane  university  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1887.— His  brother,  Will-
iam Henry  Fitzhugh,  soldier,  second  son  of
Robert  E.  Lee,  b.  at  Arlington,  Va.,  31  May,  1837,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1857,  and  in  the
same  year  appointed  2d  lieutenant  in  the  6th  in-
fantry, U.  S.  army,  and  served  in  the  Utah  cam-
paign of  Gen.  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  and  after-
ward in  California.  Early  in  1859  he  resigned  his
commission  and  took  charge  of  his  farm,  the  his-
toric White  House,  on  the  Pamunkey.  In  the
spring  of  1861  he  raised  a  cavalry  company  for  the
Confederate  service,  was  made  captain,  and  was
soon  promoted  major  and  made  chief  of  cavalry  to
Gen.  Loring  in  the  West  Virginia  campaign.  In
the  winter  of  1861— '2  he  was  ordered  to  Freuericks-
burg  and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel.  In  the
spring  of  1862  he  was  made  colonel,  and  not  long
afterward  was  attached  to  the  brigade  of  Gen.  J.
E.  B.  Stuart,  in  most  of  whose  campaigns  he  par-
ticipated. On  3  Oct.,  1862,  he  was  made  briga-
dier-general, to  date  from  15  Sept.  At  Brandy
Station,  9  June,  1863,  he  was  severely  wounded,
and  was  afterward  captured  by  a  raiding  party  and
carried  to  Fortress  Monroe,  where  he  was  held  for
some  time  as  a  hostage.  In  the  early  spring  of  1864
he  was  exchanged,  on  23  April  was  promoted  ma-
jor-general of  cavalry,  and  led  his  division  in  the
fights  from  the  Rapidan  to  Appomattox,  where  he
surrendered.  He  soon  went  to  work  at  the  White
House,  rebuilding  the  dwelling,  and  became  a
farmer.  For  some  years  he  was  president  of  the
Virginia  agricultural  society.  In  1875  he  was
elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  in  1886  to  congress.
— Robert  Edward's  nephew,  Fitzhugh,  soldier,  b.
in  Clermont,  Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  19  Nov.,  1835,  was


LEE


LEECH


675


graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856,
and  commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  tiie  2d  cav-
alry. He  was  severely  wounded  in  a  fight  with
Indians,  and  in  May,  1860,  was  ordered  to  report
at  West  Point  as  instructor  of  cavalry.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  in  1861  he  resigned  his
commission  and  entered  the  Confederate  service.
He  was  first  placed  on  staff  duty,  and  was  adjutant-
general  of  Ewell's  brigade  until  September,  1861,
when  he  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st
Virginia  cavalry,  and  later  was  promoted  colonel,
and  he  participated  in  all  the  campaigns  of  the
Army  of  Northern  Virginia.  On  25  July,  1862,
he  was  made  brigadier-general,  and  on  3  Sept.,  1863,
major  general.  In  the  battle  of  Winchester,  19
Sept.,  1864,  three  horses  were  shot  under  him,  and
he  was  disabled  by  a  severe  wound,  which  kept
him  from  duty  for  several  months.  In  March,
1865,  he  was  put  in  command  of  the  whole  cavalry
corps  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  and  a
month  later  he  surrendered  to  Gen.  Meade  at
Farmville,  after  which  he  retired  to  his  home  in
Stafford  county.  In  1874  he  made  a  speech  at
Bunker  Hill  which  attracted  wide  attention.  In
the  winter  and  spring  of  1882-'3  he  made  a  tour
through  the  southern  states,  in  the  interest  of  the
Southern  historical  society.  He  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Virginia  in  1885.

LEE,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in  1625;
d.  in  St.  Malo,  France,  in  1091.  He  was  a  learned
non-conformist  divine,  and  minister  to  a  church
in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  in  1686-'8.  On  his  way  home  he
was  captured  by  the  French.  Besides  several  relig-
ious treatises,  he  published  "  The  Temple  of  Solo-
mon portrayed  by  Scripture  Light "  (London,  1659).

LEE,  Thomas,  statesman,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  1  Dec,  1769;  d.  there,  24  Oct..  1839.  His
father  was  one  of  the  Charleston  patriots  that
were  sent  to  St.  Augustine  by  Sir  Henry  Clinton.
Thomas  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1790.  soon  rose
to  eminence,  was  clerk  of  the  South  Carolina  house
of  representatives  in  1798-1804,  at  the  latter  date
was  elected  an  associate  judge,  and  on  his  resigna-
tion a  few  months  subsequently  became  comp-
troller-general of  the  state,  nolding  office  till  1816.
He  was  president  of  the  state  of  South  Carolina
bank  from  1817  till  his  death,  served  several  terms
in  the  legislature,  and  in  1823  was  appointed  by
President  Monroe  U.  S.  district  judge,  holding
office  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  was
active  in  the  temperance  reform  and  in  benevolent
enterprises. — His  niece,  Mary  Elizabeth,  author,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  23  March,  1813 ;  d.  there,
23  Sept.,  1849,  early  manifested  literary  tastes,  was
a  zealous  student,  and  possessed  a  remarkable
talent  for  the  acquisition  of  languages.  Her  prose
writings  have  not  been  collected,  but  "  Historical
Talcs  for  Youth,"  published  in  the  "  Massachu-
setts School  Library,"  is  from  her  pen.  "The
Blind  Negro  Communicant"  is  the  best  known  of
her  poems.  A  volume  of  her  verses,  with  a  me-
moir of  her  by  Rev.  Samuel  Gilman,  was  published
after  her  death  (Charleston,  1851).

LEE,  Thomas  Sim,  statesman,  b.  in  Frederick
county,  Va.,  in  1744;  d.  there,  9  Nov.,  1819.  He
was  educated  by  private  tutors,  and  removed  to
Maryland,  where  he  held  several  local  offices,  and
was  governor  of  the  state  in  1779-'83.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1783-'4,  and
to  the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1786.  In
1794  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Maryland,
but  declined  to  serve.

LEE,  William  Little,  chief  justice  of  the  Ha-
waiian islands,  b.  in  Sandy  Hill,  Washington  co.,
N.  Y.,  25  Feb.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Honolulu,  28  June,  1857.


He  was  graduated  at  Norwich  university,  Vt,  and
went  to  Portsmouth,  Va.,  as  superintendent  of  the
military  academy  that  had  been  established  there
by  Capt.  Alden  Partridge.  He  then  studied  at
Harvard  law-school  and  settled  in  the  practice  of
his  profession  at  Troy,  N.  Y.  Being  threatened
with  pulmonary  phthisis,  he  decided  to  try  a  milder
climate,  and  in  1846  set  out  for  Oregon.  Being
detained  for  several  months  at  Honolulu  by  repairs
to  the  vessel  on  which  he  had  sailed,  Mr.  Lee  un-
dertook some  important  suits  for  the  Hawaiian
government,  and  soon  afterward  accepted  the  post
of  chief  justice  and  chancellor,  which  he  retained
through  life.  Among  his  labors  were  the  framing
of  the  revised  constitution  of  the  kingdom,  and
the  drawing  up  of  its  civil  and  criminal  codes.  He
strenuously  urged  upon  the  king  and  chiefs  the
policy  of  giving  up  a  third  of  their  lands  to  the
common  people,  and  when  a  law  to  that  effect  was
passed  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  land  com-
mission to  carry  out  its  provisions ;  but  he  declined
to  accept  any  compensation  for  his  services.  Judge
Lee's  health,  always  delicate,  gave  way  as  a  result
of  undue  exposure  in  attendance  upon  the  sick
during  an  epidemic  of  small-pox  that  decimated
the  Hawaiian  nation  in  1853.  This  brought  on  a
return  of  his  early  malady,  and  in  1855  he  left  for
the  United  States  in  the  hope  of  regaining  his
health.  As  minister  Judge  Lee  negotiated  a  reci-
procity treaty,  while  there,  with  William  L.  Marcy,
who  was  then  secretary  of  state.

LEE,  Wilson,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sussex  county,
Del.,  in  1761;  d.  in  Anne  Arundel  countv,  Md.,  il
Oct.,  1804.  He  became  an  itinerant  Methodist
minister  in  1784,  and  labored  extensively  in  the
west,  especially  in  Kentucky.  He  was  appointed
to  the  New  London,  Conn.,  district  in  1794,  and
subsequently  served  on  the  New  York,  Philadel-
phia, and  Baltimore  circuits.  He  was  one  of  the
most  laborious  and  successful  missionaries  of  his
time,  his  labors  in  the  west  contributing  largely  to
the  evangelization  of  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,
and  he  shared  with  Jesse  Lee  in  the  founding  of
Methodism  in  New  England.

LEECH,  Daniel  D.  Tompkins,  government
official,  b.  in  Nassau,  N.  Y.,  3  April,  1810;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  C,  5  Nov.,  1869.  His  grandfather,
Capt.  Hezekiah  Leach,  served  in  the  French  and
Indian  and  Revolutionary  wars.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1829,  was  a  tutor  of  languages
there,  and  afterward  taught  in  the  Albany  academy
under  Joseph  Henry.  About  1837  he  removed  to
Washington  with  Prof.  Henry,  took  a  clerkship  in
the  post-office  department,  and  retained  a  post
either  in  this  or  in  the  treasury  department  until
his  death,  his  duties  being  largely  in  connection
with  the  foreign  departments  because  of  his  lin-
guistic acquirements.  In  1855,  as  confidential
clerk  to  the  postmaster-general,  he  compiled  a
post-route  bill,  covering  the  entire  United  States,
for  which  congress  voted  him  $1,000.  In  1857  he
wrote  the  histories  of  the  U.  S.  departments  for  the
"  National  Intelligencer."  He  was  the  author  of
the  first  postal  directory  (1857),  and  continued  it
for  several  years  as  a  private  enterprise,  till  it
was  adopted  by  the  government.  He  was  widely
known  for  his  zealous  ministrations  during  the  civil
war  among  the  National  soldiers  in  camp,  bar-
racks, and  hospitals.  —  His  son,  Samuel  Van
Derlip,  clergvman,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  17  March,
1837,  attended  school  until  he  was  fourteen  years
of  age,  when  he  became  private  secretary  of  Thomas
S.  Bocock,  of  Virginia.  In  1853  he  went  as  sec-
retary to  a  government  expedition  to  Central
America,  Venezuela,  and  the  West  Indies,  on  his


676


LEEDS


return  studied  the  classics,  and  then  was  prepared
for  the  ministry  at  Garrett  biblical  institute,
Evanston,  111.,  and  in  1858  was  admitted  to  the
Baltimore  conference,  became  pastor  of  a  Method-
ist church  in  that  city,  and  subsequently  held
charges  at  Martinsburg,  Va.,  Baltimore,  and.  Cum-
berland, Ind.,  and  Albany  and  Saratoga,  N,  Y.  In
1886  he  was  chosen  president  of  New  York  state
temperance  society.  In  1860  he  wrote  for  the
"  Baltimore  Exchange  "  a  series  of  historical  papers
on  the  '•  Rise  and  Progress  of  American  Method-
ism," and  afterward  issued  a  volume  of  temperance
poems  (1863).  In  1874,  as  special  correspondent
of  the  Baltimore  "American,"  he  wrote  the
"  Round  Lake  Letters  "  for  that  journal.  He  has
served  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  "  Methodist "
and  "  Baltimore  Record,"  has  written  for  the  M  Met-
ropolitan Pulpit,"  and  contributed  largely  to
several  historical  publications.  He  received  in
1879  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  St.  John's  college,
Annapolis,  Md.  He  has  also  published  "  The
Drunkard"  (1869);  "  Ingersoll  and  the  Bible"
(1880) :  and  "  The  Inebriates  "  (1886).

LEEDS,  Daniel,  author,  b.  in  England  in  1652 ;
d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  28  Sept.,  1720.  He  settled
at  Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  about  1677,  and  afterward
removed  to  Burlington,  where  he  became  one  of
the  foremost  men  in  the  province  of  West  Jersey.
In  1682  he  was  appointed  surveyor-general  of  the
province,  and  was  chosen  to  the  assembly.  Upon
the  recommendation  of  the  Earl  of  Nottingham,
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  Lord  Cornbury's
council  in  1702,  in  which  post  he  served  several
years.  He  was  at  first  a  Quaker,  but  became  a
violent  opponent  of  that  denomination.  He  pub-
lished a  series  of  almanacs  at  Philadelphia  and
New  York  from  1687  till  1713,  his  first  being  the
second  almanac  that  was  issued  in  the  middle
colonies.  Among  his  other  works,  which  are  aimed
at  the  Quakers,  except  his  compilation  entitled
"  The  Temple  of  Wisdom "  (Philadelphia,  1688),
are  "  The  News  of  a  Trumpet "  (1697) ;  "  Hue  and
Cry  against  Error"  (1698) ;  "  A  Trumpet  Sounded  "
(1699) ;  "  The  Rebuker  Rebuked  "  (1703)  ;  and
"  The  Great  Mystery  of  Fox-Craft  Discovered "
(part  i.,  1704 ;  part  ii.,  1706).

LEEDS,  John,  astronomer,  b.  in  Bay  Hundred,
Talbot  co.,  Md.,  18  May,  1705;  d.  in  Wade's  Point,
plantation,  Md.,  in  March,  1780.  He  was  clerk  of
Talbot  county  court  for  forty  years,  and  was  sub-
sequently a  judge  of  the  provincial  court.  In  1760
he  was  commissioned  to  supervise  the  returns  of
Mason  and  Dixon  of  the  boundaries  of  Maryland
and  Pennsylvania,  and  was  surveyor-general  of
Maryland  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  published
"  Observations  of  the  Transit  of  Venus,"  in  "  Philo-
sophical Transactions  "  (London,  1769).

LEESER,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.  in  Neuenkirchen,
Prussia,  12  Dec,  1806 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1
Feb.,  1868.  He  arrived  in  Richmond,  Va.,  in  1824,
and  after  engaging  in  commerce  was  called  to  the
pastorate  of  a  Philadelphia  synagogue  in  1829.  His
literary  labors  began  early,  with  translations  from
the  German  and  articles  in  defence  of  Judaism ;
also  with  the  publication  of  volumes  of  sermons,
catechisms,  and  the  editing  of  religious  and  devo-
tional works.  In  1843  he  issued  "  The  Occident,"
a  monthly,  the  pioneer  in  Jewish  periodical  litera-
ture. He  published  "  Instructions  in  the  Mosaic
Religion,"  translated  from  the  German  (Philadel-
phia, 1830);  "The  Jews  and  the  Mosaic  Law"
(1833) ;  "  Discourses,  Argumentative  and  Devo-
tional, on  the  Subject  of  the  Jewish  Religion "
(1836) ;  "  Portuguese  Form  of  Prayer,  in  Hebrew
and  English"  (1837-8); "Hebrew  Spelling  and


LEFEVRE

Reading  Book"  (1838);  "Catechism  for  Young
Children"  (1839);  "  Discourses "(1840);  an  edition
of  Grace  Aguilar's  "Spirit  of  Judaism"  (1842);
"  Descriptive  Geography  and  Brief  Historical
Sketch  of  Palestine,"  from  the  Hebrew  of  Rabbi
Joseph  Schwartz;  and  a  translation  of  the  Scrip-
tures from  the  original  Hebrew,  the  work  by  which
he  is  best  known  (1845-'53).  Mr.  Leeser  was  |
zealous  worker  in  charitable  and  educational  fields,
possessed  a  wonderful  memory,  and  was  esteemed
for  his  honesty  and  singleness  of  purpose.  He  be-
longed to  the  conservative  school.

LEETE,  William,  governor  of  Connecticut,  b.
in  England  about  1603 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  16
April,  1683.  He  was  educated  in  England  as  a  law-
yer, and,  emigrating  to  this  country  in  1637,  set-
tled in  New  Haven,  and  was  subsequently  a  found-
er of  Guilford,  Conn.,  and  one  of  the  pillars  of  the
church  there.  He  was  deputy  governor  in  1661-'5,
was  frequently  a  commissioner  of  the  colony,  re-
elected governor  in  1676,  and  afterward  annually
chosen  until  his  death.  Leete  was  an  ardent  re-
publican, and  befriended  and  hospitably  enter-
tained the  regicides  Edward  Whalley,  William  Goff,
and  John  Dixwell  while  he  was  deputy  in  1661.
In  July,  1675,  when  Edmund  Andros,  governor
under  the  grant  of  the  Duke  of  York,  proceeded
with  armed  men  to  Connecticut  to  vindicate  his
jurisdiction  as  far  as  the  river,  Leete  convened
the  assembly,  and  signed  the  proclamation  that
was  forwarded  to  Capt.  Thomas  Bull,  who  com-
manded the  garrison  at  Say  brook.  This  procla-
mation, though  full  of  loyalty  to  the  king,  forbade
Andros's  landing,  and  protested  against  his  illegal
proceedings.  Dr.  John  Trumbull  says  of  him :
"  He  presided  in  times  of  the  greatest  difficulty,
yet  always  with  such  integrity  and  wisdom  as  to
meet  the  public  approbation.  An  island  near  Guil-
ford bears  the  governors  name.

LEFEBVRE-DESNOUETTES,  Charles  (leh-
faibr'-day-noo-et'),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Paris,
France,  14  Sept.,  1773 ;  d.  at  sea,  22  April,  1822.  He
served  in  the  French  army  in  Belgium  in  1792,  was
aide-de-camp  to  Napoleon  at  Marengo,  became  briga-
dier-general in  1806,  and  general  of  division  in  1808.
He  was  made  a  peer  in  1815,  fought  at  Fleurus  and
Waterloo,  and  after  this  battle  was  condemned  to
death  by  the  royalists,  but  escaped  to  the  United
States,  where  he  attempted,  with  Gen.  Lallemand
(q.  v.),  to  found  a  colony  of  French  refugees  in  Ala-
bama. While  in  this  country  he  was  in  correspond-
ence with  Napoleon  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  his
rescue  from  St.  Helena.  On  the  death  of  the  latter,
Lefebvre  received  by  his  will  150,000  francs,  but
was  lost  at  sea  while  returning  to  Europe.

LEFEVRE,  Peter  Paul,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Roulers,  West  Flanders,  30  April,  1804 ;  d.  in  De-
troit. Mich.,  4  March,  1869.  He  finished  his  studies
in  Paris,  left  that  city  for  the  United  States  in
1828,  and,  going  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  was  ordained
subdeacon  by  Bishop  Rosati  in  1831.  In  the  same
year  he  was  ordained  priest  and  stationed  at  New
Madrid.  Mo.,  but  after  a  few  months  was  trans-
ferred to  the  pastorate  of  Salt  river,  consisting  of
the  northern  part  of  Missouri,  the  western  part  of
Illinois,  and  southern  Iowa.  This  was  the  largest
and  most  laborious  mission  ever  attended  by  a
single  priest.  In  one  of  his  expeditions  to  a  dis-
tant part  of  his  charge  he  sustained  an  injury  to
his  ankle  from  which  he  never  recovered.  At
length  his  health  was  broken  by  his  labors,  and  in
1841  he  went  to  France  to  rest.  While  there  he
was  nominated  bishop  of  Zela  in  partibus  and  co-
adjutor bishop  of  Detroit,  and  on  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  was  consecrated  at  Philadelphia


LEFFERTS


LEG A RE


677


by  Archbishop  Kenrick.  On  his  arrival  in  Detroit
he  had  a  dispute  with  some  of  the  laity  as  to  the
tenure  of  church  property  in  the  city,  in  which  he
was  finally  successful.  At  this  time  there  were
only  two  Roman  Catholic  churches  in  Detroit,  and
twenty-five  in  the  states  of  Michigan  and  Wiscon-
sin, which  were  included  in  his  diocese.  During
his  episcopate  the  number  of  churches  in  Detroit
increased  to  eleven,  and  in  that  part  of  Michigan
called  the  lower  peninsula  to  160,  the  upper  penin-
sula and  Wisconsin  having  been  formed  into  new
dioceses.  He  built  the  cathedral  of  St.  Peter  and
St.  Paul,  and  purchased  sites  for  churches  and  other
church  property  in  places  where  cities  where  likely
to  be  built.  His  foresight  in  this  respect  has  re-
sulted in  a  permanent  revenue  for  the  diocese
of  Detroit  for  religious  and  charitable  purposes.
The  Indian  missions  were  the  object  of  his  special
care,  and  he  established  stations  at  obscure  and
distant  points  where  the  Indians  and  half-breeds
could  attend  religious  services.  To  provide  a  sup-
ply of  priests  he  founded  the  Redemptorist  con-
vent of  Detroit.  He  was  also  instrumental  in
founding  the  American  college  of  Louvain,  Bel-
gium, with  the  same  object.  While  the  number  of
priests  in  his  diocese  when  he  entered  on  his  office
was  but  eighteen,  at  his  death  it  had  increased  to
eighty-eight  in  the  lower  peninsula  alone.  He  was
a  strong  supporter  of  Roman  Catholic  education,
and  introduced  into  his  diocese  several  brother-
hoods and  sisterhoods  that  they  might  open  schools.
Numerous  charitable  institutions  are  due  to  the
energy  of  Bishop  Lefevre,  among  them  four  or-

f»han  asylums,  St.  Mary's  hospital  and  insane  asy-
um,  and  the  Michigan  state  retreat.  He  attended
several  of  the  provincial  councils  of  Baltimore  and
Cincinnati,  and  the  national  council  of  1852,  and
took  an  active  part  in  these  assemblies.

LEFFERTS,  Marshall,  engineer,  b.  in  Bedford,
L.  I.,  15  Jan.,  1821 ;  d.  near  Newark,  N.  J.,  3  July,
1876.  He  was  educated  in  the  common  schools.
was  first  a  clerk,  and  subsequently  a  civil  engineer,
and,  returning  to  mercantile  pursuits,  became  a
partner  in  the  importing-house  of  Monewood  and
Company,  New  York.  In  1849  he  became  presi-
dent of  the  New  York,  New  England,  and  New
York  state  telegraph  companies,  from  which  office
he  retired  in  1860  and  began  a  system  of  telegraph-
wires,  which  was  worked  on  the  automatic  plan  of
transmission.  These  patents  were  subsequently
purchased  by  the  American  (now  the  Western
onion)  telegraph  company,  of  which  he  became
electric  engineer,  and  at  the  same  time  he  was  con-
sulting engineer  of  the  Atlantic  cable  company.
He  was  the  first  in  the  United  States  to  make  and
apply  instruments  for  the  detection  of  faults  in
electric  cables,  and  to  reduce  the  system  of  relays
to  common  standards.  He  resigned  his  office  with
the  Western  Union  telegraph  company  in  186?  to
organize  the  commercial  news  department  of  that
company,  became  president  of  the  gold  and  stock
telegraph  company  in  1869,  and  when,  two  years
afterward,  the  latter  purchased  the  commercial
news  department,  he  again  assumed  its  control.
He  joined  the  New  York  7th  regiment  in  1851  as  a
private,  became  its  lieutenant-colonel  the  next
year,  and  its  colonel  in  1859.  In  1861  this  regi-
ment, under  his  command,  was  the  first  to  leave
the  city  for  the  seat  of  war.  It  was  again  called
out  in  1882  and  in  1863,  and  at  the  latter  date  was
stationed  in  Frederick,  Md.,  where  Col.  Lefferts
was  military  governor,  returning  to  New  York  to
protect  the  city  in  the  draft  riots  of  July,  1863.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  resigned  his  command,
and  accepted  that  of  commandant  of  the  veteran


corps  of  the  7th  regiment,  holding  office  until  his
death,  which  occurred  on  the  railroad  train  while
he  was  going  with  his  corps  to  the  Fourth  of  July
parade  in  Philadelphia  in  1876.— His  son,  George
Morewood,  physician,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  24  Feb.,
1846,  was  educated  at  the  College  of  the  city  of
New  York,  graduated  at  the  New  York  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  1870,  and  in  1872-'3
studied  in  Vienna.  He  then  settled  in  New  York
city,  making  a  specialty  of  diseases  of  the  throat
and  chest,  and  in  July,  1874,  he  performed  the  op-
eration of  subhyoidean  laryngotomy  for  the  first
time  that  it  has  been  attempted  in  the  United
States.  He  is  professor  of  laryngoscopy  in  the
New  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  is
surgeon  and  consulting  surgeon  to  several  New
York  hospitals,  is  a  member  and  trustee  of  various
professional  bodies,  and  in  1876  was  president  of
the  New  York  laryngological  society.  He  con-
ducted at  one  time  the  quarterly  reports  of  laryn-
goscopy in  the  "  New  York  Medical  Journal,"  and
the  semi-annual  reports  on  syphilis  of  the  mouth,
nose,  and  larynx  in  the  "Archives  of  Dermatol-
ogy." He  contributed  largely  to  medical  litera-
ture, and  is  the  author  of  "Diseases  of  the  Nose
and  its  accessory  Cavities "  (New  York,  1884) ;
•'  Diagnosis  and  Treatment  of  Chronic  Nasal  Ca-
tarrh "  (St.  Louis,  Mo.,  1886) ;  and  "  Phannacopia
for  Diseases  of  Throat  and  Nose"  (New  York,
1887).  He  has  also  translated  "  Frankel  on  the  Gen-
eral Diagnosis  of  Diseases  of  the  Nose,  Pharynx,
and  Larynx  "  (1876) ;  and  "  Ziemssen's  Cyclopaedia
of  Practice  of  Medicine"  (1876).

LEFFINGWELL,  Charles  Wesley,  clergyman,
b.  in  Ellington,  Conn.,  5  Dec.,  1840.  He  entered
Union  college  in  1857,  and  studied  there  for  two
years.  During  1859-'60  he  was  principal  of  Gal-
veston academy,  Texas.  He  then  entered  Knox
college,  Galesburg,  111.,  and  was  graduated  in  1862.
He  was  vice-principal  of  the  military  school  at
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  in  1862-'5.  studied  theology
at  Nashotah  theological  seminary,  Wis.,  and  after
his  graduation  in  1867  was  for  a  brief  period  tutor
there.  He  then  took  orders  in  the  Episcopal  church,
and  was  assistant  minister  in  St.  James's  church,
Chicago,  111.,  in  1868.  Soon  afterward  he  founded
and  became  rector  of  St.  Mary's  school,  Knoxville,
III.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Knox
college  in  1875.  Dr.  Leffingwell  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese  of
Quincy,  and  was  editor  of  the  diocese  and  province
in  1875-'9.  Since  1879  he  has  devoted  himself
earnestly  to  journalism  in  the  interests  of  his
church,  and  is  editor  of  a  weekly  paper,  "The
Living  Church."  In  addition  to  his  work  as  editor,
he  has  prepared  a  "  Reading- Book  of  English  Clas-
sics for  Young  People"  (1879).

LEFTWICH,  Joel,  soldier,  b.  in  Bedford  county,
Va,,  in  1759 ;  d.  there,  20  April,  1846.  During  the
Revolutionary  war  he  fought  at  Germantown  and
at  Camden,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Guilford.
In  the  war  of  1812  he  commanded  a  brigade  under
Gen.  Harrison,  and  he  was  subsequently  major-
general  of  militia,  often  a  member  of  the  Virginia
legislature,  and  for  many  years  a  justice  of  the
peace  of  Bedford  countv.

LEGARE,  Hugh  Swinton  (leh-gree),  states-
man, b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  2  Jan.,  1789;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  20  June,  1843.  He  was  of  French
Huguenot  stock  on  the  paternal,  and  Scottish  on
the  maternal,  side.  A  physical  infirmity  that  de-
barred him  from  manly  sports  gave  him  a  taste
for  reading,  and  to  become  an  orator  was  the  chief
object  of  his  ambition.  He  was  graduated  at  the
College  of  South  Carolina  in  1814,  studied  law  for


678


LEGASPI


LEGGE


three  years,  and  spent  the  next  two  in  study  and
travel  abroad.  On  his  return  to  Charleston  he  en-
gaged in  planting  cotton  on  John's  island.  In
1820- '2  he  was  in  the  legislature,  and  at  the  latter
date  he  removed  to  Charleston  and  began  the  prac-
tice of  law,  but  met
with  little  success.  He
represented  Charleston
in  the  legislature  in
1824 -'30,  was  then
elected  attorney  -  gen-
eral, and  during  the
nullification  excite-
ment ardently  sup-
ported the  Union  in
public  speeches.  At
this  time  Legare  be-
came the  coadjutor
of  Stephen  Elliott  in
the  publication  of  the
"Southern  Review,"  a
quarterly  magazine.
He  wrote  the  initial
article  for  the  first
number  on  "  Classical
Literature,"  and  continued  its  principal  contrib-
utor until  the  death  of  Elliott,  when  he  became
editor.  At  the  end  of  the  eighth  volume  the
magazine  was  suspended.  Meanwhile  he  ably
filled  the  office  of  attorney-general.  In  1832  he
became  charge  d'affaires  at  Brussels.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1836,  after  an  extended  tour  of  the  con-
tinent, he  returned  home,  and  was  immediately
elected  to  congress  as  a  Union  Democrat,  taking
his  seat  in  the  extra  session  of  1837  that  was  called
to  deliberate  on  the  financial  embarrassments  of
the  country.  He  greatly  increased  his  reputation
in  the  debates  that  followed,  but  his  course  in
opposition  to  the  sub-treasury  project  caused  his
defeat  at  the  next  election.  He  returned  to  his
profession,  was  soon  employed  in  cases  of  magni-
tude that  were  then  pending  in  the  courts  of  South
Carolina,  and  in  the  case  of  "  Pell  and  Wife  vs.  the
Executors  of  Ball"  achieved  a  triumph  that  decided
his  place  at  the  Charleston  bar.  In  the  presidential
canvass  of  1840  he  favored  the  election  of  Gen.
Harrison,  and  at  this  time  he  began  a  series  of
brilliant  papers  in  the  •'  New  York  Review "  on
"  Demosthenes,"  "  Athenian  Democracy,"  and  M  The
Origin,  History,  and  Influence  of  the  Roman  Law."
In  1841  he  was  appointed  by  President  Tyler  attor-
ney-general of  the  United  States,  and  after  the
withdrawal  of  Daniel  Webster  on  the  ratification
of  the  Ashburton  treaty,  in  the  composition  of
which,  especially  in  the  part  regarding  the  right  of
search,  Mr.  Legare  had  rendered  important  service,
he  discharged  for  some  time  the  duties  of  secretary
of  state.  He  died  suddenly  in  Boston  while  at-
tending, with  President  Tyler,  the  ceremonies  at
the  unveiling  of  the  Bunker  Hill  monument.
Chief-Justice  Story  said  of  him :  "  His  argumen-
tation was  marked  by  the  closest  logic ;  at  the  same
time  he  had  a  presence  in  speaking  I  have  never
seen  excelled."  A  memoir  of  him,  with  selections
from  his  writings,  including  addresses,  despatches,
and  his  diary  at  Brussels,  was  edited  and  published
by  his  sister,  Mary  Swinton  Legare  Bullen
(Charleston,  S.  C,  1848).  She  attained  some  suc-
cess as  a  painter,  and  removed  in  1849  to  West
Point,  Lee  co.,  Iowa,  where  she  founded  and  en-
dowed Legare  college  for  women.

LEGASPI,  Miguel  Lopez  de  •  (lay-gas'-pee).
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Zumarraga,  Guipuzcoa,  in
1524;  d.  in  Manila,  20  Aug.,  1572.  He  came  to
New  Spain  in  1545,  and  was  for  some  years  chief


notary  to  the  common  council  and  the  civil  gover-
nor of  the  city  of  Mexico.  The  viceroy,  Luis  do
Velasco,  appointed  him  in  1564  commander  of  the
expedition  that  he  was  preparing  by  order  of  Phil-
ip II.  for  the  conquest  of  the  Philippine  islands.
The  viceroy  died  in  July  of  that  year,  but  the  au-
diencia,  governing  provisionally,  completed  the  ar-
mament of  the  expedition,  and  on  21  Nov.,  1564,
Legaspi  sailed,  with  four  ships  and  a  numerous
force,  from  the  port  of  Navidad.  After  visiting  the
whole  Philippine  archipelago  and  conquering  Slin*
doro,  he  despatched  one  vessel,  to  report  his  prog-
ress, to  Mexico,  which  arrived  in  Acapulco,  20  Aug.,
1569.  In  1570  he  conquered  the  island  of  Luzon,
and  founded  the  city  of  Manila,  where  he  died  two
years  afterward.  He  wrote  several  despatches  to
the  king  about  his  conquest,  which,  under  the  title
"Cartas  al  Rey  Don  Felipe  II.  sobre  la  expedicion,
conquistas  y  progresos  de  las  islas  Felipinas."  are
preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  archives  of  the  In-
dies at  Seville,  Spain.

LEGENDRE,  Napoleon  Narcisse  Gabriel,
Canadian  author,  b.  in  Nicolet,  Canada,  13  Feb.,
1841.  He  was  educated  at  the  Christian  brothers'
college,  Point  Levis,  and  at  St.  Mary's  Jesuit  col-
lege, Montreal,  where  he  received  the  degree  of
licencie-en-loi  in  1864.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1865,  and  edited  "  Le  jour-
nal de  l'instruction  publique  "  from  1871  till  1876,
when  he  was  appointed  clerk  of  French  journals
of  the  legislative  council  of  Quebec.  He  was  made
by  the  governor-general,  the  Marquis  of  Lome,  a
member  of  the  Royal  society  of  Canada,  in  the
section  "de  la  litterature  Francaise,"  at  the  time
of  its  formation.  In  addition  to  many  articles  and
essays  published  in  French  and  Canadian  peri-
odicals, he  is  the  author  of  "  Sabre  et  scalpel,"  a
romance  (Montreal  1872) ;  "  Albani,"  a  biography
(Quebec,  1874);  "  A  mes  enfants  "  (1875);  "Echos
de  Quebec  "  (2  vols.,  1877) ;  "  Notre  constitution  et
nos  institutions"  (Montreal,  1878);  and  "Les
Perce-Neige,"  poems  (Quebec,  1886).

LEGGE,  William,  second  Earl  of  Dartmouth,
English  statesman,  b.  in  England  in  1731 ;  d.
there  in  1801.  His  grandfather,  George,  first  Baron
of  Dartmouth,  was  master  of  the  ordnance,  and
afterward  admiral
of  the  fleet,  under
James  II.,  whose
fortunes  he  fol-
lowed in  the  revo-
lution of  1688,  and
his  father,  William,
was  made  an  eari
by  Queen  Anne,  at
whose  death  he  was
a  lord -justice  of
Great  Britain.  The
son  succeeded  to
the  title  in  1750.
He  took  much  in-
terest in  education
in  the  colonies,  and
was  a  subscriber  to
the  fund  that  was
collected  in  Eng-
land by  Sampson
Occum,  a  young
Mohican  Indian,  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indian
charity-school  that  had  been  planned  by  Occum,
and  partially  endowed  by  Joshua  Moor,  in  Lebanon,
Conn.  (See  Wheelock,  Eleazar.)  Lord  Dart-
mouth became  president  of  the  trustees  of  this
fund,  and  when,  in  1769,  the  institution  was  char-
tered as  a  college  and  removed  to  Hanover,  N.  H.,


l&r?Z?ZSZjZ^f.


LEGGETT


LEIDY


679


it  was  given  the  name  of  its  patron,  although,  with
his  fellow-trustees,  he  opposed  the  change.  As  a
result  of  this  opposition,  the  charity-school  obtained
an  independent  charter,  and  remained  distinct  from
the  college  till  1849.  Lord  Dartmouth  was  secre-
tary of  state  for  the  colonies  from  1770  till  1775.

LEGGETT,  Mortimer  Dormer,  soldier,  b.  in
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  19  April,  1831.  He  removed,  in
youth,  with  his  parents,  who  were  Friends,  to  Ohio,
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Willoughby,  Ohio,
in  1844,  and  in  1846  organized  the  first  system  of
union  free  schools  in  the  state.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  was  professor  of  plead-
ings and  practice  in  the  Ohio  law  college  from
1855  till  1858,  when  he  became  superintendent  of
schools  in  Zanesville.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  raised  the  78th  Ohio  infantry,  of
which  he  was  appointed  colonel  in  January,  1862,
and  which  he  led  at  Fort  Donelson,  Shiloh,  where
he  was  wounded,  and  at  Corinth.  In  June  of  this
year  he  commanded  a  brigade,  and  captured  Jack-
son, Tenn.,  defended  Olivia,  Tenn.,  against  a  large-
ly superior  force,  and  was  slightly  wounded.  In
November,  1862.  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  was  severely  wounded
at  Champion  Hills,  and  again  at  Vicksburg,  com-
manded the  3d  division  of  the  7th  corps  in  Gen.
Sherman's  march  to  the  sea,  and  in  July,  1864.
was  brevetted  major-general.  On  21  Aug.,  1865,
he  was  commissioned  major-general  of  volunteers,
and  on  28  Sept.  resigned.  In  1871  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  commissioner  of  patents.

LEGGETT,  William,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1802 ;  d.  in  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  29  May,
1839.  His  father,  Maj.  Abraham  Leggett,  was  a
soldier  of  the  Revolution.  The  son  was  educated  j
at  Georgetown  college,  i
D.  C,  and  in  1819  re-  I
moved  with  his  father
to  Illinois.  He  entered
the  navy  as  a  midship-  <.
man  in  1822,  but  re-
signed in  1826,  and
became  editor  of  the  I
"  Critic,"  a  weekly  lit-
erary journal  which
was  soon  united  with
the  "New  York  Mir-
ror." In  1829  he  be-
came an  editor  of  the
"  New  York  Evening
Post,"  and  was  at-
tached to  that  journal
till  1836.  At  the  out-
set he  stipulated  with
William  Cullen  Bry-
ant, the  senior  editor,  that  he  should  not  be  required
to  write  political  articles,  as  he  had  neither  taste
nor  fixed  opinions  regarding  politics;  but  before
the  year  had  passed  he  appeared  to  have  found  his
true  vocation  in  discussing  them,  and  wrote  vigor-
ous editorial  articles  in  favor  of  free  trade  and
against  the  U.  S.  bank.  In  1835  the  meetings  of
the  Abolitionists  in  New  York  were  dispersed
by  mobs.  Leggett  denounced  these  proceedings,
and  defended  the  right  to  free  discussion  in  re-
gard to  slavery  as  well  as  all  other  subjects.  Re-
tiring from  the  "  Post,"  he  began  the  publication  of
"  The  Plain  Dealer"  in  1836,  which  attained  a  large
circulation,  but  was  discontinued  in  less  than  a  year
through  the  failure  of  its  publisher.  After  this,
his  health  being  greatly  enfeebled,  Mr.  Leggett
left  literary  work  and  retired  to  New  Rochelle,
N.  Y.  He "  was  appointed  in  1839  by  President
Van Buren  diplomatic  agent  to  Guatemala,  but


died  before  the  day  of  sailing.  Mr.  Leggett  was
remarkable  among  the  journalists  of  his  day  as  an
unflinching  advocate  of  freedom  of  opinion  for  his
political  opponents  as  well  as  for  his  own  party.
Mr.  Bryant  wrote  the  poem  to  his  memory  begin-
ning "  The  earth  may  ring  from  shore  to  shore."
He  describes  Leggett  as  fond  of  study,  delighting
to  trace  principles  to  their  remotest  consequences,
and  as  having  no  fear  of  public  opinion  regarding
the  expression  of  his  own  convictions.  It  was  the
fiery  Leggett  that  urged  on  Bryant  to  attack  Will-
iam L.  Stone,  a  brother  editor,  in  Broadway.  Soon
afterward  he  fought  a  duel  at  Weehawken  with
Blake,  the  treasurer  of  the  old  Park  theatre.  To
the  surprise  of  all  New  York,  Leggett  selected
James  Lawson,  a  peacefully  disposed  Scottish-
American  poet,  who  was  slightly  lame,  as  his  sec-
ond ;  and  when  asked  after  the  bloodless  duel  for
his  reasons,  he  answered :  "  Blake's  second,  Berke-
ley, was  lame,  and  1  did  not  propose  that  the
d— d  Englishman  should  beat  me  in  anything."
His  writings  include  "  Leisure  Hours  at  Sea  "  (1825);
'•  Tales  of  a  Country  Schoolmaster"  (1835) ;  "  Na-
val Stories "(1835);  and  "Political  Writings,"  edit-
ed, with  a  preface,  by  Theodore  Sedgwick  (1840).
See  "  lirvant  and  His  Friends,"  by  James  Grant
Wilson  (New  York.  1886).— His  nephew,  William
Henry,  botanist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  24  Feb..
1816 ;  d.  there  in  April,  1882,  was  the  son  of  Abra-
ham Alsop  Leggett.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1837,  and  after  travelling  through  Europe
followed  the  profession  of  a  teacher  till  his  death.
He  was  one  of  the  earliest  members  of  the  Greek
club,  an  association  of  college  graduates  that  was
formed  for  the  study  of  that  language,  and  was
devoted  from  early  life  to  the  science  of  botany,  in
which  he  became  an  authority.  He  founded  the
"  Torrev  Botanical  Bulletin,"  and  was  its  sole
editor  and  publisher  from  1870  till  1880.  Mr.
Leggett  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  academy
of  sciences  and  of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of
natural  sciences.

LEGRAND,  Pierre  (leh-gron'),  French  buc-
caneer, b.  in  Dieppe,  France,  about  1620 ;  d.  there
in  1670.  He  was  the  first  buccaneer  on  the  isl-
and of  Tortugas,  and  became  famous  by  his  auda-
cious capture  of  the  vice-admiral  of  the  Spanish
fleet  near  Cape  Tiburon,  on  the  western  shore  of
Santo  Domingo,  which  he  performed  with  a  small
boat  manned  by  twenty-eight  men.  His  vessel  was
leaking,  and  he  was  rendered  desperate  by  want  of
provisions.  After  reaching  the  Spanish  vessel,
Legrand  cut  a  hole  in  the  boat  by  which  he  had
come,  so  that  his  followers  were  forced  to  take  the
ship  or  die  in  the  attempt.  The  vessel  soon  sur-
rendered, an  immense  booty  was  divided  among  the
buccaneers,  and  Legrand,  with  his  share,  returned
to  France,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.

LEIB,  Michael,  senator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1759  ;  d.  there.  22  Dec,  1822.  After  receiv-
ing a  common-school  education,  he  studied  medi-
cine, practised  in  Philadelphia,  and  occupied  sev-
eral offices  of  trust,  including  a  service  of  several
vears  in  the  state  legislature.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1798,  re-elected  for
the  three  succeeding  terms,  and  served  till  1806,
when  he  resigned.  In  1808  he  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Madison  and  Clinton  ticket.  In  the
same  year  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in
place  of  Samuel  Maclay,  who  had  resigned,  and
was  in  office  till  1814,  when  he  was  appointed
postmaster  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.

LEIDY,  Joseph,  naturalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  9  Sept.,  1823;  d.  there,  30  April,  1891.  He
acquired  a  knowledge  of  mineralogy  and  botany,


680


LEIDY


LEIPER


studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Paul  B.  Goddard.  and
was  graduated  in  that  department  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1844.  At  first  he  became
assistant  in  the  chemical  laboratory  of  Robert  Hare
and  James  B.  Rogers,  also  practising  medicine,
but  in  1846  he  wholly  relinquished  the  practice  of
his  profession,  excepting  during  the  civil  war,  when
he  entered  the  U.  S.  volunteer  army  and  served  as
a  contract  surgeon  in  the  Satterlee  general  hospital
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.  Meanwhile,  in  1845,  he  be-
came prosector  to  the  chair  of  anatomy  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  which  was  then  held  by
Dr.  William  E.  Horner,  and  in  1846  became  demon-
strator of  anatomy  in  Franklin  medical  college.
The  latter  appointment  he  held  for  one  session  only,
arid  then  he  renewed  his  association  with  Dr.
Horner,  with  whom  he  also  gave  a  private  course
of  anatomical  lectures.  He  visited  Europe  in  1848,
examining  the  museums  and  hospitals  there,  and
on  his  return  lectured  on  microscopic  anatomy,
and  in  1849  began  a  course  of  lectures  on  physi-
ology at  the  Medical  institute.  In  1852  he  took
Dr.  Horner's  place,  and  delivered  his  lectures  to
the  completion  of  the  course,  and  on  the  death  of
the  latter  in  the  following  year  Dr.  Leidy  was
elected  to  the  chair  of  anatomy.  In  1871  he  was
also  called  to  the  chair  of  natural  history  in  Swarth-
more  college,  and  for  many  years  held  both  those
posts.  Prof.  Leidy,  in  1884,  on  the  establishment
of  the  department  of  biology  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  became  its  director,  which  office  he
long  held.  He  was  an  accomplished  draughtsman,
and  in  1844,  when  Dr.  Amos  Binney  was  about  to
publish  his  work  on  the  terrestrial  air-breathing
mollusks,  he  selected  Prof.  Leidy  to  dissect  and
draw  the  internal  organs  of  the  species  that  were
to  be  described. Prof.  Leidy  obtained  the  Walker

Erize  of  $1,000  from  the  Boston  society  of  natural
istory  in  1880,  and  also  the  Lyell  medal  with  the
sum  of  £25  from  the  Geological  society  of  London
"  in  recognition  of  his  valuable  contributions  to

Ealaeontology,"  and  received  in  1886  the  degree  of
iL.  D.  from  Harvard.  He  was  a  member  of  numer-
ous scientific  societies,  in  1884  was  elected  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences,  and  was  president  of
the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences.  The
titles  of  his  published  papers  exceed  800  in  number
all  on  biological  subjects,  of  which  many  are  from
specimens  obtained  on  the  various  surveys  under
the  U.  S.  government  and  submitted  to  him  for
study  and  report.  His  first  palaeontological  paper,
published  in  1847,  was  "  On  the  Fossil  Horse,"  a
subject  which  later,  in  the  hands  of  Thomas  H.
Huxley  and  Othniel  C.  Marsh,  has  been  used  in
the  illustration  of  the  theory  of  evolution.  Prof.
Leidy's  principal  works  are  "  Memoir  on  the  Ex-
tinct Species  of  American  Ox  "  (1852) ;  "  A  Flora
and  Fauna  within  Living  Animals"  (1853);  "An-
cient Fauna  of  Nebraska  "  (1853) ;  u  On  the  Extinct
Sloth  Tribe  of  North  America  "  (1855) :  "  Creta-
ceous Reptiles  of  the  United  States"  (1865);  "The
Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Ne-
braska" (1809);  "Contributions  to  the  Extinct
Vertebrate  Fauna  of  the  Western  Territories "
(1873) ;  "  Description  of  Vertebrate  Remains  from
the  Phosphate  Beds  of  South  Carolina "  (1877) ;
"Fresh -Water  Rhizopods  of  North  America"
(1879) ;  "  The  Parasites  of  the  Termites  "  (1881) ;
"On  Manayunkia  speciosa"  (1883):  and  "Tape-
Worm  in  Birds  "  (1887).  The  foregoing  have  been
issued  by  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sci-
ences, the  Smithsonian  institution,  and  under  the
auspices  of  the  National  government.  He  was  also
the  author  of  "  An  Elementary  Text-Book  on  Hu-
man Anatomy  "  (Philadelphia,  1861).


LEIGH,  Benjamin  Watkins,  senator,  b.  in
Chesterfield  county,  Va.,  18  June,  1781 ;  d.  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  2  Feb.,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary  in  1802,  and  at  twenty-one
years  of  age  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  prac-
tised successfully  till  1813  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  was
a  member  of  the  legislature  from  that  city,  and
presented  a  series  of  resolutions  that  asserted  the
right  of  the  legislature  to  instruct  the  U.  S.  sena-
tors from  Virginia.  He  then  removed  to  Rich-
mond, where  he  at  once  took  a  high  place  at  the
bar,  was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  revise  the
statutes  of  the  state,  and  became  reporter  to  the
court  of  appeals.  In  1822  he  was  sent  as  commis-
sioner to  Kentucky,  and  in  concert  with  Henry
Clay,  on  the  part  of  that  state,  made  an  agreement
concerning  the  "occupying  claimants"  law,  which
threatened  to  annul  the  Virginia  title  to  lands  in
Kentucky.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1829-'30,  and  in  1834
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  as  a  Whig,  to  fill
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  William
C.  Rives,  Democrat,  who  had  refused  to  obey  the
instructions  of  the  legislature.  Mr.  Leigh  was
re-elected  at  the  next  session  of  the  legislature,
but  in  1836.  the  political  complexion  of  that  body
having  changed,  he  could  not  obey  his  instruc-
tions, and  in  July  of  this  year  he  resigned  and  re-
tired to  private  life.  William  and  Mary  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1835.  He  published  "  Re-
ports of  Cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeals,  and  in  the
General  Court  of  Virginia "  (Richmond  1830-'44).
— His  cousin,  Hezekiah  Gilbert,  clergyman,  b.
in  Perquimans  county,  N.  C,  25  Nov.,  1795 ;  d.  in
Mecklenburg  county,  Va.,  18  Sept.,  1858,  was  edu-
cated in  Murfreesborough,  N.  C,  taught  for  two
years,  in  1818  joined  the  Virginia  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  for  thirty-five
years  occupied  responsible  charges  in  that  state  and
in  North  Carolina.  In  1829  he  was  a  founder  of
Randolph  Macon  college,  Va.,  and  subsequently
he  was  one  of  its  principal  supporters.  In  1849  he
was  an  organizer  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
south.  Randolph  Macon  college  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1858.

LEIGHTON,  William,  poet,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  22  June,  1833.  He  received  the  degree  of
B.  S.  at  Harvard  in  1855,  and  engaged  in  the  manu-
facture of  glass.  In  1868  he  removed  to  Wheel-
ing, W.  Va.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Sons  of
Godwin,"  a  tragedy  (Philadelphia,  1876) ;  "  Change :
the  Whisper  of  the  Sphinx,"  a  philosophical  poem
(1878);  "A  Sketch  of  Shakespeare"  (Wheeling,
1879) ;  "  Shakespeare's  Dream,  and  other  Poems  "
(Philadelphia,  1881) ;  "  The  Subjection  of  Hamlet,"
an  essay  on  the  motives  of  thought  and  action  in
that  tragedy  (1882) ;  and  "  The  Price  of  the  Present
Paid  by  the  Past,"  a  poem  that  he  delivered  at  the
dedication  of  a  soldiers'  monument  in  Wheeling
(printed  privately,  1883).

LEIPER,  Thomas,  b.  in  Strathaven,  Lanark,
Scotland,  15  Dec,  1745;  d.  in  Delaware  county.
Pa.,  6  July,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  Glasgow
and  Edinburgh,  and  emigrated  to  Maryland  in
1763.  In  1765  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where
he  engaged  in  the  storing  and  exportation  of  to-
bacco. When  the  Revolution  began  the  principal
tobacco-house  was  interdicted,  and  Mr.  Leiper,  seiz-
ing this  opportunity,  pushed  his  connection  so  that
he  soon  became  the  principal  factor  in  Philadelphia.
A  few  years  later  he  built  in  Delaware  county.  Pa.,
several  large  mills  for  the  manufacture  of  tobacco
and  snuff,  and  in  1780  he  bought  and  operated
quarries  in  the  neighborhood  of  his  mills.  By
these  means  he  amassed  a  large  fortune,  which


LEISLER


LEISLER


681


enabled  him  to  subscribe  freely  to  the  improve-
ment of  Philadelphia  and  that"  part  of  Delaware
county  in  the  neighborhood  of  "Avondale,"  his
country  residence.  Mr.  Leiper  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  first  troop  of  city  light  horse,
better  known  as  the  Philadelphia  city  troop,  and
served  with  them  as  lieutenant  during  the  Revo-
lution at  the  battles  of  Princeton,  Trenton,  Brandy-
wine,  and  Germantown.  As  treasurer  of  the  troop,
he  carried  the  last  subsidies  of  the  French  to  the
Americans  at  Yorktown.  He  also  acted  with  his
corps  in  quelling  several  civil  insurrections  and
riots,  notably  in  the  whiskey  riot  of  1794,  and  in
the  attack  on  the  residence  of  James  Wilson  in
Philadelphia,  when  he  was  one  of  the  seven  troop-
ers that  charged  and  routed  the  mob  of  rioters.
Mr.  Leiper  was  a  staunch  Democrat,  and  was  gen-
erally chosen  chairman  of  all  Democratic  town-
meetings,  at  one  of  which  he  was  the  first  to  nomi-
nate Gen.  Jackson  for  the  presidency.  He  was  a
presidential  elector,  director  of  the  banks  of  Penn-
sylvania and  the  United  States,  commissioner  for
the  defence  of  the  city  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  a
member,  and  ultimately  president,  of  the  common
council  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia.  In  1809  Mr.
Leiper  had  constructed,  from  his  quarries  on  Crura
creek  to  his  landing  on  Ridley  creek,  in  Delaware
county,  what  was  the  first  permanent  tramway  in
America.  The  road  was  three  fourths  of  a  mile  in
length,  and  continued  in  active  use  until  1828,
when  it  was  superseded  by  a  canal,  after  the  plan
made  by  Mr.  Leiper,  but  not  carried  into  effect
until  after  his  death. — His  son,  George  Gray,  b.
in  Delaware  county,  Pa.,  3  Feb.,  1780;  d.  there,  17
Nov.,  1868,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1803.  He  represented  Delaware
county  in  congress  from  1829  till  1831,  and  for
many  years  served  as  lay  associate  judge  of  the
Delaware  countv  circuit  court.

LEISLER,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Frankfort  on
the  Main,  Germany;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16  May,
1691.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1660  as  a  sol-
dier in  the  service  of  the  Dutch  West  India  com-
pany. Leaving  the  army  soon  after  his  arrival,  he
engaged  in  the  Indian  trade,  and  became  a  com-
paratively wealthy  man.  While  on  a  voyage  to
Europe  in  1678  he  was  captured  by  Moorish  pirates,
and  was  compelled  to  pay  a  ransom  of  2.05(3  pieces
of  eight  to  obtain  his  freedom.  Previous  to  this
voyage  he  was  a  resident  of  Albany,  where  he  was
a  magistrate,  and  had  incurred  the  displeasure  of
Sir  Edmund  Andros,  the  governor,  by  the  arbi-
trary and  high-handed  measures  that  he  and  his
associates  had  adopted  to  prevent  the  spread  of
popery,  the  political  bugbear  of  the  day,  Leisler
had  also  endeared  himself  to  the  common  people
by  befriending  a  family  of  French  Huguenots  that
had  been  landed  on  Manhattan  island  so  destitute
that  a  public  tribunal  had  decided  they  should  be
sold  into  slavery  in  order  to  pay  their  ship-charges.
Leisler  prevented  the  sale  by  purchasing  the  free-
dom of  the  widowed  mother  and  son  before  it
could  be  held.  Under  Dongan's  administration  in
1683  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  judges,  or  "com-
missioners," of  the  court  of  admiralty  in  Xew
York.  In  1688  Gov.  Dongan  was  succeeded  by
Lieut.-Gov.  Francis  Nicholson.  In  1689  the  mili-
tary force  of  the  city  of  New  York  consisted  of  a
regiment  of  five  companies,  of  one  of  which  Leisler
was  captain.  He  was  popular  with  the  men,  and
probably  the  only  wealthy  resident  in  the  province
that  sympathized  with  the  Dutch  lower  classes.
At  that  time  much  excitement  prevailed  among
the  latter,  owing  to  the  attempts  of  the  Jacobite
office-holders  to  retain  power  in  spite  of  the  revo-


lution in  England  and  the  accession  of  William
and  Mary  to  the  throne.  On  a  report  that  the  ad-
herents of  King  James  were  about  to  seize  the  fort
and  massacre  their  Dutch  fellow-citizens,  an  armed
mob  gathered  on  the  evening  of  2  June,  1689,  to
overthrow  the  existing  government.  The  cry  of
"  Leisler  "  was  raised,  and  the  crowd  rushed  to  his
house.  At  first  he  refused  to  lead  the  movement,
but  when  the  demand  was  reiterated  by  the  men
of  his  regiment  he  acceded,  and  within  an  hour
received  the  keys  of  the  fort,  which  had  meanwhile
been  seized.  Fortunately  for  the  revolutionists,
the  fort  contained  all  the  public  funds,  whose  re-
turn the  lieutenant-governor  in  vain  demanded.
Four  hundred  of  the  new  party  signed  an  agree-
ment to  hold  the  fort  "for  the  present  Protestant
power  that  reigns  in  England,"  while  a  committee
of  safety  of  ten  of  the  city  freeholders  assumed  the
powers  of  a  provisional  government,  of  which  they
declared  Jacob  Leisler  to  be  the  head,  and  com-
missioned him  as  "captain  of  the  fort."  In  this
capacity  he  at  once  began  to  repair  that  work,  and
strengthened  it  with  a  "battery  "  of  six  guns  be-
yond its  walls,  which  was  the  origin  of  the  public
park  that  is  still  known  as  the  Battery.  Nicholson
and  the  council  of  the  province,  with  the  authori-
ties of  the  city,  headed  by  Stephanus  van  Cortlandt,
the  mayor,  attempted  by  pacific  means  to  prevent
the  uprising,  but  without  effect.  Finally,  becom-
ing alarmed  for  their  own  safety,  the  lieutenant-
governor  sailed  for  England,  and  "the  mayor,  with
the  other  officials,  retired  to  Albany.  To  the  latter
city,  where  the  Jacobite  office-holders  still  held
control,  Leisler  sent  his  son-in-law,  Milbourne.  in
November,  with  an  armed  force  to  assist  in  its  de-
fence against  the  Indians,  but  he  was  directed
to  withhold  it  unless  Leisler's  authority  was  rec-
ognized. This  was  refused,  and  Milbourne  re-
turned unsuccessful.  In  December  a  despatch  ar-
rived from  William  and  Mary  directed  "  to  Francis
Nicholson,  Esq.,  or  in  his  absence  to  such  as  for
the  time  being  takes  care  for  preserving  the  peace
and  administering  the  laws  in  his  majesty's  prov-
ince of  New  York."  This  Leisler  construed  as  an
appointment  of  himself  as  the  king's  lieutenant-
governor.  He  therefore  dissolved  the  committee
of  safety,  swore  in  a  council,  and  assumed  the  style
of  a  royal  lieutenant-governor  and  commander-in-
chief.  In  the  spring  of  1690,  Albany,  terrified  by
an  Indian  invasion,  and  rent  by  domestic  factions,
yielded  to  Milbourne.  Amid  distress  and  con-
fusion a  house  of  representatives  was  convened,
and  the  government  was  constituted  by  the  popu-
lar act.  After  the  massacre  at  Schenectady  in
February,  1690.  Leisler  engaged  with  great  vigor
in  the  expeditions  against  the  French,  and  equipped
and  despatched  against  Quebec  the  first  fleet  of
men-of-war  that  had  been  sent  from  the  port  of
New  York.  In  January,  1691,  Maj.  Ingoldesby  ar-
rived with  the  news  of  Henry  Sloughter's  appoint-
ment as  governor,  and  demanded  possession  of  the
fort,  which  Leisler  refused.  ( )n  Sloughter's  own  de-
mand immediately  upon  his  arrival  in  the  following
March,  he  likewise  refused  to  surrender  it  until  he
was  convinced  of  Sloughter's  identity  and  the  lat-
ter had  sworn  in  his  council.  As  soon  as  the  latter
event  occurred,  he  wrote  the  governor  a  letter  re-
signing his  command.  Sloughter  replied  by  arrest-
ing him  and  nine  of  his  friends.  The  latter  were
subsequently  released  after  trial,  but  Leisler  was
imprisoned,  charged  with  treason  and  murder,  and
shortly  afterward  tried  and  condemned  to  death.
His  son-in-law  and  secretary,  Milbourne,  was  also
condemned  on  the  same  charges.  These  trials
were  manifestly  unjust;  the  judges  were  the  per-


682


LEITCH


LE  JEUNE


sonal  and  political  enemies  of  the  prisoners,  and  so
gross  were  the  acts  of  some  of  the  parties  -that
Sloughter  hesitated  at  signing  the  death-warrants,
and  it  is  said  that  he  finally  did  so  when  under  the
influence  of  wine.  By  the  English  law  of  treason
their  estates  were  forfeited  to  the  crown,  but  the
committee  of  the  privy  council  to  whom  the  mat-
ter was  referred  reported  that,  although  the  trial
was  in  conformity  to  the  forms  of  law,  they  never-
theless recommended  the  restoration  of  the  estates
of  the  culprits  to  their  heirs.  In  1695  Leisler's  son
succeeded  in  procuring  the  passage  of  an  act  of
parliament  reversing  his  father's  attainder.  Three
years  later  the  Earl  of  Bellomont,  who  had  been
one  of  the  most  influential  supporters  of  the  efforts
of  Leisler's  son,  was  appointed  governor  of  New
York,  and  through  his  influence  the  assembly  voted
an  indemnity  to  Leisler's  heirs.  The  bones  of  Leis-
ler  and  Milbourne  were  honorably  interred  in  the
Dutch  church.  Among  Leisler's  claims  to  kindly
remembrance  is  the  fact  that,  in  1689,  while  exer-
cising the  functions  of  governor,  he  purchased  the
land  that  is  now  occupied  by  the  village  of  New
Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  as  a  place  of  refuge  for  the  perse-
cuted Huguenots.  See  his  "  Life,"  by  Charles
Fenno  Hoffman,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biog-
raphy" (Boston,  1844).  See  also  ''A  Man  whom
New  York  Beheaded,"  by  Emily  C.  Judson,  included
in  "  Alderbrook  "  (Boston,  1846).

LEITCH,  William,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Rothesay,  Scotland,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  Kingston,  Can-
ada, 9  May,  1864.  He  was  educated  at  the  gram-
mar-school of  Greenock,  and  at  the  University
of  Glasgow,  where  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.
in  1836.  After  studying  in  the  Divinity  hall  of
Glasgow,  in  1838  he  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  in
the  Church  of  Scotland.  He  was  minister  of  the
parish  of  Monimail  from  1843  till  1859,  when  he
resigned  on  his  appointment  as  principal  of  Queen's
university,  Kingston,  Canada.  By  virtue  of  his
office  he  was  a  member  of  the  synod  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  of  Canada,  and  in  1862  was  elected
moderator.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  senate
of  the  University  of  Toronto,  and  was  an  examiner
in  that  institution.  He  was  in  favor  of  maintain-
ing a  great  Canadian  university,  with  all  properly
organized  colleges  throughout  the  country  rallying
around  it,  on  such  terms  as  would  best  secure  a
collegiate  education  for  the  various  sections  of  the
country,  and  at  the  same  time  promote  a  generous
rivalry  among  the  various  colleges  constituting
that  university.  His  scheme*  is  still  advocated  in
Canada,  but  with  little  prospect  of  success.  He
was  an  enthusiastic  student  of  science,  lectured  in
Glasgow  university  on  astronomy  while  studying
there,  and  for  several  years  acted  as  assistant  to
Prof.  Nichol,  the  astronomer.  For  some  time  he
conducted  a  series  of  investigations  on  the  sub-
ject of  partheno-genesis  and  alternate  generation,
as  illustrated  by  the  phenomena  of  sexual  develop-
ment in  hymenoptera,  the  result  of  his  researches
being  published  in  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Brit-
ish Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  "
and  in  the  "Annals  of  the  Botanical  Society  of
Canada."  In  addition  to  several  publications  on
the  subject  of  national  education  in  Scotland  and
India,  he  wrote  a  work  entitled  "God's  Glory  in
the  Heavens"  (New  York,  1866).

LEITE  FERREIRA  DE  MELLO,  Jos6  Bento
(lay'-e-teh),  Brazilian  politician,  b.  in  Campanha,
Minas  Geraes,  6  Jan.,  1785;  d.  near  Pousoalegre,
8  Feb.,  1844.  He  studied  and  was  graduated  in
S5o  Paulo,  where  he  was  ordained  priest  in  1810,
and  soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  rector  of  the
parish  of  Pousoalegre. In  1821  he  took  part  in


politics  as  a  member  of  the  Liberal  party,  which
elected  him  representative  to  the  assembly  of  Lis-
bon. In  1822  he  was  appointed  member  of  the
provisional  government  of  Brazil,  and  in  1825  he
was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  the  nation.  In
that  year  he  began  to  publish  the  paper  "  Pre-
goeiro  Constitucional,"  and  some  years  afterward
the  "  Recopilador  Mineiro."  In  1831  he  founded
in  Pousoalegre  the  society  "  Defensora  da  Liber-
tade  e  Independencia  Nacional,"  and  from  that
year  till  1834  he  was  active  in  propagating  liberal
ideas  concerning  the  abolition  of  slavery.  During
the  regency  of  Father  Feijo  he  sustained  the  gov-
ernment, and  in  1840  was  the  first  to  propose  the
declaration  of  the  majority  of  Pedro  II.  In  1843
he  espoused  the  revolution  of  the  Liberal  party  in
S.  Paulo  and  Minas  Geraes,  and,  being  defeated,
retired  to  his  province  on  account  of  feeble  health
and  his  decreasing  popularity.  Next  year,  on  the
way  to  one  of  his  plantations,  he  was  murdered.

LEITH,  Sir  James,  British  general,  b.  in  Aber-
deenshire, Scotland,  8  Aug.,  1763;  d.  in  Barbadoes,-
W.  I.,  16  Oct.,  1816.  He  entered  the  army  as  a
lieutenant  in  1780,  served  under  Sir  John  Moore
and  Wellington  in  Spain,  attaining  the  rank  of
lieutenant-general,  and  in  1814  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  British  forces  in  the  West
Indies,  and  captain-general  of  the  Leeward  isles.
From  Barbadoes  he  sent  troops  to  aid  the  French
commander  in  suppressing  the  revolt  in  Guade-
loupe, and  forced  the  insurgents  to  capitulate.

LE1VA,  Andres  Diaz  Venero  de  (lay'-e-vah),
first  governor  of  New  Granada,  b.  in  Valladolid,
Spain,  in  1523;  d.  in  Madrid  in  1585.  He  studied
in  the  College  of  Santa  Cruz  de  Valladolid.  where
he  obtained  the  degree  of  doctor  in  civil  and  eccle-
siastic law,  and  occupied  the  posts  of  attorney-gen-
eral and  auditor  of  the  council  of  the  Indies.  He
was  appointed  in  1563  governor  of  the  newly
created  province  of  New  Granada,  and  arrived  in
Santa  Be  on  12  Feb.,  1564.  He  adopted  many
measures  for  the  protection  of  the  natives,  punish-
ing excesses  that  were  committed  against  them,  es-
tablishing numerous  schools,  and  obtaining  a  royal
order  in  1566  for  the  foundation  of  several  con-
vents. He  organized  and  regulated  the  missions,
distributing  them  in  different  parts  of  the  country,
founded  villages  for  the  Indians,  organized  police
forces  for  their  protection,  and  gave  them  the  best
lands  for  their  colonies,  which  were  called  resguar-
dos.  Instead  of  using  the  Indians  as  beasts  of
burden,  he  introduced  for  this  purpose  a  great
number  of  donkeys,  thus  giving  new  facilities  for
commerce.  He  established  a  college  in  the  capital
for  sons  of  caciques  and  other  Indians  of  rank,
and  also  created  a  court  of  justice  for  their  bene-
fit. Leiva  was  the  only  governor  under  whose
administration  the  country  enjoyed  peace  and
prosperity.  In  1573  he  was  recalled  to  Spain  and
made  president  of  the  council  of  the  Indies.

LE  JEUNE.  Paul  (leh-zhun),  French  mission-
ary, b.  in  the  diocese  of  Chalons,  France,  in  1592;
d.  in  Paris,  7  Aug.,  1664.  He  became  a  Jesuit
in  1614,  and  after  completing  his  theological
studies  was  professor  of  rhetoric  and  literature  in
various  colleges.  He  was  sent  to  Canada  in  1632,
and  on  his  arrival  in  Quebec  made  superior  of  the
missions.  In  1637  Commander  de  Sillery  sent
workmen  to  Le  Jeune  with  a  request  that  he  would
employ  them  in  founding  villages  for  the  Christian
Indians.  The  superior  conducted  them  to  a  point
about  four  miles  above  Quebec,  and  there  founded
the  village  of  Sillery.  In  a  few  years  this  settle-
ment became  a  considerable  town,  and  the  Indian
inhabitants  cleared  a  large  tract,  and  were  gradu-


LELAND


LELAND


083


ally  civilized  by  Le  Jeune.  He  ceased  to  be  supe-
rior in  1639,  and  in  1649  returned  to  France,  where
he  was  made  procurator  of  the  foreign  missions.
In  1658  he  was  selected  by  Anne  of  Austria  for  the
new  bishopric  that  was  to  be  erected  in  Canada,
but  the  Jesuits  represented  to  her  that  their  rules
did  not  permit  them  to  accept  such  a  dignity.
His  works  are  "  Brieve  relation  du  voyage  de  la
Nouvelle  France,"  the  first  of  the  "  Relations"  on
New  France  which  the  Jesuits  continued  to  1672,
and  which  form  one  of  the  best  sources  of  infor-
mation with  regard  to  the  North  American  Indians
(Paris,  1632) ;  "  Relation  de  ce  qui  s'est  passe  en  la
Nouvelle  France  en  l'annee  1633 "  (1634) ;  and
seven  other  "  Relations,"  ending  with  that  of
1660-'l  (1662).  He  also  wrote  many  devotional
works,  some  of  which  became  very  popular.

LELAND,  Aaron,  clergyman,  b.  in  Holliston,
Mass.,  28  May,  1761 ;  d.  in  Chester,  Vt.,  25  Aug.,
1833.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
was  ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister  about  1786.  set-
tled in  Chester,  Vt.,  and  built  up  a  church  from
which  sprang  those  at  Andover  and  Grafton,
Mass.,  Weathersfield  and  Jamaica,  Vt.,  and  other
places.  He  was  an  earnest  Jeffersonian  Democrat,
sat  in  the  legislature  from  1801  till  1811,  during
which  period  he  was  thrice  elected  speaker,  was  a
councillor  for  four  years,  and  for  five  successive
years  elected  lieutenant-governor  of  Vermont.
He  also  served  as  an  assistant  justice  of  the  county
court  for  eighteen  years.  In  1828  he  was  proposed
as  a  candidate  for  governor,  but  declined  the  nomi-
nation, being  unwilling  to  desert  the  pulpit,  in
which  he  was  an  effective  orator.

LELAND,  Charles  Godfrey,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  15  Aug.,  1824.  Before  he  was  fifteen
years  of  age  he  began  to  contribute  short  poems  to
newspapers.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1846,  afterward  studied  aesthetics,  history,  philoso-
phy, and  the  modern  languages  in  the  universities
of  Heidelberg  and  Munich,  and  then  went  to  Paris,
where  he  attended  lectures  at  the  Sorbonneand  the
College  Louis-le-Grand,  and  was  one  of  the  Ameri-
can deputation  that  congratulated  the  provisional
fovernment  after  the  revolution  of  February,  1848.
n  October,  1848,  he  returned  to  Philadelphia,  where
he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851.
He  soon  relinquished  that  profession,  and  became
a  contributor  to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"
for  which  he  had  begun  to  write  while  a  student  in
college,  the  "  International  Magazine,"  "  Sartain's,"
"  Graham's,"  and  other  periodicals.  He  resided  for
some  time  in  New  York  city,  where  he  edited  the
"  Illustrated  News,"  but  returned  to  Philadelphia
in  1855,  and  was  connected  with  the  "  Evening  Bul-
letin "  three  years.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  wrote  in  support  of  a  vigorous  National  pol-
icy in  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  and  estab-
lished in  Boston  the  "  Continental  Magazine,"  in
which  he  proposed  and  urged  the  emancipation  of
the  slaves.  He  returned  to  Philadelphia  in  1863,
and  wrote  and  made  the  illustrations  for  a  political
satire  entitled  "  The  Book  of  Copperheads."  In
1865  he  engaged  in  speculations  in  the  coal  and
petroleum  fields,  and  travelled  through  Kentucky,
Tennessee,  and  West  Virginia.  On  his  return  to
Philadelphia  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Press,"
which  was  prosperous  under  his  management.
After  travelling  through  the  west  he  went  to  Eu-
rope in  May,  1869,  and  remained  till  1880,  resid-
ing chiefly  in  London,  and  while  there  he  pur-
sued original  investigations  into  the  history,  lan-
guage, and  customs  of  the  Gypsy  race.  When  he
returned  to  Philadelphia  he  introduced  and  super-
vised a  system  of  industrial-art  education  in  the


?ublic  schools.  Mr.  Leland  is  the  author  of  "  The
'oetry  and  Mystery  of  Dreams,"  containing  the
fruit,  of  curious  researches  in  ancient  and  modern
literature  (Philadelphia,  1855) :  -  Meister  Karl's
Sketch-Book,"  a  collection  of  sketches  of  foreign
travel  and  other  articles  reprinted  from  magazines
(1855);  "Pictures  of  Travel,"  translated  from  the
German  of  Heinrich  Heine  (1856);  "Sunshine  in
Thought"  (New  York,  1862);  "Legends  of  Birds"
(Philadelphia,  1864);  "To  Kansas  and  Back,"  a
pamphlet  describing  a  journey  to  the  far  west
(1866):  and  a  pamphlet  on  the  "Union  Pacific,
Eastern  Division  "  (1867).  His  most  popular  works
were  the  "Hans  Breitmann  Ballads"  (complete
ed.,  Philadelphia,  1871),  the  first  of  which  humor-
ous dialect  poems  were,  so  much  admired  that  he
composed  an  extended  series,  burlesquing  pecul-
iarities of  character,  as  well  as  of  thought  and
speech  among  the  ruder  type  of  German  Ameri-
cans. His  later  works  are  "  The  Music-Lesson  of
Confucius,  and  other  Poems,"  in  which  he  seeks  to
harmonize  the  Christian  religion  with  the  antique
sentiments  of  joy  and  beauty  (London,  1870);
"  Gaudeamus,"  a  translation  of  humorous  poems
by  Josef  V.  Schefel  and  other  German  writers
(1871);  "Egyptian  Sketch-Book"  (1873);  "The
English  Gypsies  and  their  Language"  (1873);
"  Fu-Sang.  or  the  Discovery  of  America  bv  Chi-
nese Buddhist  Priests  in  the  Fifth  Century"  (1875);
"  English  Gypsy  Songs,"  in  collaboration  with
Janet  Tuckey  and  Prof.  Edward  II.  Palmer  (1875);
"  Johnnykin  and  the  Goblins  "  (1876) :  "  Pidgin-
English  Sing-Song"  (1876);  "Abraham  Lincoln"
(1879) ;  "  The  Minor  Arts  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Gypsies  "
(1882) ;  and  "  The  Algonquin  Legends  of  New  Eng-
land "(1884).  In  connection  with  the  educational
movement  that  he  set  on  foot  he  edited  a  series  of
"Art- Work  Manuals"  (1885),  containing  instruc-
tions for  ceramic  painting,  brass  repousse  work,
leather  work,  papier-mache  work,  stencilling,  and
wood-carving.  He  now  (1887)  resides  in  London,
England. — His  brother.  Henry  Perry,  author,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,  1828;  d.  there,  22
Sept.,  1868,  was  a  frequent  contributor  in  prose
and  verse  to  newspapers  and  magazines.  He  was
an  extensive  traveller,  and  a  student  in  various  de-
partments of  knowledge,  and  possessed  a  vein  of
humor  that  pervades  his  writings.  While  serving
as  a  lieutenant  in  the  118th  Pennsylvania  regiment
during  the  civil  war,  he  was  prostrated  by  a  sun-
stroke, from  the  effects  of  which  he  never  fully  re-
covered. He  published  "  The  Grey  Bay  Mare,  and
other  Humorous  American  Sketches"  (Philadel-
phia, 1856),  and  a  volume  of  sketches  of  foreign
travel,  entitled  "  Americans  in  Rome"  (1863).

LELAND,  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Walpole,  Mass.,
in  1850:  d.  in  Paris,  France,  5  Dec,  1877.  He  en-
gaged in  mercantile  pursuits  in  Boston  till  187-1,
when  he  resolved  to  be  an  artist,  and  became  a  pupil
of  Bonnat  in  Paris.  Here  his  short  career  was
marked  by  rapid  success.  His  early  death  was  the
result  of  an  accident.  In  1876  he  exhibited  the
portrait  of  Mile.  d'Alembert  at  the  Paris  salon,
and  in  1877  "  A  Chevalier  of  the  Time  of  Henry
III."  and  "  An  Italian  Girl."

LELAND,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Grafton,
Mass.,  14  May,  1754;  d.  in  North  Adams,  Mass.,
14  Jan.,  1841.  He  was  educated  as  a  Congrega-
tional ist,  but,  adopting  Baptist  tenets,  was  licensed
as  a  preacher  in  1774,  and  in  1775  removed  to  Vir-
ginia, where  until  1791,  with  the  exception  of  oc-
casional visits  to  the  north,  he  was  actively  em-
ployed in  discharging  the  duties  of  his  office.  He
resided  at  first  in  Culpepper  county,  but  on  account
of  difficulties  in  his  church  removed  to  Orange


684


LE  LYONNET


LEMBKE


county,  and  engaged  in  preaching  tours  throughout
Virginia  and  the  northern  parts  of  North  Carolina
and  as  far  northward  as  Philadelphia.  He  was
not  regularly  ordained  until  June,  1787.  When
the  Federal  constitution  was  under  discussion
Elder  Leland  was  put  forward  as  the  candidate  of
the  party  that  was  opposed  to  its  adoption  unless
the  views  that  were  dominant  in  Virginia  were  in-
corporated, James  Madison  being  the  opposing
candidate  for  delegate  to  the  State  convention
from  Orange  county ;  yet  after  a  conversation  with
the  latter  Leland  withdrew  in  his  favor.  In  Feb-
ruary, 1792,  he  settled  in  Cheshire,  Mass..  where
he  resided  for  the  most  part  until  his  death.  He
was  a  prolific  writer,  and  during  his  fifteen  years'
ministry  in  Virginia  preached  more  than  3,000  ser-
mons, founded  two  large  churches — one  in  Orange
and  one  in  Louisa  county — and  baptized  700  per-
sons. He  continued  his  itinerant  ministry  after
returning  to  Massachusetts,  and  down  to  1821  had
baptized  1,352  converts.  Toward  the  close  of  1801
he  went  to  Washington  to  present  to  Mr.  Jefferson
a  mammoth  cheese  weighing  1,450  pounds.as  a  testi-
monial of  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the  people
of  Cheshire  in  the  new  chief  magistrate.  He  was
firmly  attached  to  the  Democratic  party,  and  some-
times manifested  his  predilections  in  his  pulpit
discourses.  His  "  Occasional  Sermons  and  Ad-
dresses," with  essays  on  moral,  religious,  and  politi-
cal subjects,  an  autobiography,  written  in  1819,
and  additional  notices  of  his  life  by  his  grand-
daughter, Miss  L.  F.  Greene,  appeared  in  1845.

LE  LYONNET,  Charles  (leh-le'-on-nay'),  French
statistician,  b.  in  Paris  in  1767;  d.  there  in  1826.
He  entered  the  colonial  civil  service,  and  was
several  times  accredited  as  unofficial  agent  to  the
government  of  Santo  Domingo.  He  went  four  times
to  that  country— in  1800,  1803,  1809,  and  1811 —
and  was  also  given  missions  to  French  and  Dutch
Guiana,  Louisiana,  and  several  of  the  West  India
islands.  He  published  "  Statistique  de  Saint  Do-
mingue"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1811);  "  Statistique  de  la
Guyane  Francaise"  (1813);  "Statistique  de  la
Louisiane"  (1803;  revised  ed.,  1814) ;  "Statistique
des  Antilles  Francaises  "  (1817);  and  other  works.

LE  MA  IRE,  James,  Dutch  navigator,  b.  in  Hol-
land about  1565 ;  d.  at  sea,  31  Dec.,  1616.  With
the  object  of  eluding  the  letters-patent  that  had
been  granted  by  the  states-general  to  the  Company
of  the  East  Indies,  and  which  forbade  Hollanders
that  did  not  belong  to  the  company  to  pass  south
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  or  through  the  Straits
of  Magellan  on  the  route  to  India,  the  chief  inhabi-
tants of  the  town  of  Hoorn  formed  a  company  for
the  discovery  of  other  routes  into  the  Pacific.  The
first  idea  of  this  enterprise  was  due  to  Isaac  Le
Maire,  and  he  communicated  it  to  Cornelis  Schou-
ten,  an  experienced  navigator  who  believed  that
the  American  continent  terminated  in  an  open  sea
South  of  Tierra  del  Fuego. The  half  of  the  ex-

Kenses  of  the  expedition  was  borne  by  Isaac  Le
laire,  and  Schouten  was  charged  with  the  equip-
ment of  the  ship  "  Concord,"  of  360  tons,  with  65
sailors  and  29  cannon  of  small  calibre.  A  smaller
vessel  was  equipped  in  the  same  manner,  but  its
name  is  not  mentioned.  Although  Schouten  was
commander,  James  Le  Maire.  the  son  of  Isaac,  seems
to  have  had  entire  control  of  the  expedition  under
the  title  of  director-general.  The  expedition  sailed
from  the  Texel,  14  June,  1615,  and  after  many

f>erils,  in  which  the  smaller  of  the  two  vessels  was
ost.  the  "  Concord  "  passed  the  Straits  of  Magellan
on  24  Jan.,  1616,  and  found  itself  near  the  eastern
extremity  of  Tierra  del  Fuego.  When  they  reached
this  point  Le  Maire  and  Schouten  discovered  a


high  land  to  the  east  which  they  named  Staten
island.  They  saw  also  a  fine  channel  opening  to
the  south,  beyond  which  the  coast  of  Tierra  del
Fuego  tended  toward  the  west,  and  they  expected
every  moment  to  reach  the  extremity  of  the  conti-
nent. After  discovering  Barneveld  islands,  the
"Concord"  doubled  the  cape  that  extended  far-
thest toward  the  south,  and  was  the  first  vessel  to
enter  the  Pacific  in  this  way.  The  Hollanders
called  the  cape  Cape  Horn,  and  the  strait  through
which  they  had  passed  before  doubling  it  was
called  after  Le  Maire.  The  two  navigators  next
directed  their  course  toward  Juan  Fernandez ;  but
they  were  driven  back  by  winds  and  currents.  They
then  sailed  out  into  the  Pacific,  and  after  many
discoveries  and  dangerous  experiences  reached
the  Dutch  settlement  in  Batavia,  sixteen  months
after  leaving  the  Texel.  Here  they  were  arrested
and  sent  home  on  board  the  "Amsterdam"  to
stand  trial  for  infringing  on  the  privileges  of  the
Company  of  the  East  Indies,  but  Le  Maire  died
before  his  arrival  in  Holland.  The  only  original
narrative  of  the  voyage  of  Le  Maire  was  written
by  Ars  Classen,  a  clerk  on  board  the  smaller  of  the
two  vessels.  It  was  translated  into  Latin,  and  a
French  version  is  found  in  the  "  Recueil  des
voyages"  of  the  Company  of  the  East  Indies.

LEMAY,  Leon  Pamphile,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  Lotbiniere,  Quebec,  5  Jan.,  1837.  He  was
educated  at  the  Quebec  seminary  and  studied  law,
but  after  obtaining  his  diploma  he  abandoned  the
profession  on  his  appointment  to  an  office  un-
der the  government.  He  is  at  present  (1887)
keeper  of  the  legislative  library  at  Quebec.  From
an  early  age  he  had  cultivated  his  poetic  talent,
and  in  1865  published  "  Essais  poetiques "  (Que-
bec). In  1867  he  received  a  gold  medal  from
Laval  university  for  the  best  poem  on  "  The  Dis-
covery of  Canada."  He  had  previously  been
awarded  a  gold  medal  for  a  "Hymne  national
pour  la  fete  des  Canadiens-Francais."  His  trans-
lation of  Longfellow's  "  Evangeline  "  (1870)  attract-
ed attention.  His  romance  "  Le  pelerin  de  Sainte
Anne "  (1877)  was  violently  attacked  by  many  as
immoral,  but  its  sequel,  "Picounoc  le  maudit,"
disarmed  hostile  criticism.  His  latest  prose  pub-
lication, "  L'Affaire  Sougraine  "  (1884),  is  said  to
contain  his  best  work.  Besides  the  volumes  of
poetry  noticed  above,  he  has  also  issued  "  Poemes
couronnes  "  (Quebec,  1870) ;  "  Les  Vengeances  "
(1875;  the  same  dramatized,  1876);  "Une  Gerbe"
(1879) ;  and  "  Petits  poemes "  (1883).  He  is  also
the  author  of  "  Fables  Canadiennes  "  (1882).

LEMBKE,  Francis  Christian,  clergyman,  b.
in  Blansigen,  Baden,  13  July,  1704;  d.  in  Nazareth,
Pa.,  11  July,  1785.  He  was  a  graduate  of  the  uni-
versities of  Strasburg  and  Jena,  and  in  early  years
was  a  skeptic,  devoted  to  philosophy,  but  he  was
converted  while  at  Jena,  and  in  1735  accepted  a
professorship  in  the  gymnasium  of  Strasburg  and
the  office  of  assistant  preacher  in  the  church  of  St.
Peter,  where  he  became  a  popular  pulpit  orator.
Some  time  afterward  he  was  cited  before  the  con-
sistory, and  told  that  he  must  pledge  himself  to
relinquish  his  friendly  relations  to  the  Moravians,
with  whom  he  had  kept  up  a  fraternal  fellowship
for  several  years.  This  he  refused  to  do,  where-
upon he  was  forbidden  to  preach.  The  effort  to
deprive  him  of  his  professorship  failed  in  conse-
quence of  the  determined  attitude  of  his  colleagues.
But  he  no  longer  felt  at  home  at  Strasburg,  and,
resigning  his  professorship  in  1746,  he  joined  the
Moravians.  Eight  years  later  he  was  called  to
this  country,  and  intrusted  with  the  church  at
Nazareth,  Pa. There  he  labored  for  thirty  years


LEMCKE


LE  MOINE


685


with  faithfulness  and  success.  In  1755  the  struc-
ture known  as  Nazareth  Hall  was  erected,  and
within  its  walls  a  boarding-school  was  opened  in
1759  for  boys  of  the  Moravian  church.  Of  this
school  Lembke  was  constituted  the  principal.  Out
of  it  grew,  in  1785,  that  enlarged  school  which
now,  for  more  than  a  century,  has  been  educating
boys  from  all  parts  of  the  United  States.  Lembke
was  a  learned  divine,  an  able  educator,  and  an
eloquent  preacher.

LEMCKE,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mecklen-
burg, Germany,  27  June,  1796;  d.  in  Carrollton,
Cambria  co.,  Pa.,  29  Nov.,  1882.  His  parents  were
poor,  but  he  educated  himself  sufficiently  to  gain
admission  to  the  College  of  Schwerin,  where  he
supported  himself  by  giving  private  lessons.  He
entered  the  German  array  in  1813,  afterward  went
to  the  University  of  Rostock  to  study  for  the
Lutheran  ministry,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1819.  He  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church,
21  April,  1824,  and  was  ordained  to  its  priesthood,
11  April,  1826.  In  1833  he  volunteered  for  mis-
sionary duty  among  the  Germans  of  the  United
States^  and  labored  first  in  Philadelphia  and  then
as  assistant  to  Father  Demetrius  Gallitzin  in  Lo-
retto,  Pa.  He  took  up  his  residence  at  Ebens-
burg,  and  purchased  a  farm  near  by,  on  which  he
afterward  erected  St.  Joseph's  church.  He  next
bought  400  acres  of  land,  on  which  he  built  a
house  and  chapel  in  1838,  and  in  1839  he  laid  out
a  town  on  it,  which  he  wished  to  name  after  his
friend  Gallitzin,  but,  on  the  remonstrance  of  the
latter,  called  it  Carrollton.  In  1840  he  succeeded
Father  Gallitzin  as  pastor  of  Loretto,  and  was  then
the  only  priest  in  Cambria  county,  but  he  soon
obtained  the  aid  of  others.  After  a  successful
visit  to  Europe  in  1844  to  collect  money,  he  bought
800  acres  of  land,  on  which  he  intended  to  estab-
lish a  colonv  of  Benedictines,  but  they  preferred
to  settle  in  Westmoreland  county.  He  became  a
member  of  the  order  of  St.  Benedict  on  2  Feb.,  1852.
performed  missionary  duty  in  Kansas,  and  founded
the  abbey  of  St.  Benedict  in  Atchison,  Kan.  He
returned  to  Pennsylvania  in  1858,  and  after  a  visit
to  Germany  labored  in  New  Jersey  till  1877,  when
he  withdrew  to  Carrollton,  Pa.  lie  wrote  his  own
autobiography,  part  of  which  appeared  in  the  jour-
nals of  Cambria  county,  and  published  translations
of  several  controversial  works  in  German,  and  "  Le-
ben  und  Werken  des  Prinzen  Demetrius  Augustin
Gallitzin  "  (Munster,  1861).

LEME,  Antonio  Pires  da  Silva  Pontes
(lay'-meh),  Brazilian  scholar,  b.  in  Minas-Geraes,
Brazil,  about  1756 ;  d.  there  in  1807.  He  studied
at  the  University  of  Coimbra,  was  graduated  in
1777,  and  went  to  the  East  Indies,  whence  he
returned  to  Lisbon,  and  in  1780  accompanied
Dr.  Lacerda,  who  was  sent  to  Brazil  by  the  gov-
ernment of  Portugal  to  study  the  question  ^of
boundaries  with  the  Spanish  colonies.  In  1781
Leme  explored  Paraguay  and  the  territories  of
Cazalvasco  and  Barbados,  meanwhile  making  copi-
ous notes  on  the  geography  of  the  country  that
were  afterward  published  by  the  government  of
Brazil  (1841).  The  commission  finished  its  work
in  1783,  and  returned  to  Portugal.  Leme  now
drew  a  complete  map  of  Brazil  and  a  maritime
guide  of  its  coasts,  for  which,  in  addition  to  his
other  services,  he  was  given  a  medal  by  the  govern-
ment of  Portugal.  In  1798  he  was  appointed  by
the  king  professor  in  the  Academy  of  Lisbon,
and  on  29  March,  1800,  he  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  the  province  of  Espirito  Santo,  where  he
gave  much  attention  to  the  civilization  of  the
Indians,  establishing  for  them  a  college  and  an


industrial  school.  He  retired  from  his  office  in
1804,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  completion  of  his
works,  but  was  obliged  to  abandon  them  on  ac-
count of  illness.  He  published  a  work  entitled
"  Construccao  e  Analyse  das  proposicces  geometri-
cas  e  experiencias  practicas  que  serven  de  funda-
mento  a  architectura  naval "  (1799).

LE  MERCIER,  Andrew  (leh-mair'-se-ay'),  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Caen,  France,  in  1692;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  31  March,  1763.  He  was  graduated  at  Geneva,
and  immediately  afterward,  in  1715,  came  to  this
country  through  the  influence  of  Andrew  Faneuil,
to  succeed  Rev.  Pierre  Daille  as  pastor  of  the  French
Protestant  church  in  Boston,  over  which  he  pre-
sided till  1748.  He  built  a  house  for  the  relief  of
shipwrecked  mariners  on  the  Isle  of  Sables,  to  which
he  sent  provisions,  and  which  was  the  means  of
saving  many  lives.  He  wrote  "The  Church  His-
tory of  Geneva,  in  Five  Books,  with  a  Political  and
Geographical  Account  of  that  Republic  "  (Boston,
1732),  and  a  "Treatise  against  Detraction"  (1733).

LE  MERCIER,  Francis,  French  missionary,
b.  in  France  early  in  the  17th  century :  d.  in  Mar-
tinique, W.  I.,  12  June,  1690.  He  entered  the
Society  of  Jesus,  14  Oct.,  1620,  and  was  sent  to
Canada  in  1635,  where  he  was  attached  to  the
Huron  mission  until  its  destruction  in  1649.  He
held  the  post  of  superior  of  the  missions  from
1653  till  1656,  labored  among  the  Iroquois  till
1658,  and  was  again  superior  from  1665  till  1670.
After  leaving  Canada  in  1673  he  was  sent  to  the
West  Indies  as  visitor.  While  he  was  superior  in
Canada  he  published  six  volumes  of  "  Relations."

LE  MOINE,  James  MacPherson,  Canadian
author,  b.  in  Quebec,  24  Jan.,  1825.  He  is  the  son
of  Benjamin  Le  Moine,  a  wealthy  merchant  of
Quebec  and  a  lineal  descendant  of  Jean  Le  Moyne,
seigneurof  three  fiefs,
who  was  a  near  rela-
tive of  Baron  Le
Moyne  de  Longueuil.
James  received  his
preparatory  educa-
tion in  St.  Thomas,
Lower  Canada,  at  the
home  of  his  maternal
grandfather,  a  Unit-
ed Empire  loyalist
who  fled  from  Phila-
delphia in  1783.  In
1838  James  entered
the  Petit  seminaire  de
Quebec,  where  he  re-
mained till  1845.  He
subsequently  studied
law,  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  of  Quebec  in  1850.  In  1847  he
became  superintendent  of  inland  revenue  at  Que-
bec, which  post  he  still  (1887)  retains.  He  has
been  president  of  the  Literary  and  historical  so-
ciety of  Quebec,  and  was  selected  by  the  Mar-
quis of  Lome  to  preside  over  the  first  section  of
the  Royal  society  of  Canada.  Mr.  Le  Moine  is
an  enthusiastic  student  of  Canadian  history  and
ornithology,  and  at  his  residence.  Spencer  Grange,
near  Quebec,  he  has  an  extensive  aviary,  a  museum
of  natural  history  specimens,  and  a  large  collec-
tion of  books  and  curios  connected  with  the  early
historv  of  Canada.  He  has  written  on  the  subject
of  Canadian  history  with  such  impartiality  as
rarelv  to  challenge  adverse  criticism.  His  works
include  "  L'Ornithologie  du  Canada "  (Quebec,
1860) ;  "  Etude  sur  les  navigateurs  arctiques
Franklin,  McClure,  Kane,  McClintock"  (1862);
"  Etudes  sur  Sir  Walter  Scott "  (1862) ;  "  Legend-


G?./fc/  &  &u*<**4S


686


LE  MOINE


LE  MOYNE


ary  Lore  of  the  Lower  St.  Lawrence"  (1862):
"  Maple  Leaves "  (4  vols.,  1863-5) :  "  Les  pe-
cheries  du  Canada"  (1863);  "Memoir  de  Mont-
calm vengee  "  (1865)  ;  "  L' Album  Canadien  "
(1870) ;  "  The  Tourists'  Note-Book  "  (1870) ;  "  Notes
historiques  sur  les  fortifications  et  les  rues  de
Quebec"  (1874);  "Conference  sur  l'ornithologie"
(1874);  "Coup-d'ceil  general  sur  l'ornithologie  de
l'Amerique  du  Nord '"(1875) ;  "Quebec:  Past  and
Present"  (1876);  "Chronicles  of  the  St.  Law-
rence "  (1878) ;  "  The  Sword  of  Brigadier-General
Montgomery  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Scot  in  New  France  "
(1880)  ;  "  Notes  sur  l'archeologie,  l'histoire,  du
Canada,  etc."  (1882) ;  "  Monographies  et  esquisses  "
(1885) ;  and  "  Chasse  et  peche  "  (1887).

LE  MOINE,  Sauvolle,  governor  of  Louisiana,
b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  about  1671 :  d.  in  Biloxi,
in  what  is  now  Mississippi,  22  July,  1701.  He  in-
herited a  large  fortune  from  an  aunt,  and  was  sent
to  be  educated  in  Prance,  where  he  was  a  favorite
in  society  and  so  remarkable  for  his  attainments
that  he  was  known  as  the  American  prodigy.  Ra-
cine pronounced  him  a  poet,  Bossuet  predicted
that  he  would  be  a  great  orator,  and  Villars  called
him  a  marshal  of  France  in  embryo.  He  accom-
panied Iberville  and  Bienville  to  the  Mississippi,
and  the  former  left  him  in  command  of  the  colony
there. Louis  XIV.  appointed  him  its  governor  in

1699,  and  he  retained  the  office  till  his  death.  He
was  the  first  colonial  governor  of  Louisiana.

LEMOS  MESA,  Manoel  de  (lay'-mos-may'-
sah),  Portuguese  jurist,  b.  in  Estremoz  in  1670 ;  d.
in  Coimbra  in 1744. He  went  to  Brazil  about

1700,  and  for  thirty  years  held  various  offices  in
the  courts  of  justice  of  that  country.  He  became
chief  justice  of  Brazil  in  1732,  but  returned  to  his
native  country  a  few  months  before  his  death.
His  most  important  work  is  "  Doacoo  da  Capitania
de  Porto  Seguro  em  favor  de  Pedro  Tourinho"
(Coimbra,  1724).  In  it  the  author  relates  the
conditions  of  the  sale  of  Brazil  by  the  natives  to
the  early  Portuguese  settlers,  and  those  which
Leonor  do  Campo  Tourinho  exacted  from  the
Portuguese  government,  after  the  death  of  her
father,  for  her  claims  to  the  sites  of  Rio  de  Janeiro
and  other  important  cities  of  Brazil.

LE  MOYNE,  Charles,  Sieur  de  Longueuil,  b.
in  Dieppe,  France,  in  1626 :  d.  in  Villemarie,  Cana-
da, in  1685.  In  1641  he  sailed  for  Canada,  where,
after  spending  four  years  among  the  Hurons  and
becoming  familiar  with  their  language,  he  settled
at  Villemarie  and  served  as  interpreter  to  the
colony.  In  1648  the  Iroquois  advanced  toward  the
fort  under  pretence  of  parleying,  but  with  the
real  object  of  surprising  it.  Le  Moyne,  who  di-
vined their  purpose,  rushed  among  them,  seized
two  Indians,  and  forced  them  to  march  as  prisoners
into  the  fort.  A  similar  act  of  bravery  on  his  part
some  weeks  later  produced  such  effect  on  the
savages  that  for  some  time  they  did  not  venture
to  appear  in  the  neighborhood.  He  resumed  the
cultivation  of  his  lands ;  but  the  Iroquois  renewed
their  attacks  on  the  colonists  in  May,  1651,  and,
collecting  some  of  his  men,  Le  Moyne  routed  them
with  great  slaughter.  In  consequence  of  this  ac-
tion he  was  appointed  garde  magazin,  and  in  1653
he  negotiated  a  peace  with  the  Iroquois.  In  1655
this  tribe  again  attacked  the  colony,  which  was
saved,  owing  chiefly  to  the  efforts  of  Le  Moyne.
He  was  captured  by  these  Indians  ten  years  later
while  he  was  hunting,  after  displaying  great  brav-
ery. The  savages  were  about  to  burn  him,  but
his  demeanor  at  the  stake  impressed  them  so  much
that  they  released  him,  and  at  the  end  of  three
months  set  him  at  liberty. Francois  de  Lauzon,


to  whom  sixty  leagues  of  territory  had  been  grant-
ed by  the  royal  government,  counted  Le  Moyne
among  his  earliest  vassals,  and  in  1657  conferred
on  him  the  amplest  seigniorial  rights.  To  his
former  possessions  was  added  in  1664  the  island
of  St.  Ilelene,  Round  island,  and  other  properties.
He  took  part  in  the  expeditions  of  Tracy  and
Courcelles  in  1666-'7,  and  in  1668  Louis  XIV.,  in
recognition  of  his  services,  ennobled  him,  con-
ferring on  him  the  title  of  Sieur  de  Longueuil,  to
which  was  added  the  title  of  Chateauguay  on  his
acquiring  that  fief.  He  afterward  took  part  in
several  expeditions  against  the  Iroquois,  his  knowl-
edge of  the  Indian  dialects  rendering  his  services
of  great  value  to  successive  governors.  He  was
for  a  long  time  captain  of  Montreal,  and  was  rec-
ommended by  De  La  Barre  to  the  French  govern-
ment for  appointment  as  governor  of  that  place.
He  had  eleven  sons,  of  whom  two  (see  Bienville
and  Iberville)  are  noticed  elsewhere. — His  son,
Charles,  first  Baron  de  Longueuil.  b.  in  Villemarie,
10  Dec,  1656 ;  d.  there,  8  June,  1729,  was  surnamed
the  "  Maccabeus  of
Montreal"  on  account
of  his  valor.  He
served  in  the  French
army  in  Flanders,
was  made  a  lieuten-
ant, and,  on  return-
ing to  Canada  in  1683,
was  made  mayor  of
Montreal,  and  en-
gaged in  colonizing
his  estates,  building
churches  and  a  stone
fort  at  Longueuil.  He
commanded  a  divis-
ion of  the  Canadian
militia  in  the  cam-
paign against  the  Iro-
quois in  1687,  and
went  with  a  body  of
Huron  and  Abenaki
Indians  to  watch  the
movements  of  the  English  fleet  before  Quebec  in
1690.  The  same  year  he  was  wounded  in  an  action
against  the  British  under  Sir  William  Phips  and
was  made  governor  of  Montreal,  and  baron  in  1700,
on  account  of  his  services  to  the  colony.  His  dex-
terity in  negotiating  with  the  Onondaga  Indians
in  1711  saved  the  trench  colony  from  great  dan-
gers, and  he  commanded  the  Canadian  troops  at
Chambly  in  the  unsuccessful  attempt  by  the  Eng-
lish to  surprise  Montreal.  He  became  command-
ant-general of  the  colony  in  1711,  was  governor  of
Three  Rivers  in  1720,  and  of  Montreal  again  from
1724  till  2  Sept.,  1726.  He  administered  the  colony
for  some  months  in  1725,  but  his  request  to  be  ap-
pointed governor  of  Canada  was  refused  on  the
ground  that  he  was  a  native  of  that  province.  He
was  made  a  chevalier  of  St.  Louis,  and  persuaded
the  Iroquois  in  1726  to  rebuild  Fort  Niagara,
notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  Gov.  William
Burnet,  of  New  York. — His  son,  Charles,  second
Baron  de  Longueuil,  b.  in  Canada,  18  Oct.,  1687 ;  d.
there.  17  Jan.,  1755,  entered  the  army,  and  was
made  captain  in  1719.  He  succeeded  his  father  in
the  barony  in  1729,  was  named  major  of  Montreal
in  1733.  and  received  the  cross  of  St.  Louis  in
1734.  He  was  appointed  governor  of  Montreal
in  1749.  On  the  death  of  the  governor-general,
De  la  Jonquiere,  in  1752,  he  administered  the  gov-
ernment of  the  colony  until  the  arrival  of  the
Marquis  de  Mennevilie  in  August  of  the  same
year. During  this  period  his  intervention  saved


<? £/|A0VA\j£


LE  MOYNE

the  Hopital-General  of  Villemarie  from  suppres-
sion by  the  French  government.— Another  son  of
the  second  Charles,  Paul -Joseph,  Chevalier  de
Longueuil,  b.  in  Canada,  17  Sept.,  1701 ;  d.  in
Prance,  12  May,  1778,  entered  the  army  in  1718.
and  was  made  lieutenant  in  the  Normandy  regi-
ment. After  being  commander  of  Fort  Frontenac
he  became  successively  governor  of  Detroit,  Three
Rivers,  and  the  citadel  of  Quebec.  He  did  good
service  in  several  campaigns,  especially  in  that  of
1747,  during  which  he  marched  180  miles  in  the
depth  of  winter,  through  frost  and  snow,  at  the
head  of  his  men  to  the  succor  of  Rigaud  de  Vau-
dreuil,  who  was  besieging  Fort  George.  His  sub-
sequent services  gained  him  the  cross  of  St.  Louis.
Not  wishing  to  live  under  English  rule,  he  went  to
France  after  the  surrender  of  Quebec. — Paul's  son,
Joseph  Dominick  Emanuel,  Canadian  soldier,
b.  in  Canada;  d.  in  Montreal,  19  Jan.,  1807,  entered
the  army,  became  major  of  marines,  and  remained
in  Canada  after  the  conquest.  His  bravery  in  de-
fending Fort  St.  Jean  against  the  English  colo-
nists in  1775  gained  him  rapid  promotion.  He  was
made  inspector-general  of  militia  in  1777,  and
afterward  appointed  colonel  of  the  Royal  Canadian
l-egiment.  He  was  created  legislative  councillor
during  the  administration  of  Lord  Dorchester,
which  post  he  held  until  his  death. — The  first
Charles's  second  son,  James,  Sieur  de  St.  Helene,  b.
in  Villemarie,  Canada,  1(5  April,  1059  ;  d.  in  Quebec
in  October,  1690,  took  part  in  the  expedition  of
De  Trove  against  the  English  in  1086.  At  the
head  of  a  detachment  of  fifty  men  he  embarked
on  a  deserted  English  vessel,  and  attacked  Fort
St.  Rupert.  The  garrison,  although  superior  in
number,  were  astounded  at  his  daring,  and  laid
down  their  arms  without  striking  a  blow.  He  then
took  part  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Quitchitchouen,
the  capture  of  which  gave  the  French  the  mastery
of  the  southern  part  of  Hudson  bay.  In  1690  he
shared  the  command  of  the  force  that  was  sent  to
capture  Schenectady,  and,  after  plundering  and
burning  this  town,  he  returned  to  Montreal.  In
October  of  the  same  year  Quebec  was  besieged  by
Admiral  Phips.  and  Le  Moyne  was  selected  to
oppose  him.  With  a  force  of  about  200  volunteers
he  defended  the  passage  of  St.  Charles  river
against  1,300  British  troops,  who  were  attempting
to  cross.  The  English  were  repulsed,  but  Le  Moyne
fell  mortally  wounded  at  the  moment  of  victory. —
Paul,  Sieur  de  Maricourt,  fourth  son  of  the  first
Charles,  b.  in  Villemarie,  15  Dec,  1663  ;  d.  there,  21
March,  1704,  followed  his  brother.  Iberville  (q.  v.),
in  his  different  campaigns  in  Hudson  bay,  and  had
a  large  share  in  his  military  successes.  In  1686,
after  traversing  countries  that  were  till  then  un-
known, crossing  several  mountains  and  rivers  and
enduring  incredible  hardships,  he  reached  his
brother,  who  was  before  Fort  St.  Rupert.  He
embarked  with  a  few  men  on  board  two  canoes,
and  then,  in  concert  with  Iberville,  captured  an
English  cruiser  in  the  harbor.  He  was  one  of  the
first  to  go  to  the  succor  of  Quebec  in  1690,  and,  ex-
cept his  brother,  the  Sieur  de  St.  Helene,  no  one
contributed  more  to  the  defeat  of  the  English
troops.  In  1696  he  was  placed  by  Frontenac  at
the  head  of  a  corps  composed  of  Sault  St.  Louis
Indians  and  Christian  Abenaquis.  After  ravaging
the  country  of  the  Iroquois,  and  forcing  them  to
lay  down  their  arms,  he  successfully  negotiated
terms  of  peace.  The  savages,  who  had  learned  to
esteem  his  honesty,  adopted  him  into  their  tribe,
chose  him  for  their  protector,  and  begged  of  him
to  be  a  mediator  between  them  and  the  French
governor. — Joseph,  Sieur  de  Serigny,  sixth  son  of


LE  MOYNE


687


the  first  Charles,  b.  in  Villemarie,  22  Julv,  1668 ;
d.  in  Rochefort,  France,  in  1734,  went  to  France,
and  was  sent  to  conduct  the  flotilla  with  which
his  brother,  Iberville,  was  to  take  possession  of
Hudson  bay.  He  did  good  work  in  this  office,
and  afterward  attacked  the  Spaniards,  who  had
fortified  the  Bay  of  Pensacola,  driving  them  away
on  15  June,  1719.  He  then  went  to  Louisiana,
where  he  erected  several  forts.  He  raised  there  a
fort  with  four  bastions  on  Mobile  bav,  defended
Dauphin  island  against  the  Spaniards,  and,  after
driving  them  from  it,  constructed  a  spacious  road-
stead. He  sailed  for  France  in  1720,  was  promoted
to  the  grade  of  captain  in  the  navy,  and  afterward
resided  in  Rochefort,  of  which  he  was  made  gov-
ernor in  1723.— Another  son  of  the  first  Charles,
Antoine,  Sieur  de  Chateauguav,  b.  in  Montreal.  7
July,  1683  ;  d.  in  Rochefort.  France,  21  March,  1747,
entered  the  royal  army,  and  arrived  in  Louisiana  in
1704  with  a  band  of  colonists.  He  served  under
Iberville  in  his  last  expeditions  against  the  English
in  1705-'6,  was  made  commandant  of  the  troops  in
Louisiana  in  1717,  and  king's  lieutenant  of  the  colo-
ny and  a  knight  of  St.  Louis  in  1718.  He  took  com-
mand of  Pensacola  after  aiding  with  an  Indian  force
in  its  capture  from  the  Spaniards,  14  May,  1719,
surrendered  it  to  them,  7  Aug.,  1719,  and  was
himself  retained  a  prisoner  of  war  till  July,  1720.
He  resumed  command  at  Mobile  after  the  peace
in  1820,  was  removed  from  office  and  ordered  to
France  in  1726,  and  was  governor  of  Martinique
from  1727  till  1744.  He  returned  to  France  in  the
latter  year,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  Isle
Royale,  or  Cape  Breton,  in  1745.

LE  MOYNE,  Francis  Julius,  abolitionist,  b.
in  Washington,  Pa.,  4  Sept.,  1798;  d.  there,  14
Oct.,  1879.  His  father  was  a  royalist  refugee  from
France,  who  practised  medicine  in  Washington.
The  son  was  graduated  at  the  college  there  in
1815,  studied  medicine  with  his  father  and  at  the
Medical  college  in  Philadelphia,  and  began  prac-
tice in  his  native  town  in  1822.  In  1835  he  assisted
in  organizing  an  anti-slavery  society  in  Washing-
ton, and  from  that  time  entered  earnestly  into  the
abolition  movement.  He  was  the  first  candidate
of  the  Liberty  party  for  vice-president,  his  nomina-
tion having  been  proposed  in  a  meeting  at  War-
saw, N.  Y.,  13  Nov.,  1839,  and  confirmed  by  a  na-
tional convention  at  Albany,  1  April,  1840.  Though
he  and  James  G.  Birney,  the  nominee  for  president,
declined  the  nomination,  they  received  7,059  votes
in  the  election  of  1840.  In  1841,  1843,  and  1847
Le  Moyne  was  the  candidate  of  the  same  party  for
governor  of  Pennsylvania.  At  a  later  period  he
became  widely  known  as  an  advocate  of  cremation.
He  erected  in  1876,  near  Washington,  Pa.,  the  first
crematory  in  the  United  States.  Dr.  Le  Moyne
founded  the  public  library  in  Washington,  gave
$25,000  for  a  colored  normal  school  near  Memphis,
Tenn.,  and  endowed  professorships  of  agriculture
and  applied  mathematics  in  Washington  college.

LE  MOYNE,  Simon,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France  in  1604 ;  d.  in  Cap  de  la  Magdeleine.  Cana-
da. 24  Nov..  1665.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus
in  1623,  came  to  Canada  in  1638.  and  was  assigned
to  the  Huron  mission.  In  1639  he  helped  to  es-
tablish the  mission  of  St.  John  among  the  Arenda
tribe.  He  continued  among  the  Hurons  up  to
1650,  and  on  2  July,  1653.  set  out  from  Quebec  to
found  an  Iroquois  mission.  He  ascended  the  St.
Lawrence,  entered  Lake  Ontario,  and,  after  sailing
among  the  Thousand  islands,  reached  a  fishing-vil-
lage at  the  mouth  of  Oswego  river.  After  con-
verting a  large  number  of  the  savages,  including
some  of  the  chiefs,  he  returned  to  Quebec  on  11


688


LEMPEREUR


LENOIR


Sept.,  where  the  favorable  account  which  he  gave
of  the  disposition  of  the  Iroquois  excited  great  ex-
ultation. On  the  petition  of  the  Mohawks  he  was
assigned  to  them  in  1656.  He  was  the  first  to  dis-
cover the  salt-springs  of  Onondaga,  an  account  of
which  he  gave  to  Dominie  Megapolensis,  of  New
Amsterdam.  He  visited  the  latter  city  in  1658,
and  was  received  with  much  kindness.  After  his
return  to  the  north  he  wrote  three  polemical  trea-
tises in  favor  of  the  claims  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  which  he  forwarded  to  the  Dutch  clergy-
man. The  vessel  conveying  the  long  rejoinder
that  the  latter  sent  to  Quebec  was  wrecked  on  the
way.  In  1661  he  was  asked  by  the  governor  to  go
again  among  the  Iroquois,  who  were  inflicting
heavy  losses  on  the  French.  He  left  Montreal  on
21  July,  and,  although  Mohawk  parties  threatened
his  life  as  he  ascended  the  St.  Lawrence  in  his
canoe,  he  at  last  reached  Onondaga  and  was  wel-
comed by  the  sachems.  He  prevailed  on  them  to
send  deputies  to  Montreal  to  make  peace,  and  with
them  nine  of  the  French  prisoners.  He  spent  the
winter  at  Onondaga,  where  he  visited  the  sick  as-
siduously during  an  epidemic.  He  also  visited
Cayuga,  and  his  missionary  labors  extended  as  far
as  the  Seneca  country.  He  was  sent  back  to  Que-
bec in  the  summer  of  1662.

LEMPEREUR,  Jeannot  (lom-peh-rur),  Hay-
tian  revolutionist,  b.  in  Quartier  Morin  in  1763 ;  d.
near  Cape  Francais  in  December,  1791.  He  was  a
slave  when  the  insurrection  began  in  Santo  Domin-
go in  1790,  and,  escaping  from  his  master,  assem-
bled in  the  mountains  a  body  of  followers  with
which  he  committed  many  outrages.  He  went  to
Port  au  Prince  in  January,  1791,  and,  haranguing
the  negroes  on  the  streets,  acquired  such  an  influ-
ence over  them  as  to  receive  offers  of  support  from
the  different  parties  that  divided  the  colony.  On
4  March  he  instigated  the  riots  in  which  several
officers  were  murdered,  and  in  June,  joining  the
mulatto  chief,  Jean  Francois,  gathered  a  force  of
negro  slaves  and  marched  on  Cape  Francais.  He
carried  as  a  standard  the  body  of  a  white  infant
on  a  spear,  and  murdered  and  devastated  as  he
marched,  rill  he  reached  the  neighborhood  of  the
town;  but  he  was  soon  defeated  by  the  united
forces  of  the  whites,  although  he  managed  to  es-
cape. The  crimes  that  he  afterward  committed
with  his  band  almost  pass  the  limits  of  credibility,
but  they  are  verified  by  many  authorities.  At  last
even  his  followers  revolted.  They  chained  and
carried  him  to  Jean  Francois,  who  ordered  him  to
be  shot.  See  Berlioz  d'Auriac's  "  La  guerre  noire,
souvenirs  de  Saint  Domingue  "  (Paris,  1860).

LEMPIRA  (lem-pee'-rah),  Central  American
cacique,  b.  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th  century ;
d.  in  1537.  He  was  the  King  of  Coquin,  afterward
called  Gracias  a  Dios,  and  his  name  signifies  "  Lord
of  the  Mountains."  At  the  beginning  of  the  con-
quest the  Spaniards  were  unmolested,  but  later
the  Indians  revolted,  on  account  of  their  cruelties,
under  the  leadership  of  this  chief.  He  had  long
been  a  terror  to  the  settlers  and  a  warrior  of  note
among  his  own  countrymen,  and  was  said  to  bear
a  charmed  life.  He  had  been  attacked  in  his
stronghold  of  Cerquin,  close  to  Gracias  a  Dios.  by
Alvarado  with  a  strong  party  of  troops  and  2.000
friendly  natives;  but  the  assault  was  unsuccessful.
Lempira  now  proposed  to  annihilate  the  invaders,
and,  gathering  a  large  army,  opened  hostilities  at
once.  Montejo,  governor  of  Yucatan  and  Hondu-
ras, sent  a  force  to  quell  the  movement,  whereupon
Lempira  retired  to  his  stronghold  and  siege  was
laid  to  the  place :  but,  although  assistance  was
summoned  from  Comayagua  and  San  Pedro  del


Puerto  de  Caballos,  the  Indians  made  good  their
defence.  For  six  months  the  Spaniards  beleaguered
the  fortress,  and,  seeing  no  prospect  of  taking  it,
had  recourse  to  a  stratagem.  A  horseman  was  or-  •
dered  to  approach  within  arquebus-shot  of  the  rock
and  summon  Lempira  to  a  colloquy,  under  pretence
of  opening  negotiations  for  peace,  while  a  foot-
soldier  who  accompanied  him,  screened  from  view
by  the  mounted  man,  shot  the  unsuspecting  chief-
tain as  he  appeared  on  the  cliff.  His  lifeless  body
rolled  over  the  rock,  and  his  followers,  panic-
stricken,  made  no  further  resistance.

L'ENFANT,  Peter  Charles  (lon-fon'),  engineer,
b.  in  France  in  1755 ;  d.  in  Prince  George's  county,
Md.,  14  June,  1825.  He  was  a  lieutenant  in  the
French  provisional  service,  and  came  to  this  country
with  Lafayette  in  1777.  He  entered  the  Continental
army  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  as  an  engineer,
was  made  captain,  18  Feb.,  1778,  and  at  the  siege
of  Savannah  was  wounded  and  left  on  the  field.
He  afterward  served  under  the  immediate  com-
mand of  Washington,  became  a  major,  2  May,
1783,  was  employed  as  an  engineer  at  Fort  Mifflin
in  1794,  and  appointed  professor  of  engineering  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  July,  1812,  but  de-
clined. He  drew  the  plan  for  the  city  of  Wash-
ington, and  was  architect  of  some  of  its  public
buildings.  He  designed  a  dwelling  for  Robert
Morris  in  Philadelphia  on  such  a  scale  that  the
latter  coidd  not  afford  to  complete  it.

LENNOX,  Charlotte  Ramsay,  author,  b.  in
New  York  city  in  1720 ;  d.  in  London,  England,
4  Jan.,  1804.  She  was  sent  by  her  father,  Col.
Ramsay,  lieutenant-governor  of  the  colony,  to  Eng-
land when  fifteen  years  of  age  to  receive  her  edu-
cation, married  in  that  country,  and  lived  there
for  the  remainder  of  her  life.  After  she  was  left  a
widow  in  straitened  circumstances,  she  resorted
to  her  pen  for  a  livelihood,  having  previously  pub-
lished a  volume  of  "  Poems  on  Several  Occasions"
(London,  1747).  She  enjoyed  the  friendship  of
Samuel  Richardson  and  of  Samuel  Johnson,  who
had  a  high  opinion  of  her  talents.  Her  principal
work  was  "  Shakespeare  Illustrated,"  of  which  two
volumes  were  first  issued  (1753),  and  a  supple-
mentary volume  shortly  afterward  (1754).  It  is  a
collection  of  the  novels  and  tales  on  which  Shake-
speare's plays  were  founded,  translated  from  the
original  authors,  with  notes  designed  to  show  that
the  dramatist  perverted  the  stories,  introducing
absurd  intrigues  and  improbable  incidents.  Some
of  these  observations  were  ascribed  by  Edmond  Ma-
lone  to  Dr.  Johnson,  who  wrote  the  dedication  to  the
Earl  of  Orrery.  Her  other  works  include  "  Memoirs
of  Harriet  Stuart"  (1751);  "The  Female  Quixote"
(1752);  "Henrietta,"  a  novel  that  was  much  read
(1758):  a  translation  of  the  Duke  of  Sully's  "Me-
moirs "  (1761 ;  new  ed.,  1854-'6):  "Sophia,"  a  novel
(1763);  "The  Sisters,"  a  comedy  (1769);  "Old  City
Manners,"  a  comedy  (1773) ;  "Euphemia,"  a  novel
(1790);  and  "  Memoirs  of  Henry  Lennox  "  (1804).

LENOIR,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Brunswick
county,  Va.,  20  April,  1751 ;  d.  in  Fort  Defiance,
Wilkes  co.,  N.  C,  6  May,  1839.  When  he  was
eight  years  old  his  father  removed  to  Tarborough,
N.  C.  He  received  a  limited  education,  married  at
the  age  of  twenty,  and  settled  near  Wilkesbor-
ough.  In  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  was
an  active  Whig  and  clerk  of  the  Surry  county
committee  of  safety.  He  suffered  severe  hardships
as  a  lieutenant  in  Gen.  Griffith  Rutherford's  cam-
paign against  the  Indians  in  1776,  and  was  after-
ward engaged,  as  a  captain  in  Benjamin  Cleve-
land's regiment,  in  subduing  the  Tories.  At  the
battle  of  King's  Mountain  he  was  wounded  in  the


LENOX


LENOX


689


^t--T-v-t-a-</


arm  and  side,  and  at  the  defeat  of  Col.  Pyle,  near
Haw  river,  a  horse  was  shot  under  him.  After  the
war  he  was  appointed  a  justice  by  congress  and
afterward  by  the  state  assembly.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly,  and  from  1781  till  1795  of  the
state  senate,  over  which  he  presided  for  five  years.
He  also  took  an  active  part  in  the  Hillsborough
convention  for  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of
the  United  States.  At  the  organization  of  the
State  university  of  North  Carolina  in  1790  he  was
chosen  president  of  the  board,  and  for  the  last
eighteen  years  of  his  life  he  was  major-general  of
the  militia.  A  town  and  also  a  county  in  North
Carolina  were  named  in  his  honor.

LENOX,  James,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  19  Aug.,  1800;  d.  there,  17  Feb.,  1880.  He
was  the  only  son  of  Robert  Lenox,  a  wealthy
Scotch  merchant  of  New  York,  from  whom  he  in-
herited, in  1839.  a  for-
tune of  several  mill-
ions of  dollars.  He
was  educated  at  Co-
lumbia college  and
studied  law,  but  nev-
er practised  the  pro-
fession. He  went  to
Europe  soon  after
his  admission  to  the
bar,  and  while  abroad
began  collecting  rare
books,  which  later  be-
came the  absorbing
passion  of  his  life.
To  a  scholarly  love
of  literature  he  add-
ed a  taste  for  art.
For  half  a  century  he  devoted  the  greater  part
of  his  time  and  talent  to  forming  a  library  and
gallery  of  paintings  not  surpassed  in  value  by
any  private  collection  in  the  New  World.  These,
together  with  many  rare  manuscripts,  marble
busts  and  statues,  mosaics,  engravings,  and  cu-
rios, he  conveyed  in  1870  to  his  native  city,  to-
gether with  the  massive  building  which  he  erected
for  their  preservation.  The  Lenox  library,  repre-
sented in  the  accompanying  illustration,  occupies
the  crest  of  the  hill  on  Fifth  avenue,  between  Sev-
entieth and  Seventy-first  streets,  overlooking  the
Central  park,  and  cost  $450,000,  the  land  being
valued  at  very  nearly  the  same  amount.  It  is  a
fire-proof  structure,  with  outside  walls  of  Lockport
limestone,  with  a  front  of  200  feet  and  a  depth  of
114  feet.  It  contains  four  spacious  reading-rooms,
a  gallery  for  paintings,  and  another  for  sculpture.
The  collection  of  Bibles,  including  the  Mazarin,
both  as  to  number  and  rarity,  is  believed  to  be  un-
equalled even  by  those  in  "the  British  museum,
while  its  Americana,  incunabula,  and  Shakespeari-
ana  surpass  those  of  any  other  American  library,
public  or  private.  The  collection  may  safely  be
valued  at  nearly  a  million  of  dollars,  which,  with
the  $900,000  for  the  land  and  building  and  the
endowment,  make  a  total  of  above  $2,000,000.  In
addition  to  the  library,  which  the  founder  saw
completed  several  years  before  his  death,  he  gave
about  half  a  million  in  money  and  land  to  the
Presbyterian  hospital,  of  which  he  was  for  many
years  the  president.  Mr.  Lenox  was  also  the  presi-
dent of  the  American  Bible  society,  to  which  he
was  a  liberal  donor,  as  he  was  to  Princeton  college
and  theological  seminary,  and  to  many  churches
and  charities  connected  with  the  Presbyterian
church,  of  which,  like  his  father,  he  was  a  member.
His  gifts  were  unostentatious:  but  their  number
and  magnificence  made  it  inevitable  that  they
vol.  in. — 44


should  be  known  to  the  world,  from  which  in  many
instances  Mr.  Lenox  strove  to  hide  them.  Several
gifts  to  needy  men  of  letters  which  passed  through
the  writer's  hands  were  accompanied  by  the  condi-
tion that  he  should  not  be  known  as  the  donor,
the  same  condition  being  imposed  on  a  lady  to
whom  he  sent  $7,000  for  a  deserving  charity.
When,  some  years  later,  she  applied  a  second  time,
Mr.  Lenox  declined  to  contribute,  although  the
object  commended  itself  to  him,  because  she  had
revealed  his  name  on  the  previous  occasion.  He
was  of  that  small  class  who  "  do  good  by  stealth  and
blush  to  find  it  fame."  He  never  married.  The
only  lady  to  whom  he  was  ever  attached,  and  who  in
early  life  refused  him,  is  still  living  and  still  single.
This  event  increased  his  peculiarly  reserved  and
retired  habits,  and  he  became  and  continued  a  re-
cluse, never  being  seen  in  the  best  society  of  his
native  city,  to  which  by  birth  and  connection  he
belonged.  He  declined  proffered  visits  from  the
most  distinguished  men  of  the  Old  World  and  the
New  and  from  a  recent  highly  gifted  governor-
general  of  Canada,  as  he  would  doubtless  have
done  had  the  Queen,  whom  Lord  Dufferin  so  well
represented,  expressed  a  wish  to  pass  his  Fifth  ave-
nue threshold.  An  eminent  scholar,  who  was  oc-
cupied for  many  weeks  in  consulting  rare  books
not  to  be  found««lsewhere,  failed  to  obtain  access
to  the  library  of  Mr.  Lenox,  who,  however,  as-
signed an  apartment  in  his  spacious  mansion  for
his  use,  and  to  that  apartment  the  works  were  sent
in  instalments  without  his  ever  penetrating  into
the  hall  containing  the  precious  collection,  or  to  the
presence  of  its  possessor.  Mr.  Lenox  occasionally
reprinted  limited  editions,  restricted  to  ten  or
twenty  copies,  of  rare  books,  which  he  placed  in
some  of  the  great  public  libraries  and  notable  private
collections  like  John  Carter  Brown's  (q.  v.).  Of  his
seven  sisters,  two  outlived  him,  but  they  have
since  died ;  Henrietta  Lenox,  the  last  survivor,
giving  to  the  library  twenty-two  valuable  adjoin-
ing lots  and  $100,000  for  the  purchase  of  books.
Portraits  of  Mr.  Lenox  were  painted  by  Sir  Francis
Grant  in  1848,  and  by  G.  P.  A.  Healy  three  years
later,  which  may  be  seen  in  the  Lenox  gallery.  He
was  also  painted  by  Daniel  Huntington  in  1874.
This  picture,  from  which  our  portrait  is  copied,
is  in  the  Presbyterian  hospital.  His  special  request
to  the  family  was  that  no  details  of  his  life  should
be  given  for  publication,  and  that  not  even  the  time
of  his  modest  funeral  should  be  announced. See


"Recollections  of  James  Lenox,"  by  Henry  Stevens
(London,  1886). — His  nephew,  Robert  Lenox  Ken-
nedy, b.  in  New  York  city,  24  Nov.,  1822 ;  d.  at  sea,
14  Sept.,  1887,  was  for  many  years  president  of  the
Bank  of  Commerce,  and  succeeded  his  uncle  as
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Lenox  li-
brary, to  which  institution  he  presented,  in  1879,
Munkacsy's  important  picture  of  "  Blind  Milton
dictating  '  Paradise  Lost '  to  his  Daughters."


690


LENTE


LEON


LENTE,  Frederick  Divoux,  physician,  b.  in
New  Berne,  N.  C,  23  Dec,  1823 ;  d.  in  Cold  Spring,
N.  Y.,  17  Sept.,  1883.  He  was  of  mixed  Dutch  and
Huguenot  descent.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  North  Carolina  and  subsequently  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  the  city
of  New  York  in  1849.  Prom  1848  till  1851  he  was
house  surgeon  at  the  New  York  hospital,  and  from
1851  till  1870  surgeon  at  the  West  Point  foundry.
Cold  Spring,  N.  Y.  In  the  latter  year  he  removed
to  New  York  on  being  appointed  to  the  chair  of
gynecology  and  diseases  of  children  at  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York.  He  was  also
assistant  surgeon  to  the  Woman's  hospital  of  the
state  of  New  York,  surgeon  to  St.  Mary's  hospital
for  sick  children,  New  York  city,  and  consulting
surgeon  to  the  New  York  free  dispensary  for  sick
children.  After  a  year's  arduous  service  he  re-
turned to  Cold  Spring,  where  he  practised  until
failing  health  compelled  him  to  reside  during  the
remainder  of  his  life  at  Palatka,  Fla.,  in  the  win-
ter, and  in  the  summer  at  Saratoga  Springs.  Dr.
Lente  was  an  unusually  prolific  writer  on  medical
subjects,  but  his  contributions  to  the  press  have
never  been  collected  and  published  in  book-form.
He  was  a  member  of  various  professional  societies,
many  of  which  elected  him  to  office,  a  founder  of
the  American  academy  of  medicine,  a  manager  of
the  Hudson  River  state  hospital,  and  a  member  of
the  American  public  health  association,  before
which  he  often  read  papers.

LEON,  Alonso  de  (lay-one),  Spanish  explorer,
b.  in  Mexico  about  1640 ;  d.  in  Cadereita  early  in
the  18th  century.  He  was  governor  of  Coahuila,
and  in  several  expeditions  explored  the  interior  of
New  Leon.  Toward  the  end  of  1688  the  Count  of
Galve,  on  assuming  the  government  of  New  Spain,
was  informed  that  some  French  adventurers  had
formed  establishments  on  the  coast  of  Texas,  and
he  ordered  Leon  to  go  with  an  expedition,  accom-
panied by  a  geographer  and  interpreter,  to  that
coast.  Accordingly  the  latter  set  out  in  the  begin-
ning of  1689,  and  after  a  long  march  through  the
desert  arrived  at  the  Bay  of  San  Bernardo,  or  Espi-
ritu  Santo,  where  he  found  a  partly  constructed
fort,  but  no  signs  of  the  French  settlers.  Hearing
from  friendly  Indians  that  five  of  them  were  with
a  neighboring  tribe  in  search  of  workmen,  Leon
sent  a  detachment  to  capture  them,  and  after
several  days  the  force  returned  with  two  of  the
French  adventurers,  Jacques  Grollet  and  Jean
L'Archeveque,  the  others  having  fled.  He  estab-
lished a  garrison,  or  presidio,  and  returned  to
Monctova,  the  capital  of  Coahuila,  despatching  the
two  Frenchmen  to  Mexico,  whence  the  viceroy
sent  them  to  Spain,  recommending  measures  to
secure  the  coast  against  the  French.  A  royal  order
came  to  establish  more  presidios  and  missions  in
Texas,  and  Leon  was  sent  in  1691  for  this  purpose ;
but  he  so  oppressed  the  Indians  that  there  was  a
general  rising  in  1693,  and  nearly  all  the  missions
were  destroyed.  Leon  was  now  recalled  and  retired
to  New  Leon,  where  he  founded  the  town  of  Cade-
reita, and  died  there.  His  report  "  Relacion  de  mi
viaje  a,  la  bahia  de  San  Bernardo,  dirigida  al  Exmo.
Br.  virey  de  N.  E.,  Conde  de  Galve"  (1689),  is  kept
in  manuscript  in  the  archives  of  the  council  of  the
Indies.  Besides  this  there  are  in  manuscript  in  the
library  of  the  University  of  Mexico  "Diarios  de
Alonso  de  Leon  "  (1689)  and  "  Relacion  y  Discursos
del  descubrimiento,  poblacion  y  pacificacion  del
Nuevo  Reino  de  Leon,  temperamento  y  calidad  de
la  tierra,  dirigidos  por  Alonso  de  Leon  al  lllmo.  Sr.
Dn.  Juan  de  Mafiosca,  Inquisidor  del  Santo  Oficio
de  la  N.  E.  afto  de  1690."


LEON,  Antonio,  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in  Huaju-
apam,  4  June,  1794;  d.  in  Molino  del  Rey,  8  Sept.,
1847.  In  May,  1811,  he  became  an  ensign  in  the
militia  of  his  native  place,  and  in  the  struggle  for
independence  he  fought  at  first  on  the  royalist  side,
rising  to  the  rank  of  captain  in  April,  1817;  but
after  the  proclamation  of  Iguala  by  Iturbide.  Leon,
in  March,  1821,  went  over  to  the  popular  side.  With
twenty-six  badly  armed  men  he  attacked  a  Spanish
detachment  of  sixty  men  at  Tixtla,  forcing  them
to  surrender  on  20  June,  and  with  the  arms  that
were  thus  obtained,  and  some  re-enforcements,  he
attacked  with  180  men  his  native  town,  which  was
strongly  fortified  by  the  Spanish  forces,  and  obliged
them  to  surrender  on  the  22d,  capturing  three  can-
non and  a  large  quantity  of  guns  and  ammunition.
He  was  rewarded  by  Iturbide  with  the  command
of  the  Misteca,  and  immediately  marched  to  besiege
the  fort  of  Yanhuitlan,  which  surrendered  after
fifteen  days.  He  now  turned  against  the  Spanish
commander  of  the  province,  who  had  established
himself  in  the  church  and  convent  of  Tehuantepec,
and  after  he  had  captured  that  place  on  29  July,
the  capital  of  Oajaca  surrendered,  and  the  whole
province  recognized  the  plan  of  Iguala.  He  was-
promoted  to  lieutenant-colonel  on  7  Aug.,  and
gathered  a  large  force  to  assist  Herrera  in  the  siege
of  Puebla,  and  Santa-Anna  in  Vera  Cruz.  After
the  final  establishment  of  independence,  Leon  was
commissioned  in  October,  1821,  to  conquer  the
Pacific  coast  of  the  state  of  Oajaca,  which  had  pro-
nounced for  the  king  of  Spain,  and  after  obtaining
his  object  in  a  short  time  without  bloodshed  was
promoted  colonel.  When  Iturbide  proclaimed  the
empire,  Leon,  with  Gen.  Bravo  and  Gen.  Guerrero,
proclaimed  the  republic  on  14  Jan.,  1823,  in  II  ua-
juapam,  and,  after  the  abdication  of  the  emperor,
Leon  was  appointed  military  commander  of  the
province  of  Oajaca,  which  elected  him  deputy  to
the  constituent  congress  of  1824.  In  1827  he  re-
tired to  private  life  on  account  of  feeble  health,
but  in  1830  he  was  called  into  service  again  to  sup-
press bands  of  robbers  under  Narvaez  and  Me-
dina. From  1834  till  1837  he  was  on  three  differ-
ent occasions  appointed  military  commander  to
quell  disturbances,  and  in  1838,  during  the  French
invasion,  made  second  chief  of  the  army  of  the
centre,  where  he  had  sometimes  to  supply  the  gar-
rison from  his  private  means.  In  1842,  as  military
and  civil  governor,  he  was  the  means  of  the  sepa-
ration of  Soconusco  from  Guatemala  and  its  an-
nexation to  Mexico,  and,  although  desiring  to  re-
tire into  private  life,  continued  as  governor  till
August,  1846.  During  the  American  invasion  in
1847  he  organized  the  military  forces  of  his  native
state,  and,  after  Santa- Anna's  defeat  at  Cerro  Gor-
do, Leon's  brigade  formed  a  nucleus  for  the  re-
organization of  the  army.  He  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Padierna,  19  Aug.,  where  his  brigade  re-
sisted the  American  advance  with  the  main  army,
and  he  fell  while  fighting  at  the  head  of  his  troop
in  the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rey,  8  Sept.,  1847.

LEON,  Juan  Yelazquez  de,  Spanish  soldier,
b.  in  Cuellar,  Spain,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century;  d.  in  Mexico,  1  July,  1520.  He  was  a
nephew  of  Diego  Velazquez,  the  conqueror  and
governor  of  Cuba.  When  this  chief  came  with
Ovando  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1502,  Leon,  then  a
boy,  accompanied  him,  and  took  an  active  part  in
the  conquest  of  the  province  of  Salvatierra  in  that
island  and  in  that  of  Cuba  in  1511.  In  the  massacre
by  the  Spaniards  under  Narvaez  in  the  Indian
town  of  Counao  he  was  the  first  to  listen  to  the
voice  of  Las  Casas,  and  tried  to  prevent  the  total
destruction  of  the  Indians. He  afterward  settled


LEONARD


LEONARD


691


in  Trinidad,  and  was  cultivating  his  plantation,
when  the  expedition  of  Cortes,  which  left  San-
tiago de  Cuba  in  November,  1518,  touched  at
that  port.  Leon  then  enlisted  under  Cortes  and
acted  as  one  of  his  adjutants,  and  was  greatly
esteemed  by  him.  When  Diego  Velazquez  tried  to
take  the  command  from  Cortes,  Leon  declared  in
favor  of  the  latter,  and  when  Panfllo  de  Narvaez
landed  in  Mexico  in  1520,  to  depose  Cortes,  Leon
was  sent  to  arrange  the  matter,  but  the  latter  re-
fused to  enter  into  any  settlement.  Leon  rendered
valuable  service  in  the  assault  on  the  position  of
Narvaez,  26  May,  1520,  and  after  the  victory  of
Cortes  did  all  in  his  power  to  alleviate  the  suffer-
ings of  the  wounded  and  the  prisoners,  inducing
nearly  all  of  the  latter  to  join  Cortes.  On  their
return  to  Mexico  they  found  that  the  Indians  had
revolted  and  besieged  the  Spanish  quarter.  Leon
took  part  in  the  fighting  from  20  June  till  1  July,
and  when  Cortes  at  last  resolved  to  evacuate  the
city,  during  the  night,  Leon  commanded  the  last
division  of  the  rear-guard,  which  was  cut  off  be-
fore accomplishing  the  retreat,  and  fell  overpow-
ered by  superior  numbers.

LEONARD,  Agnes,  author,  b.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  20  Jan.,  1842.  She  was  educated  at  Henry
female  college,  Newcastle,  Ky.,  of  which  her  father,
Dr.  Oliver  L.  Leonard,  was  president.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  the  family  removed  to  Chicago,
as  the  father  favored  the  national  cause,  while  the
daughter  remained  a  warm  friend  of  the  south.
Miss  Leonard  married  Dr.  Simson  E.  Scanland,  in
1868,  and  subsequently  Samuel  II.  Hill.  She  began
writing  verses  for  the  "  Louisville  Journal  "  at  the
age  of  thirteen,  has  contributed  editorials  to  Chi-
cago daily  papers,  edited  the  Chicago  "  Sorosis  "  in
1868,  and"  the  "  Chaffee  Countv  Times,"  Col.,  from
1880  till  1882,  and  has  been  associate  editor  of  the
"  Dispatch,"  at  Leadville,  Col.,  in  1886-'?.  She  has
gained  note  as  a  lecturer,  and  is  the  author  of
"  Myrtle  Blossoms  "  (Chicago,  1863) ;  "Vanquished,"
a  novel  (New  York,  1866) ;  and  "  Heights  and
Depths  "  (Chicago,  1871).

LEONARD,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Massachusetts
in  1698;  d.  there  in  1778.  He  was  descended  from
Henry  Leonard,  who,  with  his  brother  James,  came
from  England  and  settled  at  Raynham,  Mass..  in
1652.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  became  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
and  probate.  He  was  a  member  of  the  council  in
1741,  and  chief  justice  in  1746. — His  son,  George,
jurist,  b.  in  Norton,  Mass.,  4  July,  1729 ;  d.  in  Rayn-
ham, Mass.,  26  July,  1819,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1748,  and  the  same  year  was  appointed  register
of  probate.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  began  practice  in  his  native  town,  and  be-
came a  member  of  the  provincial  house  of  represent-
atives, a  provincial  councillor,  and  a  judge  of  pro-
bate. He  was  elected  from  Massachusetts  to  the
1st  congress,  and  served  from  4  March,  1789,  till  3
March,  1791,  and  was  again  elected,  serving  from
7  Dec,  1795,  till  3  March,  1797.  He  was  afterward
a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  again  a
member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives,  and
was  also  a  state  senator. — The  second  George's
cousin,  Daniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Norton,  Mass.,  29  May,
1740;  d.  in  London.  England,  27  June,  1829.  was
the  son  of  Col.  Ephraim  Leonard,  a  zealous  Whig.
Daniel  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1760,  became
a  member  of  the  assembly,  and  at  first  supported
the  Whig  cause  with  great  eloquence  and  energy.
But  in  1774  he  was  one  of  the  barristers  and  attor-
neys that,  in  an  address  to  Gov.  Thomas  Hutchin-
son, approved  the  latter's  course,  and  in  the  same
year  was  appointed  a  "  mandamus  "  councillor,  but


was  not  sworn  into  office.  A  mob  having  fired  into
his  house,  he  took  refuge  in  Boston,  but  left  that
city  with  his  family  in  1776,  and  accompanied  the
British  army  to  Halifax.  He  was  included  in  the
banishment  act  of  1778  and  in  the  conspiracy  act
of  1779.  From  Halifax  he  went  to  England,  was
afterward  for  many  years  chief  justice  of  Bermuda,
and  finally  resided  ih  London.  He  had  a  passion
for  cards,  was  fond  of  dress,  and  was  the  original
of  "  Beau  Trumps  "  in  Mrs.  Mercy  Warren's  politi-
cal satire  "  The  Group."  He  was  the  author  of  a
series  of  papers  signed  "  Massachusettensis,"  which
present  the  best  defence  of  the  measures  of  the
British  government  that  appeared  in  this  country.
They  were  replied  to  by  John  Adams  under  the
signature  of  "  Novanglus."  Both  were  reprinted,
with  a  preface  by  Mr.  Adams  (Boston,  1819).

LEONARD,  John  Edwards,  lawver,  b.  in  Ches-
ter county,  Pa.,  22  Sept.,  1845 ;  d.  in  llavana,  Cuba,
15  March,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1867,  and  after  a  two  years'  course  of  study  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  I),  at  Heidelberg.  He  be-
gan the  practice  of  law  in  Louisiana,  soon  became  l
district  attorney,  and  was  afterward  a  judge  of  the
state  supreme  court.  In  1876  he  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican,  and  in  that  body  was
made  a  member  of  the  committee  on  the  revision
of  the  laws  of  the  United  States.

LEONARD,  Levi  Washburn,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bridgewater,  Mass.,  16  Jan.,  1773;  d."  in  Exeter,
X.  H„  12  Dec,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1815,  studied  theology  at  Cambridge,  and
in  1820  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional  church  in  Dublin,  N.  II.,  where  he  remained
thirty  years.  He  contributed  extensively  to  the
secular  and  religious  press,  superintended  the  com-
pilation of  the  "  History  of  Dublin,"  and  wrote  a
"  Literary  and  Scientific  Class-Book  "  (Keene,  N.
H.);  "North  American  Spelling  Book";  and  "Se-
quel^to  Easy  Lessons."

LEONARD,  Nicholas  Germain  (lay-6-nar),  au-
thor, b.  in  Guadeloupe,  W.  I.,  in  1744;  d.  in  Nantes,
France,  26  Jan.,  1793.  He  went  to  France  at  an
early  age,  and  was  educated  there.  He  displayed
poetic  talent,  and  published  verses  that  had  some
reputation  in  their  day.  They  brought  him  to  the
notice  of  the  French  minister  Chauvelin,  who  ap-
pointed him  charge  d'affaires  at  Liege.  Here  he
composed  the  "  Lettres  de  deux  amans  de  Lyon,"
a  romance  which  was  very  popular,  and  was  trans-
lated into  English  and  Italian.  He  abandoned
diplomacy,  and  returned  to  Guadeloupe,  where  he
stayed  several  years,  but  went  back  to  France  in
1787,  and  published  the  fourth  and  best  edition  of
his  works  (3  vols.,  Paris,  1787).  This  edition  con-
tains his  "  Voyage  aux  Antilles."  A  short  time
afterward  he  set  out  again  for  Guadeloupe  with
the  title  of  lieutenant-general  of  the  admiralty  and
vice-seneschal  of  the  colony.  He  returned  to
France  in  1792,  and  died  on  the  day  when  he  was
about  to  embark  again  for  his  native  island.  Leo-
nard was  of  an  amiable  character,  but  his  melan-
choly and  listless  temperament,  though  sometimes
giving  a  certain  charm  to  his  works,  exercised  an
unfortunate  influence  over  his  whole  life.  His
nephew,  Campenon,  published  a  complete  edition
of  his  works  (3  vols.,  Paris,  1798).

LEONARD,  Richard,  Canadian  soldier,  b.  in
England  in  1780;  d.  near  Niagara,  Upper  Canada,
31  Oct.,  1833.  He  entered  the  Britisn  army  as  an
ensign  in  1796,  became  a  lieutenant  in  1797,  and
after  serving  in  Ireland  during  the  rebellion  of
1798,  joined  Sir  Ralph  Abercrombie  in  the  Medi-
terranean. He  served  during  the  campaign  of
1801  in  Egypt,  and  in  1803  in  New  Brunswick.  In


LEONARD


LERDAN


April,  1813,  he  became  deputy  assistant  adjutant-
general,  and  was  present  at  the  attack  on  Sackett's
Harbor,  where  he  was  wounded.  He  was  on  active
service  in  the  campaign  of  1814,  participated  in
the  action  at  Lundy's  Lane,  was  severely  wounded
in  the  assault  on  Fort  Erie,  and  succeeded  to  the
command  after  the  death  of  Lieut.-Col.  William
Drummond  (q.  v.).  lie  was  afterward  on  military
duty  in  Lower  Canada,  and  subsequently  retired  to
a  property  that  he  had  purchased  near  the  battle-
field of  Lundy's  Lane.

LEONARD,  William  Andrews,  clergyman,  b.
in  Southport,  Conn.,  15  July,  1848.  His  grand-
father, Stephen  Banks  Leonard,  was  a  member  of
congress  from  Tioga  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1837-'41.  He
was  educated  at  St.  Stephen's  college,  Annandale,
N.  Y.,  and  at  Berkeley  divinity-school,  Middletown,.
Conn.,  and  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church.  After  holding  pastorates  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  he  became  rector  of  St.  John's
church,  Washington,  D.  C,  where  he  still  (1887)
remains.  In  1880  he  was  chosen  missionary  bishop
of  Washington  territory,  but  declined.  He  has
published  "Via  Sacra"  (New  York,  1871),  and  a
"  Brief  History  of  the  Christian  Church  "  (1881).

LEONOWENS,  Anna  Harriette  Crawford,
author,  b.  in  Caernarvon,  Wales,  5  Nov.,  1834.  She
was  the  daughter  of  Thomas  M.  Crawford,  a  Brit-
ish officer,  who  was  killed  by  the  Sikhs,  in  Lahore,
and  married  Thomas  Leonowens,  of  the  British
army,  after  whose  death  she  was  compelled  to  sup-
port herself.  In  1863  she  was  selected  to  fill  the
post  of  governess  to  the  family  of  the  king  of  Siam,
who  had  acquired  English  from  the  missionaries,
and  desired  that  his  children  should  be  educated
in  that  language.  She  spent  four  years  in  Bang-
kok, occupying  not  only  the  place  of  instructor  to
the  royal  family,  but  also  that  of  secretary  to  the
king  in  his  foreign  correspondence.  The  present
king  of  Siam  was  educated  under  her  special  su-
pervision, and  showed  his  enlightenment  by  the
abolition  of  slavery  in  1868.  She  came  to  the
United  States  in  1867,  and  settled  in  New  York
city,  where  she  established  a  school  for  the  edu-
cation of  teachers  in  the  kindergarten  system.
Besides  articles  in  the  "  Atlantic  "  and  other  maga-
zines, she  has  published  "  The  English  Governess
at  the  Court  of  Siam  "  (Philadelphia,  1870) ;  "  The
Romance  of  the  Harem  "  (1872) ;  and  "  Life  and
Travels  in  India  "  (1884).

LEPROHON,  Jean  Lukin,  Canadian  physi-
cian, b.  in  Chambly,  Lower  Canada,  7  April,  1822.
His  grandfather,  Jean  P.,  a  lieutenant  in  the  French
army,  emigrated  to  Canada  in  1758,  and  settled  in
Montreal  after  the  conquest.  The  grandson  at-
tended Nicolet  college,  studied  medicine,  and  was
graduated  at  McGill  college  in  1843.  He  then
visited  Europe,  remained  abroad  till  1845,  and  on
his  return  began  to  practise  medicine  in  Montreal.
Dr.  Leprohan  has  been  attached  to  the  Montreal
dispensary  as  consulting  physician  since  1854.  I  n
1860  he  was  appointed,  with  another  physician,  to
examine  the  sanitary  condition  of  Montreal,  and
presented  a  valuable  report.  In  1870  he  became
professor  of  hygiene  in  Bishop's  college,  which
chair  he  filled  till  within  a  few  years.  Dr.  Lepro-
han has  been  Spanish  vice-consul  since  September,
1871,  and  has  been  made  a  knight  of  the  order  of
Charles  III.  of  Spain.  He  is  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Woman's  hospital  of  Montreal,  has  edited
"  La  Lancette  Canadienne,"  lectured  on  hygiene
before  L'Institute  Canadien,  and  has  done  much
for  sanitary  science  in  the  province  of  Quebec. —
His  wife,  Rosanna  Elenora,  Canadian  author,  b.
in  Montreal  in  1832 ;  d.  there,  20  Sept.,  1879. Her


maiden  name  was  Mullins,  and  she  was  educated  at
the  Convent  of  Notre  Dame,  Montreal.  At  the  age
of  fourteen  she  became  a  contributor  to  the  "  Lit-
erary Garland  "  in  Montreal,  in  1851  she  married
Dr.  Leprohan,  and  in  1860  became  connected  with
the  "  Family  Herald  "  there.  She  also  wrote  for
the  "  Boston  Pilot "  and  other  publications.  Among
her  works,  many  of  which  have  been  translated
into  French,  are  "  Ida  Beresford,"  "  Florence  Fitz
Harding,"  "Eva  Huntingdon,"  and  "The  Manor-
House  of  De  Villerai."  An  edition  of  her  poems
was  published  after  her  death  (Montreal,  1881).

LERAY,  Francis  Xavier,  archbishop,  b.  in
Chateau  Giron,  near  Rennes,  France,  20  April,
1825 ;  d.  there,  23  Sept.,  1887.  He  studied  in  the
lyceum  of  Rennes  in  1833-'43,  and  in  the  latter
year  came  to  the  United  States,  where  he  taught
for  several  months  in  Spring  Hill  college,  near
Mobile,  Ala.,  and  then  entered  the  Sulpitian  college
of  Baltimore,  where  he  finished  his  theological
studies.  He  was  next  appointed  prefect  of  St.
Mary's  college,  near  Baltimore,  afterward  trav-
elled in  the  west  as  a  missionary,  and  in  1852
was  ordained  priest  and  attached  to  the  diocese  of
Natchez.  At  the  end  of  six  months  he  was  sent
to  Jackson,  Miss.,  where  during  the  yellow-fever
epidemic  of  1853  and  1855  he  was  unceasing  in
his  efforts  to  minister  to  the  sick  and  dying.  In
1857  he  was  sent  to  Vicksburg,  where  he  formed  a
parish,  and  in  1860  established  the  Sisters  of  Mer-
cy, whom  he  had  obtained  from  Baltimore.  In
1861,when  the  civil  war  began,  he  placed  them  in
the  hospitals  of  Mississippi  Springs,  Jackson,  and
Shelby  Springs,  while  he  went  to  the  front  as
chaplain  in  the  Confederate  army.  After  the
war  he  returned  to  Vicksburg,  where  he  established
many  institutions  for  the  general  good.  In  1867
Vicksburg  was  visited  by  the  cholera,  during  which
he  showed  the  same  fearlessness  that  he  had  exhib-
ited during  the  yellow-fever  epidemics.  In  1877
he  was  nominated  bishop  of  Natchitoches,  and  was
consecrated  in  the  cathedral  of  Rennes,  France,  on
23  April.  He  was  rapidly  restoring  this  diocese  to
prosperity  when  he  was  made  coadjutor  archbishop
of  New  Orleans,  23  Oct.,  1879,  and  administrator
of  the  temporalities  of  the  diocese.  The  losses  that
had  been  occasioned  by  the  war  had  sunk  the
church  of  New  Orleans  in  debt,  but  its  finances
prospered  under  his  management.  He  succeeded
Archbishop  Berche  in  December,  1883,  and  was
invested  with  the  pallium  in  the  cathedral  of  St.
Louis  in  January,  1885,  with  imposing  ceremonies.
Most  of  the  cities  of  the  south  sent  deputations  to
congratulate  him  on  the  occasion.  Archbishop
Leray  attended  the  third  plenary  council  of  Balti-
more, in  November,  1884,  where  his  ability  for
organization  and  his  knowledge  of  men  and  affairs
gave  him  commanding  influence.  He  went  to
Rome  early  in  1887,  in  connection  with  the  ap-
pointment of  a  coadjutor,  and  fell  sick  while  visit-
ing his  birthplace  in  Brittany.

LERDAN,  Nicolas  Etienne  (lair-don),  West
Indian  physician,  b.  in  Fort  Dauphin,  Hayti,  in
1761 ;  d.  in  Port  au  Prince  in  1826.  He  played  a
conspicuous  part  in  the  revolution  of  Santo  Do-
mingo as  secretary  of  the  colonial  assembly  of
Saint  Marc  in  1790,  and  participated  in  the  up-
rising of  Oge  in  the  same  year,  for  which  he  was
tried  at  Port  au  Prince,  but  acquitted  for  lack  of
evidence.  He  then  emigrated  to  the  United  States
and  practised  medicine  in  New  Orleans  till  1797,
when  he  returned  to  his  native  country  and  soon
became  a  political  leader.  He  strongly  supported
Toussaint  l'Ouverture,  and  was  imprisoned  by  Gen.
Victor  Leclerc ;  but  after  the  defeat  of  the  French


LERDO  DE  TEJADA


LERDO  DE  TEJADA


693


he  became  the  trusted  adviser  of  Henry  Christophe,
and  contributed  greatly  to  the  latter's  elevation  to
the  throne  of  Hayti.  In  1815-16  he  was  among
the  Haytians  who  opposed  the  annexation  of  their
country  to  Prance,  and  published  several  pam-
phlets in  opposition  to  the  plan.  These  include
"  Haiti  peuple  libre  "  (Port  au  Prince,  1814) ;  H  Le
regime  Francais  a  Haiti "  (1815) ;  "  Concitoyens,
voulez-vous  redevenir  esclaves?"(1815) ;  and  "De
l'interet  de  la  France  a  rentrer  en  possession  de
Haiti "  (1815).  Dr.  Lerdan  was  also  the  author  of
several  surgical  works.

LERDO  DE  TEJADA,  Miguel  (lair-do-deh-
teh-hah'-dah),  Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  Vera  Cruz
in  1814;  d.  in  Mexico,  22  March,  1861.  He  was
educated  in  the  college  of  his  native  city,  and  fol-
lowed a  commercial  career,  but  also  published  a  his-
tory of  the  state  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  acquired  repu-
tation as  a  statistician.  After  the  entry  of  Gen.
Alvarez  into  Mexico  in  October,  1855,  he  called
Lerdo  to  his  cabinet  as  under-secretary  of  public
works,  which  place  he  occupied  till  President
Comonfort  appointed  him  in  May,  1856,  secretary
of  the  treasury.  While  in  this  office  he  prepared
the  famous  law  forbidding  the  clergy  and  public
corporations  to  hold  landed  property,  which  was
published  on  25  June,  and  signed  by  Comonfort
(q.  v.)  only  after  much  hesitation.  Lerdo's  ener-
getic measures  alone  saved  the  credit  of  the  gov-
ernment, which  was  opposed  by  the  influential
and  wealthy  classes.  As  he  belonged  to  the  ad-
vanced branch  of  the  Liberal  party,  he  soon  found
that  he  was  not  in  accord  with  the  rest  of  the
ministry  and  the  president,  who  were  attached  to
the  moderate  wing,  and  he  resigned  in  January.
1857.  The  progressive  Liberals  nominated  him  as
their  candidate  for  president ;  but  in  July  he  with-
drew his  name,  and  advised  his  partisans  not  to  op-
pose the  government,  although  he  condemned  its
policy.  After  the  usurpation  of  power  by  Zuloaga
and  afterward  by  Miramon,  Lerdo  joined  Juarez  in
Vera  Cruz,  and  in  February,  1859,  was  called  by
the  latter  to  the  portfolio  of  the  treasury.  He  also
held  for  three  months  that  of  public  works,  and  in
these  posts,  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  the  pro-
visional president,  he  continued  the  advanced  meas-
ures that  he  had  advocated  in  1856,  and  prepared
the  law  for  the  nationalization  of  church  property
and  the  secularization  of  the  male  monastic  orders.
This  measure,  published  by  executive  decree  of  12
July,  1859,  in  Vera  Cruz,  and  signed  by  the  whole
ministry,  was  principally  due  to  the  energy  of  Lerdo,
and  prepared  the  way  for  the  final  fall  of  the  re-
actionary party,  as  it  cut  off  their  resources.  Hav-
ing some  disagreement  with  the  president  of  the
council,  Ocampo,  Lerdo  resigned  in  July.  1859,  but
after  the  latter's  resignation  he  was  again  in  charge
of  the  treasury  from  December,  1859,  till  May,  1860,
and  of  the  portfolio  of  public  works  from  Decem-
ber, 1859,  till  January,  1860.  After  the  triumph
of  the  Liberal  government  and  its  return  to  Mexico,
Lerdo  was  elected  by  popular  vote  judge  of  the
supreme  court.  In  the  elections  for  the  constitu-
tional presidency  in  1861  he  was  nominated  by  the
advanced  Liberals,  and  toward  the  end  of  February
had  obtained  the  electoral  vote  of  five  states,  while
Gonzalez  Ortega  had  five  and  J  uarez  six  states ;  but
he  withdrew  again  from  the  contest,  fell  sick  shortly
afterward,  and  died  within  a  week. — His  brother,
Sebastian,  president  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Jalapa,  25
April,  1825;  d.  in  New  York,  21  April,  1889;  was
educated  in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso  in  the  city
of  Mexico.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,
began  practice,  and  became  president  of  the  College
of  San  Ildefonso  in  1852. In  December,  1855,  he  was


appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  on  1
June,  1857,  was  called  by  President  Comonfort  to
take  the  portfolio  of  foreign  affairs  and  assume  the
presidency  of  a  moderate  Liberal  cabinet,  but  re-
signed on  16  Sept.,  as  he  was  a  supporter  of  the
new  Liberal  consti-
tution, and  opposed
the  policy  of  the
president.  After
the  advent  of  the
church party to

Eower  he  joined  the
liberal  administra-
tion of  Juarez  at
Vera  Cruz,  and
with  him  returned
to  Mexico  in  Janu-
ary, 1866.  He  was
a  member  of  con-
gress during  the
sessions  of  1861-'2,
and  in  August,
1861,  in  the  extra-  p  j> » n H- »

ordinary  session  of &■  dsiAs^JUJd'e^tLd/L

that  body,  he op-

posed  the  treaty  that  had  been  made  for  arranging
the  English  debt.  The  failure  of  this  treaty  led
to  the  downfall  of  the  Zamacona  cabinet,  and
Lerdo  was  called  by  Juarez  to  form  a  new  one;
but  he  refused,  and,  after  the  formation  of  the  Do-
blado  ministry,  he  continued  to  oppose  the  con-
clusion of  treaties  by  the  executive  without  the  ap-
probation of  congress.  He  was  commissioned  by
Juarez  to  arrange  a  treaty  of  commerce  and  extra-
dition with  the  United  States,  which  afterward  was
of  great  use  to  his  country  in  its  struggle  against
foreign  intervention.  He  was  again  a  member  of
congress  in  1862-'3,  and,  abandoning  his  opposition
to  the  government,  earnestly  advocated  the  con-
cession of  extraordinary  powers  in  the  unusual  cir-
cumstances of  that  time.  When  the  French  troops
were  about  to  invade  the  capital,  and  the  govern-
ment retired  on  31  May,  1863,  Lerdo  accompanied
the  president.  He  was  appointed  by  Juarez  min-
ister of  justice  on  2  Sept.,  and  on  11  Sept.  minister
of  foreign  affairs,  was  a  constant  companion  of  the
president  till  1867,  and  counselled  him  on  the  ex-
piration of  his  presidential  term,  30  Nov.,  1865,  to
issue  a  decree  declaring  his  term  to  be  extended
until  constitutional  elections  could  be  held.  After
the  fall  of  Queretaro,  and  the  capture  of  Maximilian,
he  was  solicited  to  exert  his  influence  over  Juarez
to  spare  the  prisoner's  life,  but  refused  to  interfere.
After  the  return  of  the  government  to  Mexico  in
July.  1867,  Lerdo,  as  minister  of  foreign  relations,
suspended  the  treaties  with  those  foreign  nations
that  had  failed  in  neutrality  toward  Mexico,  joined
the  intervention  or  recognized  the  imperial  govern-
ment, but  all  the  subjects  of  those  powers  that  re-
sided in  Mexico  were  guaranteed  full  security.  In
the  elections  of  December,  1867,  he  was  chosen
chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court ;  but,  in  opposi-
tion to  the  president's  wishes,  that  body  at  first  re-
fused to  grant  him  permission  to  continue  in  the
cabinet.  The  necessary  permission  was  obtained  in
September,  1868.  and  he  resumed  his  portfolio.
During  the  elections  of  1871  he  was  proclaimed  by
a  numerous  party  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,  and
on  that  account  resigned  the  presidency  of  the  min-
istry. In  October,  1871,  congress  declared  Juarez
re-elected,  and  at  the  latter's  death,  18  July,  1872,
Lerdo.  in  virtue  of  his  office  of  chief  justice,  assumed
the  executive.  He  issued  a  decree  of  amnesty,  and
nearly  all  the  chiefs  that  were  in  rebellion  against
the  government,  including  Gen.  Porfirio  Diaz,  made


694


LEROY


LESCAN


their  submission.  When  congress  convened  for  the
election  of  a  constitutional  president  on  16  Nov.,
Lerdo  was  victorious  without  much  opposition,
and  entered  on  his  new  term  on  1  Dec.  To  the
astonishment  of  all  he  retained  the  cabinet  of  the
Juarez  party  without  any  change,  and  by  this  policy
brought  about  serious  results.  He  presided  at  the
opening  of  the  railroad  to  Vera  Cruz  in  1873,  and
he  also  fostered  the  extension  of  telegraph-lines  and
sent  a  valuable  collection  of  Mexican  products  to  the
Centennial  exhibition  in  Philadelphia.  In  Novem-
ber, 1874,  he  sanctioned  the  law  that  established  the
Federal  senate,  and  sent  an  astronomical  commis-
sion to  Asia  to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus.  In
1875  he  was  proclaimed  a  candidate  for  re-election
in  1876,  and  this  was  the  cause  of  revolutionary
movements  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  These  be-
gan with  the  "  plan  of  Tuxtepec,"  15  Jan.,  1876,
and  spread  very  rapidly.  Notwithstanding  that
the  plan  of  Tuxtepec  had  pronounced  re-election
illegal,  Lerdo  accepted  the  candidacy,  and  on  26
Sept.,  1876,  congress  declared  him  re-elected  presi-
dent ;  but  as  there  was  doubt  as  to  the  validity  of
the  vote,  the  chief-justice  of  the  supreme  court,
Jose  Maria  Iglesias  (q.  v.),  declared  the  constitu-
tional order  interrupted  and  retired  to  Guanajuato,
proclaiming  himself  provisional  president.  The
governor  of  Guanajuato  recognized  Iglesias's  gov-
ernment, and  meanwhile  Diaz,  with  his  army,  ad-
vanced from  the  east.  After  the  government  troops
under  Gen.  Alatorre  had  been  defeated  at  Tecoac
on  16  Nov.,  Lerdo  fled  on  26  Nov.,  accompanied  by
his  ministers,  Escobedo,  Romero  Rubio,  Baz,  and
Mejia.  The  party  was  captured  by  a  bandit,  Pio-
quinto  Huato,  who  called  himself  a  partisan  of
Diaz,  and  detained  until  a  ransom  of  $30,000  was
paid,  but  finally  they  arrived  at  the  seaport  of
Sihuantanejo,  and  afterward  sailed  from  Acapulco
for  the  United  States.  Lerdo  afterward  lived  in
retirement  in  New  York  city.

LEROY,  William  Edgar,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  York,  24  March,  1817;  d.  there,  10  Dec,
1888.  He  became  a  midshipman,  11  Jan.,  1832,
and  lieutenant,  13  July,  1843,  served  on  Com.  Isaac
Hull's  flagship  the  "  Ohio,"  was  afterward  at-
tached to  the  steamer  "  Princeton,"  and  took  part
in  the  engagement  with  Mexican  soldiers  at  Rio
Aribiqua  in  1847.  After  promotion  to  command-
er. 1  July,  1861,  he  was  assigned  to  the  steamer
"  Keystone  State,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  squadron,
with  which  he  was  at  the  capture  of  Pernandina,
Fla.,  in  1862,  and  in  an  engagement  with  iron-clads
off  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  January,  1863.  He  com-
manded the  steam-sloop  "  Oneida,"  of  the  Western
Gulf  squadron,  in  1864,  and  the  "  Ossipee  "  in  the
same  year.  In  the  latter  vessel  he  received  the  sur-
render of  the  Confederate  ram  "  Tennessee,"  in  the
battle  of  Mobile  Bay.  He  was  made  captain,  25
July,  1866,  commodore  in  July,  1870,  and  rear-
admiral,  5  April,  1874,  and  in  1876  commanded  the
South  Atlantic  station.  On  20  March,  1884,  he  was
placed  on  the  retired  list.  Admiral  Leroy  was  fa-
miliarly known  as  "  the  Chesterfield  of  the  Navy."

LERY,  Jean  de  (lay-ree),  sometimes  improperly
written  Delery,  Burgundian  clergyman,  b.  in  La
Margelle  in  1534  ;  d.  in  Berne,  Switzerland,  in
1611.  He  became  a  convert  to  Calvinism,  and  was
ordained  to  the  ministry  at  Geneva  in  1555.  In  the
same  year  Villegaignon  asked  the  consistory  of
that  city  for  a  clergyman  to  accompany  him  to
Brazil,  where  the  French  Protestants  had  resolved
to  make  a  settlement,  and  Lery  was  sent  to  him.
He  remained  in  Brazil  from  1556  till  1559,  and
rendered  valuable  aid  to  Villegaignon,  who  sent
him  back  to  Geneva  in  1559  to  forward  re-enforce-


ments and  supplies.  But  subsequent  events  in
Brazil  rendered  his  commission  useless,  and  Lery
tettled  in  Berne,  where  he  became  pastor  of  a
church.  He  published  "  Histoire  d'  un  voyage  fait
en  la  terre  du  Bresil "  (La  Rochelle,  1578 ;  several
revised  eds.,  Geneva,  1580-1611).

LERY,  Vicomte  de,  French  military  engineer,
b.  in  Quebec  in  1754;  d.  near  Melun,  France,  6
Sept.,  1824.  Early  in  life  he  entered  the  military
service  as  an  engineer.  He  was  in  several  expedi-
tions on  sea  during  the  American  Revolutionary
war,  and  placed  in  a  state  of  defence  the  islands  of
Guadeloupe  and  Tobago.  During  the  Napoleonic
wars  he  served  under  Kleber.  Jouidan,  and  Bermi-
dotte,  planned  the  works  and  originated  the  meas-
ures of  defence  and  attack,  and  facilitated  the
different  passages  of  the  Rhine,  and  planned  the
fortifications  on  that  river.  He  was  created  lieu-
tenant-general in  1805,  accompanied  Marshal  Mac-
donald  through  the  campaigns  of  the  Grisons,  and
afterward  took  part  in  several  great  battles  in  Ger-
many and  Spain.

LESCALLIER,  Daniel  (les'-cal'-yay'),  French
engineer,  b.  in  Lyons,  4  Nov.,  1743 ;  d.  in  Croix
Rousse,  near  Lyons,  in  May,  1822.  He  intended
to  enter  the  corps  of  naval  engineers,  but  before
passing  his  examination  went  to  Santo  Domingo  in
1764,  in  the  suite  of  Count  d'Estaing,  the  governor-
general,  and  was  the  first  to  draw  a  map  of  the
city  and  suburbs.  He  returned  to  France  in  1766,
held  various  important  posts,  and  in  1780  was
appointed  general  inspector  of  the  colony  of  Gre-
nada, where  he  did  much  to  reform  the  administra-
tion and  expose  the  corruption  of  officials.  In
1782  he  went  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  Dutch  Gui-
ana, which  the  French  had  just  recovered  from  the
English.  In  1784  he  transferred  the  country  to
Dutch  commissioners,  and  in  1785  was  appointed
commissioner-general  of  French  Guiana.  During
a  residence  of  about  four  years  in  this  colony  he
restored  order  in  the  finances,  and  suggested  many
plans  of  improvement  to  the  government.  Some
of  his  views  met  with  opposition,  and  he  resigned
and  returned  to  France  in  1788.  He  was  then
employed  on  missions  to  the  French  colonies  in
Africa  and  India  up  to  1799,  when  the  first  consul
summoned  him  to  the  council  of  state  for  the  de-
partment of  the  colonies.  In  1800  he  was  sent  to
Guadeloupe  as  civil  governor,  where  he  restored  to
their  homes  850  colonists  who  had  been  expelled
by  revolutionary  movements.  He  returned  to
France  in  1805  and  took  passage  for  the  United
States,  where  he  busied  himself  with  the  interests
of  the  colony  he  had  left.  On  his  return  to  France
he  held  several  offices,  and  was  appointed  consul-
general  to  the  United  States  in  1811.  Lescallier,
besides  works  on  a  variety  of  European  subjects,
wrote  "  Expose  des  moyens  de  mettre  en  valeur
et d'administrer  la  Guyane "  (Paris,  1791-8) ;  " No-
tions sur  la  culture  des  terres  basses  dans  la
Guyane"  (1798);  and  " Description  botanique  du
chirantodendron,  arbre  du  Mexique,"  a  translation
from  the  Spanish  (1805).  ■  •

LESCAN,  Agnds  Francois  (les-con),  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  Brest  in  November,  1728 ;  d.
there  in  April,  1794.  He  gained  reputation  as
commander  of  a  privateer  in  the  West  Indies,
and  became  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy  in  1752,  serv-
ing afterward  in  Canada  and  doing  good  service
at  the  siege  of  Quebec  in  1759.  At  the  conclusion
of  peace  in  1763  he  re-entered  the  merchant  navy,
but  soon  left  it  again,  and  was  employed  on  differ-
ent commissions  in  Martinique  and  Santo  Domin-
go, commanding  for  some  time  the  navy  in  Guade-
loupe. He  served  during  the  whole  of  the  war  of


LESCARBOT


LESLEY


695


American  independence,  fought  under  Destouches
and  De  Grasse  at  Newport,  under  De  Guichen
near  Dominica  against  Rodney  in  April  and  May,
1781,  and  at  Yorktown  in  October.  He  received
from  Louis  XVI.  the  brevet  of  commander  and  the
cross  of  Saint  Louis,  and  served  again  in  Santo
Domingo  in  1790.  Being  severely  wounded  dur-
ing the  ensuing  troubles,  he  was  compelled  to  retire
in  1791.  He  published  "  Memoires  d'un  loup  de
mer ;  ses  campagnes  en  Amerique  "  (Brest,  1792).

LESCARBOT,  Marc  (les-car-bo),  French  au-
thor, b.  in  Vervins,  France,  in  1590;  d.  about
1630.  He  was  a  lawyer,  but,  being  of  an  adven-
turous disposition,  he  abandoned  his  practice  be-
fore the  parliament  of  Paris  and  embarked  for
New  France.  He  helped  to  form  the  first  settle-
ments in  Canada,  and  after  his  return  to  Europe
he  travelled  in  Switzerland  and  other  countries.
His  principal  work  is  "Histoire  de  la  Nouvelle-
France,  contenant  les  navigations,  decouvertes
et  habitations  faites  par  les  Francais  es  Indes  oc-
cidentals "  (Paris,  1609;  2d  ed..  enlarged,  1611;
with  new  additions,  1618).  In  this  rare  and  curi-
ous work  the  author  first  gives  an  account  of  the
voyage  of  John  Verazzani,  and  then  describes  the
French  settlements  in  Florida,  the  expedition  of
Villegaignon  to  Brazil,  and  the  colony  founded  by
De  Monts  in  Acadia.  He  intermingles  the  narra-
tive with  anecdotes  and  literary  remarks,  and  he
added  to  the  third  edition  a  collection  of  verses
entitled  "  Les  muses  de  la  Xouvelle-France,"  be-
cause he  composed  them  during  his  travels  in  that
country.  Charlevoix  considers  him  a  sincere,  sen-
sible, and  impartial  writer.

LESIEUR-DESAULNIERS,  Isaac  (les-yurr),
Canadian  educator,  b.  in  Ste.-Anne  d'Yaamchiche,
Lower  Canada,  28  Nov.,  1811 ;  d.  in  the  College  of
St.  Hyacinthe,  Canada.  5  April,  1868.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  College  of  Nicolet  in  1828.  and,  not-
withstanding his  youth,  was  appointed  professor  of
philosophy  in  the  College  of  St.  Hyacinthe.  He
was  ordained  priest  in  1838,  and  in  1847  travelled
through  every  part  of  Canada,  collecting  funds  for
a  new  college  at  St.  Hyacinthe,  which  was  built
almost  entirely  by  his  energy  and  devotion.  After
travelling  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  in  1852-'4
he  was  appointed  superior  of  the  college,  and  re-
modelled the  entire  system  of  teaching,  doing  away
almost  wholly  with  punishments,  and  appealing
successfully  to  the  honor  of  his  students.  He
wrote  an  unpublished  translation  of  part  of  the
"Summa"  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  and  a  '■  Traite
des  obligations  "  for  the  benefit  of  his  pupils.  In
1867  he  published  a  remarkable  series  of  articles  on
"  Le  progres"  in  the  "Courrier  de  St.  Hyacinthe."
On  questions  of  ecclesiastical  law  he  was  the  au-
thority of  the  priests  of  his  own  and  neighboring
dioceses.  In  1849-'50  he  delivered  a  course  of  lec-
tures before  the  Canadian  institute  of  Montreal  on
"  Being,"  and  one  on  the  "  Physical  and  Intellec-
tual Organization  of  Man  "  before  the  School  of
medicine,  which  attracted  wide  attention.  About
this  time  he  engaged  in  an  interesting  public  dis-
cussion on  the  subject  of  electricity  with  Dr.  Meil-
leur  and  the  Abbe  Duchaine.

LESLEY,  Peter,  geologist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  17  Sept.,  1819.  In  early  life  he  was  Peter  Les-
lie, Jr.,  and  assumed  the  business  signature  J.  P.  Les-
ley, which  he  still  retains.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1838.  and  dur-
ing the  three  following  years  served  as  assistant  on
the  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania  under  Henry
D.  Rogers.  In  1841  he  entered  the  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary,  and  in  April,  1844,  was  licensed
to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Philadelphia,  but  a


month  later  went  abroad  and  spent  the  winter  in
the  University  of  Halle,  attending  the  lectures  of
Erdmann,  Leo,  Tholuck,  and  Ulrici. On  his  re-
turn in  the  spring  of  1845  he  entered  the  employ
of  the  American  tract  society  in  Pennsylvania,  re-
maining for  two  years,  and  spent  the  winter  of
1847-'8  in  geological  work  in  Boston. Subsequent-
ly for  three  years  he  had  charge  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Milton,  Mass. ;  but,  his  theological
views  changing,  he  left
the  pulpit  and  settled
in  Philadelphia,  where
he  has  since  been  en-
gaged as  a  professional
expert  in  geology,  and
in  1855-'9  was  secretary
of  the  American  iron
association. In  1872  he
became  professor  of  ge-
ology and  mining,  and
also dean of the sci-
entific  faculty, in the
University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, ceased  his  teach-
ing in 1878, and in  >j
1886  was  made  profes- ^K7^~T  a  J?
sor  emeritus. His  geo- A'  ff.  OC&PC&'U .
logical work has in- [/  /
eluded  surveys  of  the 1/

Cape  Breton  coal-fields  in  1862-'3,  numerous  spe-
cial examinations  of  coal,  oil,  and  iron  fields  in
the  United  States  and  Canada ;  and  he  is  recog-
nized as  a  chief  authority  in  the  United  States
on  all  questions  connected  with  the  coal-forma-
tion of  North  America.  Hence,  on  the  establish-
ment of  the  complete  geological  resurvey  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1874,  he  was  made  chief  geologist  in
charge  of  the  undertaking.  His  official  duties  in
this  capacity,  involving  the  publication  of  more
than  seventy  volumes  of  reports,  have  prevented
in  a  great  measure  his  personal  work  as  a  geolo-
gist; but  he  has  published  over  his  own  name
the  several  prefaces  and  notes  to  the  reports.  In
1863  he  was  sent  to  Europe  by  the  Pennsylvania
railroad  company  to  examine  methods  of  harden-
ing the  surface  of  rails  and  to  report  on  the  success
of  Bessemer's  invention.  He  was  one  of  the  ten
commissioners  that  were  appointed  by  the  U.  S.
senate  to  visit  the  World's  fair  in  Paris  in  1867.
Prof.  Leslev  was  secretary  and  librarian  of  the
American  philosophical  society  from  1858  till  1885,
and  during  that  time  prepared  a  catalogue  of  its
library  in  three  volumes  (1863,  1866,  and  1878).
He  is  also  a  member  of  various  other  scientific  so-
cieties, and  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  In  1883  he  was
elected  president  of  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science,  and  made  his  retiring
address  at  the  Ann  Arbor  meeting  in  1885.  He
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  before  the  Lowell  in-
stitute. Boston,  in  1865,  which  was  subsequently
Bublished  under  the  title  of  "  Man's  Origin  and
testiny  as  seen  from  the  Platform  of  the  Sci-
ences" (Boston  and  London,  1868;  revised  ed.,
1887).  Besides  numerous  memoirs  on  geological,
philological,  and  antiquarian  subjects,  he  has  ed-
ited the  "  U.  S.  Railroad  and  Mining  Register"  in
1859-'62 ;  the  "  Early  Proceedings  (1744  to  1838)
of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  from  the
Original  Records"  (Philadelphia,  1885);  and  the
"  Reports  of  the  Second  Geological  Survey  of  Penn-
sylvania" (1875  et  seq.);  and  he  has  also  published
•'Coal  and  its  Topography"  (Philadelphia,  1856);
"The  Iron  Manufacturer's  Guide"  (1858):  "His-
torical Sketch  of  Geological  Explorations  in  Penn-


696


LESLIE


LESLIE


sylvania "  (Harrisburg,  1876) ;  and  "  Paul  Drei-
fuss,  his  Holiday  Abroad"  (Boston,  1882).— His
wife,  Susan  Inches,  is  the  daughter  of  Judge  Jo-
seph Lyman,  of  Northampton,  Mass.,  married  Prof.
Lesley  in  1849,  and  has  been  devoted  to  the  work
of  organized  charities  in  Philadelphia.  She  has
published  "Memoirs  of  Mrs.  Anne  J.  Lyman"
(Cambridge,  1876 ;  2d  ed.,  entitled  "  Recollections
of  My  Mother,"  Boston,  1886).

LESLIE,  Alexander,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1740;  d.  there,  27  Dec,  1794.  He  was
brigadier-general  and  commanded  the  light  in-
fantry at  the  battle  of  Long  Island  in  August,
1776,  served  at  the  capture  of  Charleston  in  May,
1780,  invaded  Virginia  with  3,000  men,  16  Oct.,
1780,  and  joined  Lord  Cornwallis  in  North  Caro-
lina in  December  of  that  year.  He  led  the  right
wing  of  the  British  force  at  Guilford,  and  at  the
close  of  the  war  was  commandant  at  Charleston.

LESLIE,  Eliza,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
16  Nov.,  1787  ;  d.  in  Gloucester,  N.  J.,  2  Jan.,  1858.
Her  father,  a  watchmaker  of  Philadelphia,  was  a

personal  friend  of
Franklin,  Jeffer-
son, and  other  emi-
nent men.  Eliza
accompanied  her
parents  to  Eng-
land in  1793,  and,
after  her  return  in
1800,  resided  chief-
ly in  Philadelphia.
Her  first  composi-
tions were  in  verse.
In  herf  ortieth  year
she  published  her
first  prose  work,
a  cookery  -  book,
which  met  with
a  large  sale,  and
subsequently,  af-
ter obtaining  a
prize  for  her  story,
"Mrs.  Wash  ington
Potts,"  which  was  published  in  "  Godey's  Ladies'
Book,"  she  adopted  literature  as  a  profession  and
edited  "  The  Gift,"  a  popular  annual.  Her  writ-
ings are  distinguished  for  good  sense,  ease  of  ex-
pression, and  quiet  humor,  and  her  works  on  cook-
ery and  housekeeping  were  for  many  years  very
Sopular.  Her  publications  include  "Seventy-five
Receipts  "  (Philadelphia,  1827) ;  "  American  Girl's
Book  "  (1831) ;  "  Pencil  Sketches  "  (1833-'7) ;  "  Do-
mestic Cookerv-Book  "  (1837) ;  "  Althea  Vernon  "
(1838);  "Henrietta  Harrison"  (1838);  "House-
Book"  (1840);  "Ladies'  Receipt  -  Book  "  (1848>;
"The  Dennings"  (1851);  and  "Behavior-Book"
(1853).  During  the  last  ten  years  of  her  life  she
was  engaged  on  a  life  of  John  Fitch,  the  steam
navigator.— Her  brother,  Charles  Robert,  artist,
b.  in  London,  England,  19  Oct.,  1794;  d.  there,  5
May,  1859,  accompanied  his  family  to  the  United
States  in  1800,  was  educated  in  the  public  schools
of  Philadelphia,  and  apprenticed  to  a  bookseller,
but  in  1813  returned  to  England,  where  he  was  in
the  studios  of  Benjamin  West  and  Washington  All-
ston,  and  soon  attained  notice.  He  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  Royal  academy  in  1821  and  acade-
mician in  1825.  In  1831  he  became  professor  of
drawing  in  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  but  re-
signed the  next  year,  owing  to  the  discontent  of
his  English  wife. In  1848-'51  he  was  professor  of

Sain  ting  in  the  Royal  academy. His  "Cooke  as
Richard  HI."  and  "Murder  of  Rutland  by  Clif-
ford "  are  in  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  fine  arts.


On, z  <*J*<cHi  1/


His  most  famous  paintings  are  in  the  Vernon  col-
lection in  the  National  gallery,  London,  and  in  the
Sheepshank's  collection.  His  works  include  "  The
Coronation  of  Queen  Victoria,"  "  Anne  Page  and
Master  Slender,"  "  Sir  Roger  de  Coverley  going  to
Church,"  and  "May  Day  in  the  Reign  of  Queen
Elizabeth."  He  published  "Memoirs  of  John
Constable "  (London,  1848),  and  "  Life  and  Times
of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,"  continued  by  Tom  Tay-
lor (1865).  See  "Charles  Robert  Leslie's  Auto-
biographical Recollections,"  edited  bv  Tom  Tavlor
(1860 ;  republished,  Boston,  I860).— Another  broth-
er, Thomas  Jefferson,  soldier,  b.  in  London,  2
Nov.,  1796 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  Nov.,  1874,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1815,
was  paymaster  of  engineers  from  that  date  till
1838,  was  appointed  2d  lieutenant  in  1816, 1st  lieu-
tenant in  1819,  and  brevetted  captain  for  ten  years'
faithful  service  in  1829.  He  was  major  and  pay-
master in  1838,  declined  the  appointment  of  deputy
paymaster-general  in  1847,  and  during  the  civil
war  was  chief  of  the  paymaster's  department  of
New  York  district.  In  1865  he  was  brevetted  colo-
nel and  brigadier-general  for  faithful  performance
of  duty  during  a  continuous  period  of  fifty  years'
service. He  was  retired  in  1869.

LESLIE,  Frank,  publisher,  b.  in  Ipswich,  Eng-
land, 29  March,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10  Jan.,
1880.  He  was  the  son  of  Joseph  Carter,  a  glove-
manufacturer,  and  was  christened  Henry,  educated
in  his  native  town,  and  placed  in  a  wholesale  dry-
goods  house  in  London  at  the  age  of  seventeen.
While  at  school  he  showed  a  strong  taste  for  art,
and  before  he  left  had  become  proficient  in  the  use
of  the  pencil  and  engraver's  tools.  On  the  estab-
lishment of  "The  Illustrated  London  News"  he
began  sending  in  sketches  signed  "  Frank  Leslie,"
a  pen-name  that  he  adopted  to  conceal  his  identity
from  his  father.  The  prompt  publication  of  his
sketches  led  him  to  give  up  the  dry-goods  business,
and  he  became  superintendent  of  the  engraving
department  of  the  paper  before  he  was  of  age.  He
studied  the  various  branches  of  the  publication
business,  became  an  expert  in  the  operation  of
"  overlaying  "  wood-engravings,  and  was  successful
as  an  engraver  on  wood.  In  1848  he  came  to  the
United  States,  assumed  the  name  of  Frank  Leslie
by  legislative  act,  and  secured  employment  on
"  Gleason's  Pictorial "  in  Boston.  Shortly  after-
ward he  became  superintendent  of  the  engraving
department  of  "  The  Illustrated  News."  In  1854  he
began  publishing  on  his  own  account,  his  first  peri-
odical being  "The  Gazette  of  Fashion,"  and  his
second  "  The  New  York  Journal."  On  14  Dec,
1855,  he  published  the  first  number  of  "  Frank  Les-
lie's Illustrated  Newspaper,"  in  which  his  ideas  of
a  pictorial  newspaper  were  indicated  by  illustra-
tions of  Dr.  Kane's  arctic  expedition  that  attracted
wide  attention.  In  1865  he  established  "  The  Chim-
ney Corner,"  and  followed  it  with  German  and
Spanish  editions  of  the  "  Illustrated  Newspaper,"
"The  Boys'  and  Girls'  Weekly,"  "The  Lady's
Journal,"  a  weekly,  "  The  Budget  of  Fun,"  a
monthly,  "  The  New  World,"  a  weekly,  "  Pleasant
Hours,  "  Popular  Monthly,"  and  "  Sunday  Maga-
zine," monthlies,  and  "  The  Chatter-Box,"  the
"  Illustrated  Almanac,"  and  the  "  Comic  Almanac,"
annuals.  Mr.  Leslie  received  the  medal  of  the
American  institute  for  wood-engraving  in  1848,
was  a  commissioner  to  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867,
where  he  was  presented  with  a  prize  medal  in  gold
by  Napoleon  III.  for  his  services  on  the  jury  on  art,
and  president  of  the  New  York  state  centennial
commission  in  1876.  He  was  a  liberal  patron  of
art  and  charitable  interests. — His  wife,  Miriam


LESLIE


LESSEPS


697


Florence,  after  his  death,  by  a  legal  process,  as-
sumed the  name  of  Frank  Leslie,  and  has  since
conducted  the  business  of  the  publishing-house.
She  is  the  author  of  "  From  Gotham  to  the  Golden
Gate  "  (New  York,  1877).

LESLIE,  James,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Kair,
Kincardineshire,  Scotland,  in  1786 ;  d.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  in  1873.  His  father,  Capt.  James  Leslie,
was  assistant  quartermaster  in  Wolfe's  army  at
the  taking  of  Quebec.  The  son  was  educated  at
Aberdeen,  Scotland,  and  was  for  many  years  a  mer-
chant in  Montreal.  He  served  with  the  Montreal
volunteers  during  the  war  of  1812,  and  remained
attached  to  the  service  till  1862,  when  he  retired
with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  Mr.  Leslie
represented  Montreal  in  the  Lower  Canada  assem-
bly from  1824  until  the  union  of  the  provinces,
and  Vercheres  from  1844  till  1848,  when  he  was
called  to  the  legislative  council,  of  which  he  was
president  from  March  till  September,  1848.  He
was  provincial  secretary  from  that  date  until  1851,
and  from  1867  till  his  death  sat  in  the  senate.

LESLIE,  Preston  Hopkins,  lawyer,  b.  in  Clin-
ton county,  Ky.,  8  March,  1819.  He  received  a
limited  education  in  country  schools,  and  worked
as  a  common  laborer  for  several  years  until  he  ob-
tained a  clerkship  in  a  store  and  finally  in  the
county  office.  He  then  studied  law  under  Samuel
B.  Maxey,  and  began  practice  in  1842.  About
1854  he  removed  to  Glasgow,  where  he  has  since
resided.  He  was  elected  to  the  representative  as-
sembly in  1844  and  in  1850,  and  to  the  state  senate
in  1867,  of  which  body  he  was  elected  speaker  in
1869  and  acting  lieutenant-governor.  On  the  elec-
tion of  Gov.  John  W.  Stevenson  to  the  U.  S.  senate
in  the  next  year,  he  succeeded  as  governor,  and  in
1871,  as  the  nominee  of  the  Democratic  party,  he
was  elected  to  the  office  for  the  term  of  four  years.
After  his  retirement  he  was  elected  and  served  six
years  as  judge  of  the  Glasgow  circuit  district.

LESQUEREUX,  Leo,  paleontologist,  b.  in
Fleurier,  Switzerland,  18  Nov.,  1806.  He  was  des-
tined for  the  church  by  his  mother,  but,  on  enter-
ing the  academy  of  Neuchatel,  met  Arnold  Guyot,
and  together  they  became  devoted  to  natural  sci-
ence. After  completing  his  course  at  the  academy
in  1827,  he  went  to  Eisenach  for  the  purpose  of  per-
fecting himself  in  the  German  language  prepara-
tory to  entering  the  University  of  Berlin,  and  sup-
ported himself  by  teaching  French.  From  1829
till  1834  he  was  principal  of  the  college  at  Chaux
de  Fonds,  but,  becoming  deaf,  he  was  obliged  to
give  up  this  place.  He  then  worked  at  engrav-
ing, and  also  made  watch-springs  until  1848.
Meanwhile  he  had  begun  the  study  of  mosses  and
of  fossil  botany,  becoming  interested  also  in  the
subject  of  peat,  its  production,  and  possible  repro-
duction. His  knowledge  of  this  subject  led  to  his
engagement  by  the  government  of  Neuchatel  to
examine  the  peat-bogs  of  that  canton,  and  later,
under  the  patronage  of  the  king  of  Prussia,  he
explored  the  peat-bogs  of  northern  Europe.  His
researches  gained  for  him  in  1844  a  gold  medal.
which  was  awarded  by  the  government  of  Neu-
chatel for  the  best  popular  treatise  on  the  forma-
tion of  peat.  In  1848  he  came  to  the  United
States,  and  at  first  made  his  home  in  Cambridge,
where  he  assisted  Louis  Agassiz  for  a  time,  but
soon  removed  to  Columbus,  Ohio,  where  he  has
since  lived.  There  he  became  first  associated
with  William  S.  Sullivant  in  the  study  of  Ameri-
can bryologv.  Together  they  published  "  Musci
Americani  Exsiccati"  (1856;"  2d  ed..  1865).  and
subsequently  he  assisted  Mr.  Sullivant  in  the  ex-
amination of  the  mosses  that  had  been  collected


by  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes  on  the  South  Pacific  ex-
ploring expedition  and  by  Lieut.  Amiel  W.  Whip-
ple on  the  Pacific  railroad  exploration,  and  finally
in  his  "Icones  Muscorum  (Cambridge,  1864).
His  own  most  valuable  researches,  beginning  in
1850,  were  studies  of  the  coal-formations  of  Ohio,
Pennsylvania,  Illinois,  Kentucky,  and  Arkansas,
on  which  he  contributed  memoirs  to  the  re-
ports of  the  state  surveys.  His  investigations  on
the  coal  flora  of  Pennsylvania  are  of  special  value.
He  prepared  a  "  Catalogue  of  the  Fossil  Plants
which  have  been  named  or  described  from  the
Coal-Measures  of  North  America"  for  the  reports
of  Henry  D.  Rogers  in  1858,  and  in  1884  furnished
"  The  Coal  Flora '?  (3  vols,  of  text,  with  an  atlas)
for  the  second  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania,
which  is  regarded  as  the  most  important  work  on
carboniferous  plants  that  has  thus  far  appeared  in
the  United  States.  Since  1868  parts  of  the  mate-
rial in  fossil  botany  have  been  referred  to  him  by
the  various  national  surveys  in  the  field,  and  he
has  contributed  to  their  reports  the  results  of  his
investigations.  He  is  a  member  of  more  than
twenty  scientific  societies  in  the  United  States  and
Europe,  and  in  1864  was  the  first  member  that  was
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  The
titles  of  his  publications  are  more  than  fifty  in
number,  and  include  twelve  important  volumes  on
the  natural  history  of  the  United  States,  besides
which  he  has  published  "  Letters  written  on  Ger-
many "  (Neuchatel.  1846)  and  "  Letters  written  on
America"  (1847-'55).  He  has  also  published,  with
Thomas  P.  James,  "  Manual  of  the  Mosses  of  North
America"  (Boston,  1884).

LESSEPS,  Ferdinand  Marie,  Viscount  de,
French  diplomat,  b.  in  Versailles,  11  Nov.,  1805.
He  received  his  early  education  in  Paris,  but  fin-
ished it  with  his  father,  a  consular  agent,  and  lived
with  him  in  Philadelphia  in  1819-'22,  where  he  ac-
quired, as  he  said,  at  a  dinner  given  to  him  in  that
city  in  1880,  the  qualities  of  pluck  and  tenacity.
He  was  consular  agent  at  Lisbon  in  1825-'7.  when
he  received  an  appointment  in  the  division  of  com-
merce. In  1828  he  was  attached  to  the  consulate
at  Tunis,  and  three  years  later  became  vice-consul
at  Alexandria  and  consul  at  Cairo,  where  he  re-
mained till  1838.  when  he  was  sent  to  Rotterdam,
afterward  to  Malaga  and  to  Barcelona.  After  the
downfall  of  Louis  Philippe  he  was  appointed  min-
ister to  Spain  and  afterward  to  Rome.  After  1850
he  devoted  his  energy  to  the  opening  of  the
Suez  canal,  the  idea  of  which  he  had  conceived
during  his  sojourn  in  Egypt.  While  on  a  visit  in
Egypt  in  1854  he  disclosed  the  project  to  Said
Pacha,  who  invited  him  to  draw  up  a  memorial  on
the  subject,  which  was  done,  with  full  details.
Said  Pacha  issued  a  firman  sanctioning  the  enter-
prise in  1854,  granted  a  letter  of  concession  in  Janu-
ary, 1856.  and  took  a  large  number  of  shares,  and
after  many  difficulties  Lesseps  formed  a  company
in  Paris  in  1858.  Work  on  the  canal  was  begun
in  the  spring  of  1859.  A  canal  for  steamboats  of
light  draught  was  opened  on  15  Aug.,  1865.  Its
bed  was  enlarged  so  that  schooners  could  pass
through  in  March,  1867.  and  the  completed  canal
was  formally  opened  amid  festivities  at  Port  Said
on  17  Nov.,"  1869.  Lesseps  directed  his  attention
to  the  Sahara  desert,  proposing  to  flood  a  portion
of  it,  and  afterward  presented  a  plan  for  a  railway
through  Asia.  Since  1873  he  has  concentrated  his
energy  on  the  Panama  canal.  In  1874  the  project
was  vigorously  advocated  in  the  French  financial
press,  and  at  the  meeting  of  the  congress  of  the
geographical  sciences,  held  in  Paris  in  1875,  Les-
seps formally  proposed  to  cut  a  canal  across  the


698


LESSLIE


LE  SUEUR


Isthmus  of  Panama.  In  the  following  year  he
formed  a  company,  with  a  capital  of  $20,000,  to
make  the  preliminary  surveys.  He  visited  Ger-
many, England,  and  Belgium,  to  secure  support
among  the  financiers,  and  in  1879  obtained  from
the  Colombian  government  the  exclusive  privilege
of  constructing  a  canal  between  the  two  oceans
through  the  Colombian  territory.  On  his  return
to  Paris  he  began  a  subscription  for  a  company
with  a  capital  of  $120,000,000,  which  proved  a
failure.  Going  again  to  the  United  States,  he  vis-
ited the  principal  cities,  making  speeches,  and
called  a  congress  of  engineers  to  meet  in  Paris
and  discuss  the  merits  of  the  proposed  routes.
That  of  Panama  having  been  approved,  he  again
began  a  subscription  for  a  company  with  a  capital
of  $100,000,000,  which  was  successful;  but  only
half  of  the  capital  is  paid  up.  The  United  States
government  desired  that  the  neutrality  of  the  canal
should  be  jointly  guaranteed  by  the  United  States
and  Colombia  under  a  treaty  with  New  Granada
concluded  in  1846,  and  that  the  war-vessels  of  no
other  power  should  have  the  right  of  passage  ex-
cept by  permission.  A  diplomatic  correspondence
was  carried  on  with  the  government  of  Great  Brit-
ain, which  declined  to  modify  the  Clayton-Bulwer
treaty  of  1850  providing  for  a  joint  English  and
American  guarantee  of  any  prospective  interoceanic
canal  or  railway.  The  company  was  definitively
constituted  on  31  Jan.,  1881,  and  the  work  began
in  October.  Much  money  has  been  wasted,  and  new
loans  asked  for.  Lesseps  has  repeatedly  asserted
that  the  canal  will  be  completed  by  1889  and  that
the  total  expenditure  will  not  exceed  $220,000,000.

LESSLIE,  James,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Dundee,  Scotland,  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Eglinton,  Ont.,
19  April,  1885.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1820,  and
established  himself  in  the  book  and  stationery
business  in  Kingston.  He  removed  to  York  several
years  later,  and  when  that  town  became  the  city  of
Toronto  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  first  city
council.  In  1836  he  took  an  active  part  in  estab-
lishing the  House  of  industry,  and  at  the  same
time  strongly  opposed  the  ascendency  of  the  Church
of  England  in  public  affairs.  Mr.  Lesslie  was  ap-
pointed president  of  the  Bank  of  the  people,  which
afterward  was  merged  in  the  Bank  of  Montreal.
At  the  beginning  of  the  insurrection  of  1837  he
and  his  brother  William  were  arrested  by  the  au-
thorities simply  because  they  were  known  as  advo-
cates of  civil  and  religious  liberty ;  but  after  an
examination  by  the  commissioners  of  treason  they
were  released.  The  disabilities  that  were  imposed
on  the  friends  of  constitutional  reform  after  the
rebellion  led  to  the  formation  of  the  Mississippi
emigration  society,  and  Mr.  Lesslie  was  chosen
as  one  of  a  delegation  to  select  a  site  for  a  Cana-
dian colony.  Davenport,  Iowa,  then  a  small  vil-
lage, was  chosen ;  but,  owing  to  the  conciliatory
course  that  was  pursued  by  Lord  Durham,  the
new  governor-general,  the  scheme  proved  abortive.
In  1844  Mr.  Lesslie  purchased  the  "  Examiner "
newspaper  in  Toronto,  and  conducted  it  editori-
ally until  1854,  when  he  sold  it  to  George  Brown,
of  the  "  Globe."  While  an  editor  he  ably  opposed
the  claims  of  the  state  church,  and  contributed  in
no  slight  degree  to  its  abolition.  In  1855  he  re-
tired from  business,  and  two  years  later  went  to
Eglinton.  where  he  remained  till  his  death.

LESTER,  Charles  Edwards,  author,  b.  in
Griswold,  Conn..  15  July,  1815.  He  is  descended
from  Jonathan  Edwards  in  the  maternal  line.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  afterward  spent
two  years  at  Auburn  theological  seminary,  and
began  to  preach. He had  to  abandon the pul-


pit on  account  of  frequent  haemorrhages  from  the
lungs,  and  to  go  abroad  for  his  health.  He  visited
Great  Britain  in  1840,  was  soon  afterward  ap-
pointed U.  S.  consul  at  Genoa,  Italy,  where  he
remained  six  years.  Since  his  return  he  has  re-
sided in  New  York  city,  devoting  himself  to  litera-
ture. Besides  contributing  to  American  and  Eu-
ropean periodicals,  he  has  edited  various  journals
and  magazines.  His  works  include  "  The  Glory
and  Shame  of  England  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1841) ;
"  Condition  and  Pate  of  England  "  (1842) ;  "  The
Artist,  Merchant,  and  Statesman  "  (1845) ;  "  Life
and  Voyages  of  Americus  Vespucius "  (1846) ;
"Artists  in  America"  (1846);  "My  Consulship"
(2  vols.,  1851);  "The  Napoleon  Dynasty,  a  His-
tory of  the  Bonaparte  Family,  by  the  Berkeley
Men  "  (1852) ;  "  Life  and  Public  Services  of  Charles
Sumner"  (1874);  "Our  First  Hundred  Years"
(1874);  "America's  Advancement"  (1878);  "The
Mexican  Republic  "  (1878) :  and  a  "  History  of  the
United  States,  considered  in  Five  Great  Periods  "
(2  vols.,  1883).  He  has  also  translated  Alfieri's
"Autobiography"  (1845);  Massimo  d'Azeglio's
"  Challenge  of  Barletta  "  (1845) ;  Machiavelli's  "  Flo-
rentine Histories  "  (1846) ;  and  Cebaz's  "  Citizen  of
a  Republic  "  (1846).

LESTER,  Charles  Smith,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wor-
cester, Mass.,  15  March,  1824.  He  received  his  early
education  at  Washington  academy,  Salem,  N.  Y.,
studied  law  at  Salem,  and  with  his  uncle,  John
Willard,  at  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  where  he  has
since  practised  his  profession.  He  was  district  at-
torney in  1859-62,  county  judge  in  1870-'6,  and  has
been  also  supervisor  of  the  town  of  Saratoga,  presi-
dent of  the  village  of  Saratoga  Springs,  and  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  education.  He  was  the  attor-
ney of  Alexander  T.  Stewart  when  the  latter  add-
ed the  Grand  Union  and  Windsor  hotels  to  his  in-
vestments, and  is  now  the  Saratoga  attorney  of  the
Stewart  estate.  Judge  Lester  has  a  high  reputa-
tion in  his  profession.

LE  SUEUR,  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in  Canada  in
the  17th  century;  d.  at  sea  in  the  18th.  In  1693
he  was  at  Chegoimegon  maintaining  peace  between
the  Chippewas  and  Sioux,  and  in  1695  he  built  a
fort  in  the  west.  He  was  in  France  in  1697,  and
obtained  permission  to  work  certain  mines  that  he
had  discovered,  but  on  his  way  to  Canada  was
captured  by  the  English.  After  his  release  he'
sailed  to  Canada,  but  was  prevented  from  working
his  mines,  and  returned  to  France,  whence  he  went
to  Louisiana  in  1699.  In  1700  he  was  ordered  by
Iberville  to  proceed  to  the  Sioux  country  with
twenty  men,  establish  a  post  there,  and  take  pos-
session of  a  copper-mine  which  he  had  previously
discovered.  He  set  out  toward  the  end  of  April,
ascended  the  Mississippi  to  St.  Anthony's  falls,  en-
tered St.  Peter's  river  on  19  Sept.,  and  forty  leagues
from  its  mouth  found  another  river  emptying  on
the  left,  which  he  called  Riviere  verte,  or  Green
river,  because  earth  that  was  carried  into  it  from  a
copper-mine  about  three  miles  distant  gave  it  that
color.  It  is  now  known  as  Blue  Earth  river,  or
Mankato.  He  was  able  to  sail  only  about  three
miles  up  this  river,  owing  to  the  floating  ice,  and
he  built  a  fort  on  the  banks,  in  which  he  passed
the  winter.  As  soon  as  April  came  he  proceeded
to  the  mine,  from  which  he  extracted  30,000  pounds
of  ore  in  twenty-two  days,  but  was  unable  to  con-  '
tinue  the  work  for  want  of  funds.  He  returned  to
France  in  1702,  and  afterward  went  again  to  Louisi-
ana, where  he  joined  the  Indians  and  acquired
great  influence  among  them.  In  1730,  when  the
Indian  allies  of  the  French  were  defeated  by  the
Natchez  tribe,  he  formed  a  corps  of  700  Choctaws,


LETCHER


LEUTZE


699


at  the  head  of  which  he  marched  against  the  Nat-
chez, defeated  them,  and  released  over  200  French
and  negro  captives.  He  was  placed  in  command
of  a  small  vessel  and  ordered  to  push  on  to  Red
river,  21  Dec,  which  he  was  to  ascend,  in  order  to
ascertain  where  the  main  body  of  the  Natchez  In-
dians was  stationed.  Having  learned  its  position,
he  returned,  and,  on  the  surrender  of  the  savages.
he  was  one  of  three  officers  to  whom  the  custody  of
their  chiefs  was  intrusted.  Knowing  their  lan-
guage thoroughly,  he  learned  from  them  that  other
bodies  of  Natchez  and  kindred  tribes  were  prepar-
ing to  attack  the  French.  He  laid  this  informa-
tion before  the  general  and  guaranteed  that  if  he
were  allowed  a  picked  company  he  would  overcome
the  savages.  This  offer  was  refused.  He  appears
to  have  gone  to  France  some  time  afterward,  and
to  have  died  at  sea  when  returning  to  Canada.

LETCHER,  John,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in
Lexington,  Va.,  29  March,  1813 ;  d.  there.  26  Jan.,
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Randolph  Macon  in
1833,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,

and  while  practising
edited  a  newspaper
in  Lexington,  Va.
He  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in
1850,  and  in  1852  was
elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  serv-
ing till  1859.  At  the
latter  date  he  be-
came governor  of
Virginia,  and  was  in
office  when  the  con-
vention passed  the
ordinance  of  seces-
sion in  1801.  Al-
though he  had  op-
posed this  policy,  he
sustained  the  action
of  the  convention,  and  immediately  placed  all  the
state's  forces  at  the  disposition  of  the  Confederate
government,  without  waiting  for  the  popular  vote.
After  the  failure  of  the  Confederacy  he  resumed
his  profession,  and  retired  from  politics.

LETCHER,  Robert  Perkins,  statesman,  b.  in
Goochland  county,  Va.,  10  Feb.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Frank-
fort, Ky.,  24  Jan.,  1861.  He  was  educated  in  the
common  schools,  removed  to  and  began  the  practice
of  law  in  Lancaster  county,  Ky.  He  was  frequently
a  member  of  the  legislature,  at  one  time  speaker  of
the  house,  and  in  1822  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Clay  Democrat,  serving  one  term.  Mr.  Letcher's
seat  was  contested  by  Thomas  P.  Moore,  but  the
house,  after  prolonged  discussion,  gave  the  seat  to
Mr.  Letcher.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  183(5
on  the  Harrison  and  Granger  ticket,  was  governor
of  Kentucky  in  1840-'4,  and  in  1849  was  appointed
minister  to  Mexico,  serving  till  1852.

LETHIERE,  Gnillauine  Guillon  (leh-te-air),
West  Indian  artist,  b.  in  Guadeloupe,  16  Jan..
1760;  d.  in  Paris,  22  April,  1832.  He  acquired
the  elements  of  design  in  his  own  country,  and,
showing  great  capacity,  was  sent  by  his  father  to
France  in  1774,  where  he  pursued  his  artistic
studies  during  three  years  under  the  direction  of
Deschamps,  professor  at  the  Academy  of  Rouen.
Then  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  was  befriended
by  Doyen,  the  king's  painter,  and  remained  until
1786,  when  one  of  his  pictures  gave  him  the  first
prize  and  an  opportunity  to  go  to  Rome.  Here  he
painted  his  "Junius  Brutus,"  which  obtained  a
prize  and  may  be  considered  his  masterpiece. He


CSvA^-t^ <*£*std%^2^


returned  to  Paris  in  1792,  in  1811  was  appointed
director  of  the  Academy  of  Rouen,  and  in  1815
member  of  the  Academy  of  arts.  He  founded  at
Paris  in  1819  a  school  of  painting,  and  travelled
often  through  England,  Spain,  and  Italy,  to  study
the  customs  and  habits  of  those  countries  for  re-
production in  his  works.  Among  his  pictures  in
the  Museum  of  painting  of  Paris  the  most  notable
are  •'  Junius  Brutus  ordering  the  Execution  of  his
Son"  (1791);  "The  Treaty  of  Leoben"  (1806);
"View  of  the  Town  of  Medicis"  (1807);  "Palace
of  the  French  Academy  at  Rome  "  (1807) ;  "  ^Eneas
and  Dido  surprised  bv  a  Storm"  (1819);  and  "Ve-
nus on  the  Waves"  (1819).

LEUTZE,  Emanuel,  historical  painter,  b.  in
Gmiind,  Wurtemberg,  24  May,  1816;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  18  July,  1868.  His  parents  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  soon  after  his  birth,
and  at  first  settled  in  Philadelphia,  but  subse-
quently removed  to  Fredericksburg,  Va.  His
early  education  was  good,  though  not  especially  in
the  direction  of  art.  The  first  development  of"  his
artistic  talent  occurred  while  he  was  attending  the
sick-bed  of  his  father,  when  he  attempted  drawing
to  occupy  the  long  hours  of  waiting.  He  soon  be-
came skilful,  and  projected  a  plan  for  publishing,
in  Washington,  portraits  of  eminent  American
statesmen,  in  which,  however,  he  met  with  but
slight  encouragement.  About  1840  he  produced  a
painting  whose  merits  were  such  as  to  procure  him
many  orders,  so  that  in  1841  he  was  enabled  to
study  in  Dllsseldorf  under  Lessing.  He  devoted
himself  to  historical  subjects,  choosing  in  prefer-
ence those  having  a  relation  to  the  discovery  or
history  of  America.  His  first  noteworthy  paint-
ing in  Europe,  "  Columbus  before  the  Council  of
Salamanca."  was  purchased  by  the  Dllsseldorf  art
union ;  and  a  companion  picture,  "  Columbus  in
Chains,"  procured  him  the  gold  medal  of  the  Brus-
sels art  exhibition,  and  was  subsequently  pur-
chased by  the  Art  union  in  New  York.  In  1843
he  studied  the  works  of  Cornelius  and  Kaulbach  at
Munich,  and,  while  there,  finished  his  "  Columbus
before  the  Queen."  On  the  completion  of  this  pic-
ture he  visited  Venice  and  Rome,  making  studies
from  Titian  and  Michael  Angelo,  and.  after  a  tour
in  Italy,  returned  to  Diisseldorf  in  1845,  where  he
married  and  made  his  home.  For  fourteen  years
he  continued  in  that  city,  during  which  period
he  painted  "  Landing  of  the  Norsemen  in  Amer-
ica," "  Cromwell  and  his  Daughter,"  "  The  Court
of  Queen  Elizabeth,"  "Henry  VIII.  and  Anne
Boleyn,"  "  The  Iconoclast,"  "  John  Knox  and
Mary  Stuart,"  and  the  series  of  pictures  illustrat-
ing striking  events  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,
of  which  the  more  important  were  "  Washington
Crossing  the  Delaware."  "  Washington  at  Mon-
mouth," "  Washington  at  the  Battle  of  Monon-
gahela,"  "  News  from  Lexington."  "  Sergeant  Jas-
per," and  "  Washington  at  Princeton."  In  1859
Mr.  Leutze  returned  to  the  United  States  and
opened  a  studio  in  New  York  city.  Early  in  1860
he  received  a  commission  from  the  government  for
a  large  mural  picture,  to  be  painted  on  one  of  the
staircases  in  the  Capitol  at  Washington.  The  sub-
ject chosen  was  "Westward  the  Star  of  Empire
takes  its  Way,"  and  the  painting  was  to  be  executed
in  fresco.  So  earnestly  did  the  artist  enter  into
this  work  that  he  not  only  made  the  then  difficult
journey  to  the  base  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  for
the  purpose  of  local  study,  but,  on  his  return,  again
departed  for  Munich,  that  he  might  learn  from
Kaulbach  the  mechanism  of  fresco-painting.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  the  National  academy  in
1860,  and  in  1867  exhibited  his  "  Elaine "  there.


700


LE VAN


LE VERT


After  his  death  there  were  shown  at  the  academy
his  "  Mother's  Visit,"  "  Storming  of  Teocalli,
Mexico,"  and  "  Settlement  of  Maryland  by  Lord
Baltimore,"  together  with  portraits  of  Gen.  Grant,
Gen.  Burnside,  and  several  artists.  His  "  Mary
Stuart  hearing  the  First  Mass  at  Holyrood  after
her  Return  from  Prance  "  was  at  the  Paris  exhibi-
tion of  1867.  Besides  his  "  Westward  Ho  !  "  as  it
is  sometimes  called,  he  had  received  other  commis-
sions from  the  government,  which  were  only  in  the
"  cartoon "  state  at  his  death.  One  of  these,
"  Civilization,"  was  intended  for  the  senate-cham-
ber. He  had  also  made  a  sketch  in  pencil  of  an
historfcal  painting  of  the  largest  size,  entitled
"  The  Emancipation."  One  of  the  artist's  most
successful  works  is  "  Lafayette  in  Prison  at  01-
mutz  Visited  by  his  Relatives  "  (1861). — His  eldest
son,  Eugene  H.  C,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  4
March,  1863,  and  was  commissioned  lieutenant  in
1871,  which  rank  he  still  (1887)  holds.

LE  VAN,  William  Barnet,  engineer,  b.  in
Easton,  Pa.,  3  June,  1829.  He  was  educated  in  his
native  town,  and  then  served  an  apprenticeship  as
a  machinist  and  draughtsman  in  the  Novelty  iron-
works, New  York  city.  Subsequently  he  became
an  engineer  in  the  service  of  Howland  and  Aspin-
wall,  then  the  largest  steamship-owners  in  the
United  States,  and  later  formed  a  similar  connec-
tion with  the  Collins  steamship  line.  In  1854  he
settled  in  New  York  as  a  consulting  engineer,  but
in  1857  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  has
since  been  engaged  in  designing,  constructing,  and
superintending  different  kinds  of  machinery,  es-

Eecially  those  of  his  own  invention.  These  include
is  grate-bar,  which  is  of  such  durability  as  to  out-
last three  sets  of  the  ordinary  bars,  and  also  effects
a  great  saving  in  fuel.  In  1859  he  introduced  a
steam-engine  governor  that  is  now  well  known  for
its  simplicity,  efficiency,  and  economy.  His  more
recent  inventions  are  a  self-recording  steam-engine
indicator  and  glass  water-gauge,  an  improved  sta-
tionary engine,  a  telescopic  hydraulic  lift,  and  an
improved  boiler  and  brick  settings.  For  many
years  he  held  the  office  of  Philadelphia  agent  of
the  Corliss  steam-engine  company  of  Providence,
R.  I.,  and  did  much  toward  introducing  their  en-
gine among  manufacturers.  Mr.  Le  Van  is  a
member  of  the  Franklin  institute  and  of  the
American  society  of  mechanical  engineers,  to  the
journal  and  proceedings  of  which  he  has  con-
tributed papers  of  technical  value.  He  is  also  the
author  of  "  Useful  Information  for  Engineers,
Boiler-Makers,  and  Firemen,  with  Facts  and  Fig-
ures" (Philadelphia,  1876),  and  "The  Steam-En-
gine  Indicator  and  its  Use  "  (1884).

LEVERETT,  Sir  John,  colonial  governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  England  in  1616 ;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  16  March,  1679.  He  emigrated  to  Bos-
ton at  the  age  of  sixteen  with  his  father,  Thomas,
who,  in  1633,  became  an  alderman  of  that  place.
John  early  held  various  offices  of  public  trust,  was
captain  of  a  militia  company,  and  a  successful
merchant.  He  returned  to  England  in  1644,  took
the  side  of  parliament  in  the  struggle  between  that
body  and  the  king,  and,  as  commander  of  a  com-
pany of  foot-soldiers,  gained  military  distinction
and  the  friendship  of  Cromwell.  After  his  return
to  Boston  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  general  court
in  1651-'3,  and  again  in  1663-'4.  He  was  one  of
the  governor's  council  in  1665-71,  major-general
in  1663-73.  and  deputy  governor  in  1671-'3,  be-
coming governor  at  the  latter  date.  His  adminis-
tration is  important  in  colonial  history  as  the  era
of  the  war  with  King  Philip,  which  Gov.  Leverett's
skill  and  energy  were  instrumental  in  conducting


to  a  fortunate  issue.  In  1676  he  was  knighted  by
Charles  II.  in  acknowledgment  of  his  services  to
the  New  England  colony  during  this  contest.  See
"  Leverett  Memorial "  (Boston,  1856). — His  grand-
son, John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  25  Aug.,  1662 :  d.
there,  3  May,  1724,  was  a  judge,  speaker  of  the
colonial  legislature,  member  of  the  council,  and
president  of  Harvard  from  1707  until  his  death.
His  attainments  in  learning  were  extensive,  and
he  received  the  honor  of  membership  in  the  Royal
society,  which  was  then  rarely  given  to  colonists.
He  was  commissioner  to  the  Indians  in  1704,  and
to  Port  Royal  in  1707.

LEVERETT,  Frederick  Percival,  scholar,  b.
in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  11  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Boston,
6  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Sir  John
Leverett,  noticed  above.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1821,  and  the  same  year  appointed
usher  in  the  Boston  Latin-school,  of  which  he  be-
came principal,  and  he  afterward  opened  a  private
classical  school.  He  published  editions  of  Caesar's
"  Commentaries,"  Juvenal,  and  the  "  Viri  Romae,"
to  be  used  as  text-books  in  schools.  His  principal
work  was  his  lexicon  of  the  Latin  language,  which
was  compiled  from  the  lexicons  of  FacciolatL
Forcellini,  Scheller,  Lunemann,  and  Freund.  The
last  sheet  of  this  work  went  to  press  on  the  morn-
ing of  his  death  (Boston,  1837).

LEVERIDGE,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  15  Sept.,  1792;  d.  there,  17  Feb.,  1886.  He
was  educated  in  a  private  school,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811.  During  the  war
of  1812  he  served  as  a  private.  In  1844-'5  he  was
corporation  council  under  Mayor  Harper.  He  was
a  founder  of  the  St.  Nicholas  club  and  of  the  old
Public-school  society,  and  was  said  to  be  the  old-
est active  member  of  the  American  bar.

LE  VERT,  Octavia  Walton,  author,  b.  in  Belle-
vue,  near  Augusta,  Ga.,  about  1810 ;  d.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  13  March,  1877.  She  was  a  granddaughter  of
George  Walton,  a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence. Her
father,  George,  re-
moved to  Pensaco-
la  in  1821,  as  terri-
torial secretary  un-
der Gen.  Jackson,
upon  whose  retire-
ment he  acted  for
a  time  as  governor.
His  daughter  ac-
quired some  knowl-
edge of  Greek,  Lat-
in, and  science,  and
became  an  Italian,
French,  and  Span-
ish scholar.  She
was  asked  to  name
the  capital  of
Florida,  and  se-
lected the  Seminole  word  Tallahassee,  meaning
"  beautiful  land."  She  was  presented  to  Gen.  La-
fayette when  he  visited  Mobile,  who,  in  speaking
of  her,  said:  "A  truly  wonderful  child  !  She  has
been  conversing  with  intelligence  and  tact  in  the
purest  French.  I  predict  for  her  a  brilliant  career."
She  spent  the  winter  of  1833-'4  in  Washington,  D.
C,  and  during  the  congressional  debates  upon  the
removal  of  the  deposits  from  the  U.  S.  bank  wrote
such  accm-ate  reports  that  it  is  said  Clay,  Calhoun,
and  Webster  frequently  called  her  to  read  their
speeches  from  her  portfolio.  In  1836  she  married
Dr.  Henry  S.  Le  Vert,  whose  father  was  fleet  sur-
geon under  Rochambeau.  and  present  at  the  siege
of  Yorktown,  and  resided  with  him  in  Mobile. In


LEVIN


LEWIS


701


1874  she  made  her  appearance  as  a  public  reader.
She  rendered  much  service  in  behalf  of  the  Mount
Vernon  association.  She  was  opposed  to  secession,
but  remained  in  Mobile,  and  rendered  service  to
the  soldiers  during  the  entire  war,  after  which  she
visited  Washington  to  ask  pardon  for  her  friend
Gen.  Beauregard.  Lamartine  advised  her  to  pre-
pare a  book  of  her  travels,  which  was  written  in
the  form  of  letters  to  her  mother,  and  entitled
"Souvenirs  of  Travel  "  (Mobile,  1858;  2d  ed.,  New
York,  1866).  She  also  wrote  "  Souvenirs  of  Dis-
tinguished People  "  and  "  Souvenirs  of  the  War,"
which  were  never  published.

LEVIN,  Lewis  C,  politician,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  10  Nov.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14
March,  1860.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  successively  in  Maryland,  Louisi-
ana, Kentucky,  and  Pennsylvania,  finally  settling
in  Philadelphia.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
native  American,  and  twice  re-elected,  serving  from
1  Dec,  1845,  till  3  March,  1851.  He  is  said  to  have
founded  the  Native  American  party,  had  much  in-
fluence in  its  conventions,  and  was  conspicuous  as
a  platform  speaker  and  writer  for  the  public  press.

LEVINGS,  Noah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cheshire
county,  N.  H.,  29  Sept.,  1796  :  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  9  Jan.,  1849.  He  was  early  apprenticed  to  a
blacksmith  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  to  which  place  his  parents
had  removed,  but  was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher
in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1818,  and
subsequently  stationed  among  other  places  in  New-
York  city,  Brooklyn,  Troy,  and  Albany,  N.  Y.,
and  New  Haven,  Conn.  In  1844  he  was  elected
financial  secretary  of  the  American  Bible  society.
During  his  eighteen  pastoral  appointments,  Dr.
Levings  is  said  to  have  preached  nearly  4,000  ser-
mons, delivered  sixty-five  addresses  and  orations,
and  to  have  travelled  36,500  miles.  He  also  de-
livered 275  addresses  for  the  American  Bible  so-
ciety. He  had  supplied  the  want  of  early  edu-
cation by  severe  private  study.  As  a  platform
speaker  it  was  supposed  that  he  had  no  superior  in
his  denomination.

LEVIS,  Francois  Gaston,  Due  de,  French  sol-
dier, b.  at  the  Chateau  d'Aniac,  Languedoc,  23
Aug.,  1720;  d.  in  Languedoc,  France,  in  1787.  He
entered  the  French  army  in  1735,  and  was  second
in  command  under  Gen.  Montcalm  at  the  capture
of  Quebec  by  the  British.  He  led  the  right  divis-
ion of  the  French  army  at  the  battle  of  Carillon,
and  was  also  at  Montmorency,  where  the  British
were  repelled  in  their  endeavors  to  gain  the  for-
tified camp  that  covered  Quebec.  At  the  first
battle  of  Quebec,  which  resulted  in  the  death  of
Montcalm  and  the  loss  of  that  city,  Levis  was  in
Montreal.  He  succeeded  his  superior  in  the  com-
mand of  the  French  forces,  and  in  the  engagement
near  St.  Foy  he  gained  a  victory  over  the  British
under  Murray.  After  this  action  he  remained  in
the  vicinity  of  Quebec  until  spring,  when  the  ar-
rival of  British  re-enforcements  caused  him  to  re-
treat to  Montreal.  The  capitulation  by  Yaudreuil
caused  his  return  to  France,  where  he  was  soon  ac-
tively engaged  in  the  army,  being  promoted  to
lieutenant-general.  He  was  present  at  the  battle
of  Johannisburg,  where  the  French,  under  Conde,
gained  a  victory  over  the  army  of  Prince  Ferdi-
nand. In  1783  he  was  created  a  French  marshal.
and  in  1784  a  duke  and  a  peer  of  France.

LEVY,  Uriah  Phillips,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  about  1795;  d.  in  New  York  city.
22  March,  1862.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in
1812,  and  was  an  officer  of  the  brig  "  Argus,"  which,
escaping  the  blockade,  took  out  William  H.  Craw-
ford as  minister  to  France,  and  destroyed  in  the


English  channel  twenty-one  vessels,  one  of  which
had  a  cargo  worth  $625,000.  On  the  capture  of  the
"  Argus "  he  was  made  prisoner  and  retained  for
two  years.  He  became  lieutenant  on  5  March,
1817,  commander,  9  Feb.,  1837,  and  captain,  29
March,  1844.  His  last  cruise  was  in  1858,  as  flag-
officer  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron.  He  was  ac-
tive in  the  movement  to  abolish  flogging  in  the
navy.  He  became  the  owner  of  "  Monticello,"  the
home  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  of  whom  he  was  an
ardent  admirer,  and  this  valuable  estate,  with  his
stock,  dwellings,  pictures,  etc.,  was  confiscated  dur-
ing the  civil  war  by  the  Confederates,  in  conse-
quence of  Levy's  sympathies  with  the  National
government.  He  published  a  "  Manual  of  Internal
Rules  and  Regulations  for  Men-of-War "  (3d  ed.,
New  York,  1861).

LEWIN,  Raphael  De  Cordova,  b.  in  the  West
Indies  in  1844;  d.  in  New  York  city,  26  June,
1886.  After  studying  in  London,  he  came  to  the
United  States,  and  had  charge  of  Hebrew  congre-
gations in  Shreveport,  La.,  Savannah,  Ga.,  and
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  He  published  a  monthly,  "  The
New  Era.*'  a  weekly,  "The  Jewish  Advocate,"  and
a  work  entitled  "  What  is  Judaism!"  (New  York,
1870).

LEWIS,  Alonzo,  poet,  b.  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  28
Aug.,  1794;  d.  there,  21  Jan.,  1861.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  school  and  academy  of  his  native  town,
where  he  became  a  teacher.  For  many  years  he  was
a  justice  of  the  peace,  and  also  a  civil  engineer.
He  edited  a  newspaper,  constructed  a  map  and
directory  of  the  town,  and  wrote  several  poems,
whose  subjects  were  drawn  from  ocean  scenery  and
Indian  legends.  He  was  known  as  "The  Lynn
Hard,"  and  Nathaniel  P.  Willis  said :  "  He  is  a  poet
in  all  his  lookings,  doings,  sayings,  and  dream-
ings."  He  was  the  author  of  "  Forest  Flowers  and
Sea-Shells,"  which  went  through  ten  editions  (Bos-
ton, 1831),  and  "  History  of  Lynn"  (1829;  2d  ed..
including  Nahant,  1844";  new*  ed.,  with  additions
by  James  R.  Newhall,  Boston,  1865).

LEWIS,  Andrew,  soldier,  b.  in  Donegal,  Ireland,
about  1720:  d.  in  Bedford  county,  Va.,  26  Sept.,
1781.  His  father,  John  Lewis,  of  Huguenot  descent,
killed  his  landlord  in  resisting  an  illegal  attempt
to  eject  him  from  his  possessions,  and  came  to  this
country  in  1732.  settling  in  Bellefonte,  Augusta
co.,  Va.,  of  which  he  was  the  first  white  resident.
Andrew,  with  his  brothers,  early  became  conspicu-
ous in  the  frontier  struggles,  and  volunteered  in
the  expedition  to  take  possession  of  the  Ohio  re-
gion in  1754.  He  was  a  major  in  Washington's
Virginia  regiment,  and  highly  esteemed  by  the  lat-
ter for  his  courage  and  skill.  He  was  with  Wash-
ington at  the  surrender  of  Fort  Necessity,  and,  ac-
cording to  some  authorities,  at  Braddock's  defeat
in  1755.  He  commanded  the  Sandy  creek  expedi-
tion in  1756.  and  was  made  prisoner  in  that  of
Maj.  James  Grant  to  Fort  Duquesne  in  1758,  and
taken  to  Montreal.  In  1768  he  was  a  commissioner
from  Virginia  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  Six
Nations  at  Fort  Stanwix,  N.  Y.  In  1774,  when  hos-
tilities had  begun  again  on  the  western  frontier  of
Virginia,  he  received  the  appointment  of  brigadier-
general,  and  as  commander-in-chief  at  the  battle  of
Point  Pleasant,  at  the  mouth  of  Great  Kanawha
river,  gained  a  victory  over  the  Shawnee  confed-
eracy under  the  celebrated  "  Cornstalk  "  in  what
was  probably  the  most  severe  engagement  with  the
Indians  that  had  taken  place  in  this  country  up  to
that  period.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of
burgesses  for  several  years,  and  a  delegate  to  the
Virginia  conventions  of  May  and  June,  1775.
When  Washington  was  appointed  commander-in-


702


LEWIS


LEWIS


chief  of  the  Continental  army,  he  recommended
Lewis  for  major-general,  but  the  latter  was  over-
looked, and  accepted  the  rank  of  brigadier-general
on  1  March,  1776,  which  he  resigned  on  15  April.
1777.  In  1776  the  committee  of  safety  sent  him
to  dislodge  Lord  Dunmore,  whom  he  attacked  on

9  July,  driving  him  from  Gwynn's  island.  He
resigned  his  command  on  account  of  illness,  and
died  on  the  way  to  his  home  on  Roanoke  river.  He
possessed  a  strong  physique  and  commanding  pres-
ence, and  was  extravagantly  described  as  making
the  earth  "  tremble  as  he  walked."  His  statue
occupies  one  of  the  pedestals  around  the  Washing-
ton monument  in  Richmond,  Va. — His  brother,
Thomas,  legislator,  b.  in  Donegal;  Ireland,  in  1718 ;
d.  in  1790,  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house  of
burgesses,  where  he  faithfully  supported  the  rights
of  the  colonies.  He  advocated  the  resolutions  of
Patrick  Henry  in  the  session  of  1765,  was  a  member
of  the  conventions  of  1775  and  1776,  and  also  of
the  State  convention  that  ratified  the  Federal  con-
stitution.— Another  brother,  William,  soldier,  b.  in
Ireland  in  1724 ;  d.  in  Virginia  in  1811,  was  engaged
in  the  French  and  Indian  warfare  under  his  brother
Andrew,  and  served  during  the  Revolution  with
the  rank  of  colonel. — Another  brother,  Charles,  b.
in  Virginia;  killed  at  the  battle  of  Point  Pleasant,

10  Oct.,  1774,  also  served  under  his  brother  An-
drew, was  a  leader  in  the  conflicts  on  the  western
frontier  of  the  state,  and  became  a  colonel  in  the
army. — Charles's  nephew,  Joshua,  jurist,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1774;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  5  June,
1833,  emigrated  to  Kentucky  in  early  manhood,
and  settled  in  Lexington,  where  he  was  the  politi-
cal adviser  of  Henry  Clay.  He  was  appointed  by
President  Jefferson  in  1803  one  of  the  three  com-
missioners to  take  possession  of  the  newly  pur-
chased province  of  Louisiana,  and  was  subsequent-
ly judge  of  the  state  supreme  court. — Joshua's  son,
John  Lawson,  soldier,  b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  26
March,  1800;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  15  May,
1886,  removed  to  New  Orleans  in  boyhood,  and
was  educated  in  that  city  and  at  Litchfield,  Conn.
He  served  as  courier  to  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  at
the  battle  of  New  Orleans,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1821,  became  inspector-general  and  major-
general  of  the  first  division  of  Louisiana  state
troops  in  1842,  was  sheriff  in  1850,  and  mayor  in
1855.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  major-general
of  state  militia  in  the  Confederate  service,  was  se-
verely wounded  at  Mansfield,  and  served  through-
out the  campaign  that  ended  in  the  retirement  of
Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  from  the  Red  river.  After
the  war  he  held  several  public  posts  in  New  Or-
leans, including  that  of  jury-commissioner.

LEWIS,  Dio,  physician,  b.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,
3  March,  1823;  d.  in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  21  May,
1886.  He  studied  at  the  Harvard  medical  school,
and,  adopting  homoeopathy,  practised  it  for  several
years  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  where  he  also  edited  and
published  a  medical  magazine  in  which  he  depre-
cated the.  use  of  drugs  and  advocated  physical
exercise  as  a  part  of  public  education.  From  1852
till  1863  he  was  engaged  in  lecturing  on  hygiene
and  physiology,  and  at  the  latter  date  he  settled  in
Boston  and  founded  the  Boston  normal  physical
training-school,  at  which,  in  seven  years,  five  hun-
dred pupils  were  graduated.  His  influence  had
much  to  do  with  the  establishment  of  the  present
system  of  physical  culture  in  most  of  the  institu-
tions of  learning  in  the  United  States.  In  1864  he
established  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  a  school  for  young
women  which  was  based  on  hygienic  principles,
but  in  September,  1868,  the  buildings  were  burned,
and  the  next  year  the  school  was  given  up. He


then  resumed  lecturing,  principally  on  hygiene  and
temperance,  and  originated  the  women's  temper-
ance crusade  in  Ohio.  He  edited  "  To-day,"  "  Dio
Lewis's  Monthly,"  "  Dio  Lewis  Nuggets,"  and  the
"Dio  Lewis  Treasury,"  the  latter  being  put  to

Eress  immediately  before  his  death.  He  published,
esides  numerous  pamphlets  and  papers  in  maga-
zines,'*  New  Gymnastics  "  (Boston,  1862);  "Weak
Lungs,  and  how  to  make  them  Strong "  (1863) ;
"  Talks  about  People's  Stomachs"  (1870);  "Our
Girls"  (New  York,  1871);  "Chats  with  Young
Women  "  (1871) ;  "Chastity"  (1872);  "  Gypsies  ?r
(1881) ; and  "  In  a  Nutshell "  (1883).

LEWIS,  Dixon  Hall,  senator,  b.  in  Hancock
county,  Ga.,  10  Aug.,  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
25  Oct.,  1848.  He  was  educated  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina,  studied  law,  and  removed  to  Ala-
bama, where  he  practised  his  profession.  After
serving  two  terms  in  the  legislature  he  was  elected
in  1828  to  congress  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,  and
held  his  seat  till  his  appointment  by  Gov.  Benjamin
Fitzpatrick  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1840,  to  fill  the
unexpired  term  of  William  R.  King.  He  was  re-
elected in  1846,  and  served  until  his  death.  Mr.
Lewis  was  a  forcible  speaker  and  a  sound  lawyer.
His  politics  were  of  the  extreme  state-rights  school,
and  he  advocated  nullification  and  secession.  His
stature  was  enormous  and  his  weight  430  pounds.
Furniture  was  made  for  his  special  use,  and  he  was
compelled  to  engage  two  seats  in  railway  and  other
public  conveyances.  On  one  occasion  a  steamer  on
which  he  was  a  passenger  was  wrecked,  but.  fear-
ing to  imperil  the  others,  he  refused  to  enter  the
boat  till  all  the  passengers  were  saved,  and  for  a
time  was  in  imminent  danger.

LEWIS,  Edmonia,  sculptor,  b.  near  Albany,
N.  Y.,  4  July,  1845.  Her  father  was  a  negro  and
her  mother  a  Chippewa  Indian.  She  was  left  an
orphan  at  the  age  of  three,  and.  after  living  for
some  time  with  the  Indians,  was  sent  by  her  brother
to  school,  where  she  obtained  a  partial  education.
She  early  began  to  model  in  clay,  and  attracted
attention  by  her  portrait  bust  of  Robert  G.  Shaw,
colonel  of  the  first  negro  regiment  in  the  National
service,  which  was  exhibited  in  Boston.  In  1865
she  went  to  Rome,  where  she  studied,  and  has
since  resided.  Her  works,  which  show  consider-
able ideality  and  talent,  have  found  their  chief
patronage  abroad.  Among  them  are  "  The  Freed-
woman  "  (1867) ;  "  Death  of  Cleopatra,"  a  vividly
realistic  work,  sent  to  the  Centennial  exhibition
of  1876 ;  "  The  Old  Arrow-Maker  and  his  Daugh-
ter," "  Hagar,"  "  Rebecca  at  the  Well,"  and  por-
trait busts  of  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  Charles  Sum-
ner, John  Brown,  and  Abraham  Lincoln.  The  last-
mentioned  work  is  in  the  San  Jose  library,  Cal.

LEWIS,  Edmund  Darch,  artist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  17  Oct.,  1837.  His  parents  took  him
from  school  when  he  was  fifteen  years  old  and
placed  him  under  Paul  Weber,  with  whom  he
studied  for  five  years.  Up  to  1876  he  worked
principally  at  landscape-painting,  but  since  then
has  devoted  himself  to  marine  views.  Mr.  Lewis's
collection  of  paintings,  bric-a-brac,  antique  furni-
ture, and  curios  is  larger  and  more  valuable  than
that  owned  by  any  other  artist  in  this  country,  and
possibly  in  the  world.  Among  his  works  are
"  Queen  of  the  Antilles,"  "  Valley  of  the  Umri,"
"  Autumn  on  the  Susquehanna,"  "  Middav  on  Lake
George,"  "  Fairmount  Park,"  "  Bass  Rocks  after  a
Storm,"  "Indian  Rock  of  an  Afternoon,"  and
"  The  Casino  at  Narragansett  Pier."

LEWIS,  Elisha  Joseph,  physician,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  in  1820.  He  studied  at  Princeton  for
two  years,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Uni-


LEWIS


versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1840,  and  also  studied
in  Paris. On  his  return  he  settled  in  Philadel-

Ehia.  He  has  contributed  largely  to  sporting
terature,  edited  with  additions  •■  Youatt  on  Dogs  "
(Philadelphia,  1847);  and  is  the  author  of  "Hints
to  Sportsmen  "  (1851 ;  enlarged  ed.,  entitled  "  The
American  Sportsman,"  1855 ;  3d  ed.,  1857).

LEWIS,  Ellis,  jurist,  b.  in  Lewisberrv,  Pa..  16
May,  1798 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  19  March,  1871.  His
ancestor,  Ellis,  came  to  this  country  from  Wales
in  1708  and  settled  in  Haverford,  Pa.,  and  his
father,  Eli  Lewis,  bought  large  tracts  of  land  in
York  county,  and  founded  the  town  of  Lewisberry.
The  son's  inheritance  was  dissipated  through  mis-
management during  a  long  minority,  and  he  was
thrown  on  his  own  resources.  He  became  a  print-
er, and  followed  the  business  while  studying  law.
At  the  age  of  twenty-four  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  soon  rose  in  his  profession,  in  1824  he
was  appointed  deputy  attorney-general  of  the  state,
and  in  1832  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature.
He  was  active  in  advancing  measures  for  the  in-
ternal improvement  of  the  state,  and  framed  a  bill
relating  to  imprisonment  for  debt  which  became  a
law,  and  was  the  first  step  toward  the  abolition  of
the  debtor's  prison.  In  1833  he  was  appointed
attorney-general,  and  in  October  of  the  same  year
president  judge  of  the  8th  judicial  district.  In
January,  1843,  he  was  made  president  judge  of  the
2d  district,  in  1851  he  was  elected  a  justice  of  the
state  supreme  court,  and  in  1854-'7  was  chief  jus-
tice. He  was  unanimously  renominated  by  the
Democratic  state  convention,  but  declined  and  re-
tired to  private  life.  Judge  Lewis  was  one  of  the
commissioners  to  revise  the  criminal  code  of  the
state.  His  acquaintance  with  medical  jurisprudence
gained  him  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  from  the
Philadelphia  college  of  medicine,  and  he  also  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Jefferson  college
and  from  Transylvania  university.  His  decisions
and  opinions  are  cited  with  approval  by  the  most
eminent  authorities  on  jurisprudence.  He  pub-
lished "Abridgment  of  the  Criminal  Law  of  the
United  States"  (Philadelphia,  1848).

LEWIS,  Enoch,  mathematician,  b.  in  Radnor,
Delaware  co..  Pa.,  29  Jan.,  1776 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia.
14  June,  1856.  He  belonged  to  the  Society  of
Friends.  He  early  exhibited  a  talent  for  mathe-
matics, at  the  age  of  fourteen  was  usher  in  a  coun-
try school,  and  at  fifteen  became  principal.  In  the
autumn  of  1792  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  stud-
ied mathematics,  teaching  half  of  each  day  to  earn
his  support,  and  in  1795  was  engaged  as  a  surveyor
in  laying  out  towns  in  western  Pennsylvania.  He
was  in  charge  of  the  mathematical  department  in
the  Friends'  academy  in  Philadelphia,  in  1796-'9,
subsequently  was  mathematical  tutor  at  the  West-
town,  Pa.,  school,  and  in  1808  opened  a  private
school  for  mathematical  students,  which  he  suc-
cessfully taught  for  several  years.  He  edited  sev-
eral mathematical  works,  with  notes,  and  about
1819  published  a  treatise  on  arithmetic  that  was
followed  by  one  on  algebra,  and  by  a  work  on  plane
and  spherical  trigonometry.  In  1827  he  became
editor  of  a  monthly  called  "  The  African  Observer."
which  continued  only  one  year,  and  from  1847  till
his  death  he  was  in  charge  of  "  The  Friends'  Re-
view." His  publications  include  a  "  Life  of  Penn  "
in  the  "Friends'  Library,"  treatises  on  "Oaths"
and  on  "Baptism,"  and  a  "Vindication  of  the
Society  of  Friends,"  in  answer  to  Dr.  Samuel  H.
Cox's  "  Quakerism  not  Christianity." — His  grand-
son, Charlton  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  West  Chester,
Pa.,  25  Feb.,  1834.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1853.
He  was  professor  of  mathematics,  and  later  of


LEWIS


703


Greek,  in  Troy  university  in  1859-'62,  deputy  com-
missioner of  internal  revenue  in  Washington,  D.C.,
in  1863-'4,  managing  editor  of  the  New  York
"  Evening  Post "  in  1870-'l,  and  secretary  of  the
chamber  of  life  insurance  in  1871-4.  He  had
studied  for  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  church,
but  abandoned  it  for  law,  and  now  (1887)  practises
his  profession  in  New  York  city.  He  has  been  for
ten  years  chairman  of  the  Prison  association  of
New  York,  and  has  visited  in  its  interest  many
European  prisons,  his  observations  on  which  have
been  printed  by  the  association.  He  has  published
Bengel's  "  Gnomon  of  the  New  Testament,"  edited
and  translated  with  Rev.  Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.  D.
(Philadelphia,  1860) ;  "  A  Historv  of  the  German
People"  (New  York.  1870);  "Harper's  Latin  Dic-
tionary," with  Prof.  Charles  Short  (1881) ;  and  has
in  preparation  "A  School  Latin  Dictionary."

LEWIS,  Estelle  Anna  Blanche  Robinson,
author,  b.  near  Baltimore.  Md..  in  April,  1824;  d.
in  London,  England,  24  Nov.,  1880.  She  was  the
daughter  of  John  Robinson,  a  wealthy  planter  of
Anglo-Spanish  birth,  and  inherited  his  poetical
and  melancholy  temperament.  While  a  school-girl,
she  translated  the  JSneid  into  English  verse,  com-
posed a  ballad  called  "  The  Forsaken,"  which  Edgar
A.  Poe  praised
extravagantly,
and  published
"  Records  of
the  Heart,"
which  contains
some  of  her
best  minor
verses  (New
York,  1844).
She  married
Sidney  I).  Lew-
is, of  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  in  1841,
and  afterward
resided  much
abroad,  princi-
pally in  Eng-
land. While
in  Italy,  in
1863.  she  wrote
her  tragedy  of

zuma,"  which  was  published  on  her  return  to  the
United  States  the  next  year  (New  York.  1864).  The
success  of  this  work  encouraged  her  to  write  "  Sap-
pho of  Lesbos,"  a  tragedy,  her  best  dramatic  work
(London,  1868).  This  reached  a  seventh  edition,
and  was  translated  into  modern  Greek  and  played
at  Athens.  She  returned  to  England  in  18(55.  and
her  last  work  was  a  series  of  sonnets  in  defence  of
Edgar  A.  Poe.  Lamartine  called  her  the  "Female
Petrarch,"  and  Poe  "the  rival  of  Sappho."  Her
other  works  are  "The  Child  of  the  Sea  and  other
Poems"  (New  York,  1848);  "The  Myths  of  the
Minstrel"  (1852):  "Poems"  (London,"  1866) ;  and
"  The  King's  Stratagem,"  a  tragedy  (1869).

LEWIS,  Fielding,  patriot,  b.  in  Spottsvlvania
county.  Va.,  in  1726 ;  d.  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in
December,  1781.  He  was  the  proprietor  of  half
the  town  of  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  of  which  he  was
the  first  mayor,  and  of  much  of  the  adjoining  ter-
ritory, and  during  the  Revolution  he  was  an  ardent
patriot,  superintended  a  large  manufactory  of  arms
in  that  neighborhood ;  the  site  of  this  establishment
is  still  known  as  "  Gunny  Green."  He  was  a  magis-
trate and  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legislature
for  many  years.  He  married  Elizabeth,  sister  of
George  Washington,  and  built  for  her  a  mansion
that  is  still  standing,  called  Kenmore  House,  which


Helemah,  or  the  Fall  of  Monte-


704


LEWIS


LEWIS


was  handsomely  constructed  and  ornamented  with
carvings  that  were  brought  from  England  for  the

fmrpose.  His  wife  was  majestic  in  person  and
ovely  in  mental  and  moral  attributes.  Later  in
life  she  so  much  resembled  her  brother  George
that,  by  putting  on  his  long  military  coat  and  his
hat,  she  could  easily  have  been  mistaken  for  the
general.  Mary,  the  mother  of  Washington,  died
on  Mr.  Lewis's  farm  and  is  buried  there.  Of  their
sons,  George  was  a  captain  in  Washington's  life-
guard, Robert  one  of  his  private  secretaries,  and
Andrew  was  aide  to  Gen.  Daniel  Morgan  in  sup-
pressing the  whiskey  insurrection  in  Pennsylvania.
Another  son,  Lawrence,  was  Washington's  favor-
ite nephew.  His  wife,  Eleanor  Parke  Custis,
b.  at  Abingdon,  Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  in  March,  1779 ;
d.  at  Audley,  Clarke  co.,  Va.,  15  July,  1852,  was  the
daughter  of  John  Parke  Custis,  the  son  of  Martha
Washington.  At  the  death  of  her  father,  in  1781,
she,  with  her  brother  George,  was  adopted  by  Gen.
Washington,  and  lived  at  Mount  Vernon.  Eleanor
was  regarded  as  the  most  brilliant  and  beautiful
young  woman  of  her  day,  the  pride  of  her  grand-
mother, and  the  favorite  of  Washington,  who  was
the  playmate  of  her  childhood  and  the  confidant  of
her  girlhood.  However  abstracted,  she  could  al-
ways command  his  attention,  and  he  would  put
aside  the  most  important  matter  to  attend  to  her
demands.  She  was  accomplished  in  drawing,  and
a  good  musician.  Washington  presented  her  with
a  harpsichord  at  the  cost  of  a  thousand  dollars.
Irving  relates  an  anecdote  that  illustrates  their
relations:  "She  was  romantic,  and  fond  of  wan-
dering in  the  moonlight  alone  in  the  woods.  Mrs.
Washington  thought  this  unsafe,  and  forced  from
her  a  promise  that  she  would  not  visit  the  woods
again  unaccompanied,  but  she  was  brought  one
evening  into  the  drawing-room  where  her  grand-
mother, seated  in  her  arm-chair,  began  in  the
presence  of  the  general  a  severe  reproof.  Poor
Nellie  was  reminded  of  her  promise,  and  taxed
with  her  delinquency.  She  admitted  her  fault  and
essayed  no  excuse,  moving  to  retire  from  the  room.
She  was  just  closing  the  door  when  she  overheard
Washington  attempting  in  a  low  voice  to  intercede
in  her  behalf.  '  My  dear,'  he  observed,  '  I  would
say  no  more — perhaps  she  was  not  alone.'  His
intercession  stopped  Miss  Nellie  in  her  retreat.
She  reopened  the  door  and  advanced  up  to  the
general  with  a  firm
step.  '  Sir,'  said  she,
'you  brought  me  up
to  speak  the  truth,
and,  when  I  told
grandmamma  I  was
alone,  I  hope  you  be-
lieve I  was  alone.'
Washington  made
one  of  his  most  mag-
nanimous bows.  '  My
child,'  he  replied,  '  I
beg  your  pardon.'  "
In  February,  1799,
she  married  his  neph-
ew, Lawrence  Lewis,
the  son  of  his  sister
Elizabeth.  Young
Lewis,  after  Wash-
ington's retirement
from  public  life,  had
resided  at  Mount  Ver-
non, and  after  their
marriage  they  continued  there  till  the  death  of
Mrs.  Washington  in  May,  1802.  Her  portrait  is
from  the  picture  by  Gilbert  Stuart. — Her  grandson,


tyfran/


Edward  Parke  Custis.  diplomatist,  b.  in  Audley,
Clarke  co.,  Va.,  7  Feb.,  1837,  was  educated  at  t lie
University  of  Virginia,  and  studied  law,  but  subse-
quently engaged  in  planting.  He  served  through^
out  the  civil  war  in  the  Confederate  army,  rising
to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  for  fifteen  months  was
a  prisoner  of  war.  He  settled  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,
in  1875,  served  in  the  legislature  in  1877,  was  a
delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  convention  in
1880,  and  in  1885  was  appointed  by  President
Cleveland  U.  S.  minister  to  Portugal.

LEWIS,  Francis,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Llandaff,  Wales,  in  March,
1713 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30  Dec,  1802.  He  was
early  left  as  an  orphan  to  the  care  of  his  uncle,  the
dean  of  St.  Paul's,  educated  at  Westminster  school,
and  entered  com-
mercial life  in
London.  On

coming  of  age,
he  sold  his  patri-
mony, invested
in  merchandise,
and  embarked
for  this  country,
where  he  estab-
lished mercantile
houses  in  New
York  and  Phila-
delphia. Lewis
made  many  trad-
ing voyages  with
great  success  to
various  parts  of
Europe,  through
Russia  as  far
north  as  Arch-
angel, and  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  and  was  twice  wrecked  on  the
shores  of  Ireland.  In  one  of  his  ventures  on  the
African  coast,  two  negro  boys  and  a  girl  were
rescued  from  an  island,  where  they  had  been  aban-
doned by  kidnappers,  and  restored  to  their  friends,
who  rewarded  the  deliverer  with  a  valuable  amount
of  ivory  and  gold-dust.  Lewis  endeavored  to  estab-
lish a  regular  trade  to  the  mouths  of  Zambesi  river,
but  was  prevented  by  the  jealousy  of  the  Dutch.
In  1752  Lewis  was  at  Oswego,  and  served  as  volun-
teer aide  to  Gen.  Hugh  Mercer.  When  the  fort
was  assaulted  by  the  French  and  Indians,  Lewis
was  given  as  prisoner  of  war  to  the  Indians,  con-
ducted to  Montreal,  and  sent  to  France,  but  was
afterward  exchanged  in  a  cartel  and  returned  to
this  country.  The  British  government  gave  him
5,000  acres  of  land  for  his  services.  In  1765  he
moved  his  family  from  New  York  city  to  White-
stone,  L.  I.,  and  gave  himself  entirely  to  public
affairs.  His  financial  experience  and  business  tal-
ent made  him  a  most  useful  member  of  the  com-
mittees on  which  he  served,  and  the  wealth  that
he  had  acquired  was  freely  expended  in  the  service
of  his  country.  His  house  at  Whitestone  was
burned  by  the  "British,  and  Mrs.  Lewis  was  impris-
oned in  the  city ;  but  her  situation  was  brought  be-
fore congress,  and  her  exchange  was  finally  effected
by  an  order  from  Gen.  Washington.  Lewis  was
one  of  the  first  to  join  the  Sons  of  Liberty.  He
was  a  member  of  the  New  York  committee  in  the
1st  Colonial  congress,  which  met  in  New  York  city
in  1765,  was  elected  a  member  of  the  1st  Continen-
tal congress  in  1775,  was  one  of  the  New  York
committee  of  100,  and  on  several  army  and  finance
committees.  In  the  following  year  he  signed  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  in  1777  he  was  re-
elected to  congress,  and  in  1779  appointed  commis-


LEWIS


LEWIS


705


sioner  of  the  board  of  admiralty,  and  elected  a  ves-
tryman of  Trinity  church.  His  old  age  was  happy
and  cheerful ;  literature  was  an  unfailing  resource,
and  the  society  of  his  grandchildren  a  great  amuse-
ment.— His  second  son,  Morgan,  statesman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  16  Oct.,  1754;  d.  there,  7  April,
1844,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1773,  and
studied  law.  In  1774  he  joined  the  army  before
Boston  as  a  volunteer,  was  elected  captain  of  a
New  York  militia  regiment,  and  received  a  com-
mission as  major  when  this  regiment  was  taken  into
the  Continental  service  as  the  2d  New  York.  In
1776  Maj.  Lewis  was  aide  to  Gen.  Horatio  Gates,
with  rank  of  colonel  and  quartermaster-general  of
the  northern  army,  serving  throughout  the  cam-

Faign  that  terminated  in  the  battle  of  Saratoga.
n  1778  Col.  Lewis  commanded  at  the  battle  of
Stone  Arabia  and  at  Crown  Point.  In  1783  he  re-
sumed his  legal  studies,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
New  York,  and  elected  a  member  of  the  assembly,
first  from  New  York  city  and  afterward  from
Dutchess  county.  He  became  a  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas,  in  1791  attorney-general  of  the
state,  in  1792  chief  justice  of  its  supreme  court,  and
in  1804  governor  of  the  state.  While  governor  he
urged  upon  the  legislature  the  necessity  of  national
education,  and  under  his  administration  a  perma-
nent fund  for  common  schools  was  established,  and
the  militia  system  was  enlarged  and  rendered  more
efficient.  From  1807  till  1812  Gov.  Lewis  lived  at
his  estate  at  Staatsburg,  Dutchess  county,  and  paid
much  attention  to  agriculture.  In  1812  Presi-
dent Madison  offered  him  the  post  of  secretary  of
war,  which  he  declined,  and  accepted  the  appoint-
ment of  quartermaster-general  of  the  armies  of  the
United  States.  In  1813  Gen.  Lewis  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  major-general.  He  served  on  the
Niagara  frontier,  captured  Fort  George,  and  com-
manded at  Sackett's  Harbor  and  French  Creek.  At
the  close  of  the  war  he  advanced  the  funds  that
were  necessary  for  the  discharge  of  American  pris-
oners in  Canada,  He  remitted  all  arrears  of  rents
that  were  due  from  those  of  his  own  tenants  in
Delaware  county  that  had  either  gone  or  sent  a  son
to  the  war,  and  by  his  good  management  avoided
on  his  own  estatesall  anti-rent  difficulties.  Early
in  life  Gen.  Lewis  became  a  Freemason,  and  he  was
elected  grand  master  of  the  order  in  1831.  He  was
president  of  the  Historical  society  and  of  the  Order
of  the  Cincinnati.  At  the  Centennial  celebration
of  the  birth  of  Gen.  Washington.  Gen.  Lewis,  who
was  then  in  his  seventy-ninth  year,  delivered  an
oration  that  gave  in  a  graphic  manner  an  account
of  Washington's  military  career.  Gen.  Lewis  7nar-
ried  Gertrude,  daughter"  of  Judge  Robert  R.  Liv-
ingston, and  left  one  daughter,  Margaret.  See
"  Biographies  of  Francis  and  Morgan  Lewis,"  by
Julia  Delafield  (New  York.  1877).

LEWIS,  Henry  Carvill,  geologist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  16  Nov.,  1853  ;  d.  in  Manchester.  Eng.,
21  July,  1888.  He  was  graduated  in  1873,  and  in
1879  joined  the  state  geological  survey  as  a  volun-
teer, and  first  investigated  the  surface  geology  of
southern  Pennsylvania,  after  which  he  studied  the
glacial  phenomena  of  the  northern  part  of  the
state,  and  traced  the  great  terminal  moraine  from
New  Jersey  to  the  Ohio  frontier.  He  furnished
numerous  papers  on  the  geology  and  mineralogy
of  Pennsylvania  to  the  "Proceedings  of  the  Phila-
delphia Academy  of  Natural  Sciences."  He  was
elected  professor' of  mineralogy  in  the  Academy  of
natural  sciences  in  1880,  and  to  the  chair  of  geolo-
gy in  Haverford  college  in  1883.  These  places  he
still  held,  although  after  1885  he  was  engaged  in
geological  studies  in  Europe,  working  at  micro-
vol.  in. — 45


scopic  petrology  in  the  University  of  Heidelberg.
He  completed  a  map  of  the  separate  ancient  gla-
ciers and  ice-sheets  of  England,  Wales,  and  Ire-
land. Prof.  Lewis  was  a  member  of  scientific
societies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and
contributed  to  their  proceedings  and  to  other  sci-
entific periodicals,  including  the  "American  Natu-
ralist," of  which  for  some  time  he  was  editor  of  the
mineralogical  department.

LEWIS,  Ida,  heroine,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in
1841.  Her  father  was  the  keeper  of  the  Lime
liock  light-house  in  Newport  harbor,  and  she  early
became  skilled  in  swimming  and  rowing.  When
eighteen  years  of  age  she  rescued  four  young  men
that  were  upset  in  a  boat  in  the  harbor,  and
brought  them  safely  ashore  in  her  skiff.  A  little
later  three  drunken  sailors  stove  a  hole  in  their
boat;  two  swam  ashore,  and  Miss  Lewis  saved  the
third.  In  1867  she  rescued  three  men.  In  1868
she  saved  a  small  boy  who  had  clung  from  the
mast  of  a  sail-boat  from  midnight  till  morning,
and  the  next  year,  assisted  by  her  brother  Hosea,
she  rescued  two  sailors  who  had  capsized  in  a  sail-
boat half  a  mile  from  the  light.  The  citizens  of
Newport,  R.  I.,  presented  her  with  a  boat  as  a  token
of  their  admiration  of  her  bravery.  In  1870  she
married  William  II.  Wilson,  of  Black  Rock,  Conn.
LEWIS,  John  Francis,  senator,  b.  near  Port
Republic,  Ya.,  1  March,  1818. He  was  engaged  in

j  planting  for  many  years,  was  a  delegate  to  the
Yirginia  convention  of  1861,  and  the  only  mem-

|  ber  from  east  of  the  Alleghanies  that  refused  to
sign  the  ordinance  of  secession.  He  was  an  unsuc-
cessful Union  candidate  for  congress  in  1865,  and
in  1869  was  nominated  for  lieutenant-governor  by

j  the  True  Republican  party  on  the  ticket  with  Gil-

I  bert  0.  Walker,  and  elected by  2(>.<MK)  majority.

|  The  same  year  he  was  elected  to  the  United  States
senate  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  1870  till  1875.
LEWIS,  John  Travers,  Canadian  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  Garrycloyne  castle.  County  Cork,  Ire-
land. 20  June.  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity
college.  Dublin,
ethics  and  logic,
and  gold  medal-

1  ist.  In  July,  1848,
he  was  made  dea-
con, and  appoint-
ed curate  of  New-
town Butler,

|  County Ferma-

;  nagh.  He  came  to
Canada  in  184!),
and  was  soon  af-
terward appoint-
ed missionary  at
West  Hawkes-
bury.  In  1854
he  became  rec-
tor of  St.  Peter's
church,  Brock-
ville.  where  he
remained  till  his

election,  13  July.  1861.  as  the  first  bishop  of  the
new  see  of  Ontario.  His  appointment  was  subse-
quently rat  died  by  royal  letters-patent,  this  being
the  last  occasion  on  which  such  were  issued.  He
was  consecrated  at  St.  George's  cathedral.  Kinp-
ton,  25  March,  and  remained  in  that  city,  which
was  the  seat  of  the  diocese  till  1871.  when  it  was  re-
moved to  Ottawa.  Bishop  Lewis  was  the  original
author  and  promoter  of  the  Lambeth  conferences.
In  November.  1*85,  by  order  of  the  governor-gen-
eral in  council,  the  bronze  medal  struck  in  com-
memoration of  confederation  in  1867  was  presented


1847  as senior moderator  in


706


LEWIS


LEWIS


to  Bishop  Lewis  as  an  expression  of  appreciation
of  his  services  to  the  cause  of  literature  and  sci-
ence. He  is  the  author  of  many  essays,  sermons,
and  reviews.

LEWIS,  Lawrence,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  20  June,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1876,  read  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1879.  He  has
contributed  articles  to  various  periodicals,  and  has
been  one  of  the  editors  of  "  Weekly  Notes  of  Cases  "
(Philadelphia)  since  1877,  and  sole  editor  of
"  American  and  English  Corporation  Cases "  and
"American  and  English  Railroad  Cases"  (New
York,  1880-6).  He  is  the  author  of  the  '•  Courts  of
Pennsylvania  in  the  17th  Century "  (Philadelphia,
1881) ;  "  History  of  the  Bank  of  North  America  "
(1882);  "Memoir  of  Edward  Shippen,  Chief  Jus-
tice of  Pennsylvania"  (1883).

LEWIS,  Mathew  Gregory,  author,  b.  in  Lon-
don, 9  July,  1775;  d.  at  sea,  14  May,  1818.  He
was  educated  at  Christ  church  college,  Oxford,  and
lived  for  some  time  in  Germany.  By  the  death  of
his  father  he  inherited  a  large  property  and  planta-
tions in  Jamaica,  which,  says  Sir  Walter  Scott,
"  he  twice  visited  in  the  cause  of  humanity  in  or-
der to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  his  slaves."  After
the  appearance  of  his  first  novel  he  was  popularly
known  as  "  Monk  Lewis."  Some  of  his  works  were
of  so  profligate  a  character  that  he  was  threatened
with  prosecution  by  the  government.  They  include
"  The  Monk  "  (London,  1795) ;  "  Tales  of  Wonder,"
with  Sir  Walter  Scott  (1801) ;  "  The  Bravo  of  Ven-
ice" (1804);  "Timour  the  Tartar"  (1812);  many
foems  and  dramas,  and  "  The  Journal  of  a  West
ndian  Proprietor,"  published  after  his  death
(1834),  of  which  Coleridge  says :  "  It  is  delightful,
and  almost  the  only  unaffected  book  of  travels  I
have  read  of  late  years."

LEWIS,  Meriwether,  explorer,  b.  near  Char-
lottesville, Va.,  18  Aug.,  1774;  d.  near  Nashville,
Tenn.,  8  Oct.,  1809.  He  was  a  great-nephew  of
Fielding  Lewis,  noticed  above,  and  inherited  a  for-
tune from  his  father,  who  died  when  the  son  was  a

child.  Meriwether,
who  was  of  a  bold
and  ad  venturous  dis-
position, left  school
at  eighteen  years  of
age,  and  in  1794
volunteered  in  the
troops  that  were
called  out  to  quell
the  whiskey  insur-
rection in  western
Pennsylvania.  He
entered  the  regular
service  in  1795,  be-
came captain  in
1800,  and  in  1801-'3
was  private  secre-
tary to  President
Jefferson,  who  in
the  latter  year  rec-
ommended him  to  congress  to  command  an  ex-
ploring expedition  across  the  continent  to  the  Pa-
cific. He  set  out  in  the  summer  of  1803,  accom-
panied by  his  associate,  Capt.  William  Clark,  and
a  company  that  was  composed  of  nine  young  men
from  Kentucky,  fourteen  soldiers,  two  Canadian
boatmen,  an  interpreter,  a  hunter,  and  a  negro
servant  of  Capt.  Clark.  They  began  to  ascend
Missouri  river  in  the  spring  of  1804,  passed  a  sec-
ond winter  among  the  Mandans  in  latitude  47°  21'
N.,  and  on  7  April,  1805,  continued  to  ascend  the
Missouri  until the  middle  of July,  when they


t^-'&oe/T^-^-v-i^JCe^ c^S^n^-4*'


reached  the  great  falls.  Near  the  close  of  this
month  they  attained  the  confluence  of  three  nearly
equal  streams,  to  which  they  gave  the  names  of
Jefferson,  Madison,  and  Gallatin.  They  ascended
the  Jefferson  to  its  source,  travelled  through  the
mountains  from  August  till  22  Sept.,  when  they
entered  the  plains  of  the  western  slope,  in  October
embarked  in  canoes  on  the  Kooskoosky,  a  branch
of  the  Columbia,  and  on  15  Nov.  reached  the
mouth  of  that  river,  after  travelling  more  than
4,000  miles  from  the  confluence  of  Mississippi  and
Missouri  rivers.  They  passed  the  following  winter
on  the  south  bank  of  the  Columbia  in  an  in-
trenched camp,  in  March,  1806,  began  to  ascend
the  Columbia  on  their  homeward  journey,  and  in
May  left  their  boats  and  made  a  difficult  journey
on  horseback  across  the  mountains  to  the  Missouri,
upon  which  they  re-embarked  in  August,  reaching
St.  Louis  in  September,  after  an  absence  of  two
years  and  four  months.  Congress  made  grants  of
land  to  the  men  of  the  expedition  and  to  their
chiefs,  and  Lewis  was  made  governor  of  Missouri
territory.  He  found  the  country  torn  by  dissen-
sions, and,  although  his  impartiality  and  firmness
soon  restored  comparative  order,  he  "began  to  suffer
from  hypochondria,  to  which  he  had  been  subject
from  his  youth.  During  one  of  his  attacks  of  de-
pression he  was  called  to  Washington,  and  at  a
lodging-place  in  Tennessee  he  put  an  end  to  his
life.  Lewis  and  Clark,  a  county  of  Montana,  is
named  in  honor  of  the  explorers.  President  Jeffer-
son said  of  him  :  "  He  was  courage  undaunted,
possessing  a  firmness  of  purpose  which  nothing  but
impossibilities  could  divert  from  its  direction,  and
was  intimate  with  Indian  character,  customs,  and
principles."  A  narrative  of  the  expedition  of  Lewis
and  Clark,  from  materials  that  were  furnished  by
the  explorers,  was  prepared  by  Nicholas  Biddle  and
Paul  Allen,  with  a  memoir  of  Lewis  by  Thomas  Jef-
ferson (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1814;  new  ed.,  with
additions  by  Alexander  McVickar,  New  York,  1843).

LEWIS,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Falmouth,
Mass.,  17  March,  1799;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  28
July.  1854.  In  his  youth  he  made  several  voyages
as  cabin-boy  with  his  father,  who  was  captain  of  a
coasting  vessel.  The  family  removed  to  Ohio  in
1813,  the  father  and  his  five  sons  walking  from
Falmouth  to  Pittsburg,  Pa.  Samuel  was  succes-
sively a  farm-laborer,  mail-carrier,  and  carpenter,
and  at  tvtenty  years  of  age  obtained  a  place  in  the
clerk's  office  of  the  Hamilton  county  court.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  three  years  afterward,  and
in  1824  was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher  in  the
Methodist  church.  He  aided  efficiently  in  forming
the  Western  college  for  teachers  in  1831,  was  ac-
tive in  promoting  common-school  education  in
Ohio,  and  in  1837  he  was  elected  by  the  legislature
superintendent  of  schools.  His  measures  for  the
improvement  of  educational  systems  were  adopted.
He  was  reappointed  a  second  term,  and  became  at
the  same  time  editor  of  the  "Common  School  Di-
rector," but  the  failure  of  his  health  compelled  his
resignation  of  both  offices.  From  1841  till  his
death  he  was  the  favorite  candidate  of  the  Anti-
Slavery  party  for  the  state  senate,  for  congress,  and
for  governor.  He  was  zealous  in  the  cause  of  tem-
perance and  kindred  reforms,  and  to  his  efforts
were  due  the  founding  of  Woodward  school,  and
Hughes  high-school  in  Cincinnati.

LEWIS,  Tayler,  scholar,  b.  in  Northumber-
land, Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y.,  11  May,  1877.  His  father  was  a  Revo-
lutionary officer.  Tayler  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1820,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  at  Fort
Miller,  N.  Y. He  gave  a  large  part  of  his  time  to


^"^


/<Ce  c^ZTCj-^/


LEWIS

biblical  and  classical  studies  for  nearly  ten  years,
and  at  length  abandoned  the  practice  of  law,  and  in
1833  opened  a  classical  school  at  Waterford,  N.  Y.,
whence,  in  1835,  he  removed  to  a  school  in  Og-
densburg,  N.  Y.  He
became  professor  of
Greek  in  the  Univer-
sity of  New  York  in
1838,  and  from  1849
until  his  death  was
professor  of  Greek,
instructor  in  the  ori-
ental tongue,  and  lec-
turer on  biblical  and
oriental  literature  at
Union  college.  In
1851-'6  he  contribut-
ed manv  articles  to
the  "Editors  Table"
of  "Harper's  Maga-
zine." Union  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1844.  Prof.  Lewis
had  a  wide  acquaintance  with  the  Greek  and
Latin  classics,  Arabic  and  Syriac,  and  the  works
of  the  Hebrew  rabbis,  and  was  especially  inter-
ested in  the  system  of  Plato.  His  works,  besides
numerous  discussions  on  social  and  political  top-
ics, are  "  Defence  of  Capital  Punishment,"  with
George  B.  Cheever  (New  York,  1845);  the  Greek
text  of  the  tenth  book  of  Plato's  dialogue,  "  The
Laws,"  under  the  title  of  "  Platonic  Theology,  or
Plato  against  the  Atheists,"  with  critical  and  ex-
planatory notes  and  illustrative  dissertations  that
show  profound  learning  (1845) ;  "  The  Six  Days  of
Creation,"  his  best-known  work,  maintaining,  on
philological  grounds,  the  harmony  of  Scripture
and  geology  (1855) ;  "  The  Bible  and  Science,"  re-
plying to  criticisms  on  the  preceding  work  (1856) ;
"  The  Divine  Human  in  the  Scriptures  "  (I860) ;
*'  States  Rights,  a  Photograph  of  the  Ruins  of
Ancient  Greece "  (1864) ;  "  Heroic  Periods  in  a
Nation's  History"  (1866):  "Special  Introduction
to  Genesis,"  with' commentary  on  chapters  i.  to  xi.,
and  xxxvii.  to  1.,  inclusive,  in  "  Lange's  Commen-
tary" (1868);  "  Rhythmetical  Version  of  Eccle-
siastes"  (1870);  with  Edward  W.  Blyden  and
Timothy  D wight,  "The  People  of  Africa,  their
Character,  Condition,  and  Future  Prospects"(1871);
**  The  Light  by  which  we  see  Light,"  the  Vedder
lectures  (1875) ;  "  Memories  of  President  Nott "
(1876) ;  and  numerous  addresses  and  reviews.

LEWIS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1765;  d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  17  Jan.,  1825.  He
served  in  the  Indian  war  in  1791,  and  was  a  cap-
tain under  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair,  resigning  in
1797.  He  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  Kentucky  vol-
unteers in  the  war  of  1812,  commanded  in  the  ac-
tion with  the  British  and  Indians  at  Frenchtown,
on  the  River  Raisin,  8  Jan.,  1813,  and  served  under
Gen.  James  Winchester  at  his  defeat  there  on  the
23d  of  the  same  month,  where  he  was  captured
and  remained  a  prisoner  two  years  in  Quebec.

LEWIS,  William  Berkeley,  politician,  b.  in
Loudon  county,  Va.,  in  1784;  d.  near  Nashville,
Tenn.,  14  Nov.,  1866.  He  removed  to  Tennessee
early  in  life  and  settled  near  Nashville.  He  was
quartermaster  under  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  in  the
war  of  1812,  served  through  the  Creek  campaign,
and  formed  a  friendship  with  Jackson  (q.  v.)  that
had  much  to  do  with  bringing  the  latter  forward
as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  in  1821.  On  his
election,  Lewis  accompanied  Jackson  to  Washing-
ton, prepared  in  part  his  inaugural  address,  and
became  one  of  his  family,  holding  the  office  of
auditor  of  the  treasury. Lewis  was  conversant


LEWIS


707


with  all  the  purposes  of  the  administration,  assisted
in  establishing  the  "  Globe  "  in  1830.  and  prepared
accounts  of  the  feud  between  Jackson  and  Calhoun,
for  which,  with  Amos  Kendall,  he  was  partially  re-
sponsible, and  of  the  removal  of  the  bank  deposits.
After  leaving  Washington  in  1845  he  lived  in  re-
tirement on  his  estate  near  Nashville  until  shortly
after  the  civil  war,  when  he  served  one  term  in  the
legislature.  He  was  a  Union  man,  and  after  the
occupation  of  Nashville  by  the  National  troops  ex-
ercised a  pacific  influence  there.  See  "  Life  of  An-
drew Jackson,"  bv  James  Parton  (New  York,  1861).

LEWIS,  William  David,  translator,  b.  in
Christiana,  Del.,  22  Dec,  1792;  d.  near  Florence,
N.  J.,  1  April,  1881.  He  was  private  secretary  to
Henry  Clay  in  1814-'15,  accompanying  him  when
he  was  U.  S.  peace  commissioner  to  Great  Britain
in  the  latter  year.  Subsequently  he  resided  ten
years  in  Russia,  where  he  engaged  in  mercantile
pursuits,  and  devoted  much  study  to  the  language.
On  his  return  to  Philadelphia,  from  1849  till  1853
he  was  collector  of  the  port ;  in  1854  was  president
of  the  Catawissa  railroad,  and  treasurer  of  the
Williamsport  and  Elmira  railroad.  For  many
years  he  was  cashier  of  the  Girard  bank  of  Phila-
delphia. He  was  a  trustee  of  various  benevolent
institutions,  and  at  one  time  was  president  of  the
Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine  arts.  He  translated
and  published  the  "  Bokesarian  Fountain,"  by
Alexander  Pushkin,  and  other  poems  by  various
Russian  authors  (Philadelphia,  1841),  which  was
favorably  commented  on  by  the  Russian  press,  and
was  an  introduction  to  the  subsequent  demand  for
Russian  literature  in  America. — His  son,  William
David,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1828;  d.
there,  19  Jan.,  1872,  was  active  in  the  Philadelphia
militia  previous  to  the  civil  war,  and  at  the  first
call  for  volunteers  served  three  months  as  colonel
of  the  18th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  subsequently
becoming  colonel  of  the  110th  Pennsylvania  volun-
teers. He  participated  in  the  battle  "of  Winchester
and  others  of  that  campaign,  and  in  March,  1865,
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.

LEWIS,  Winslow,  sailor,  b.  in  Wellfleet,  Cape
Cod,  Mass.,  11  May,  1770;  d.  in  Roxbury.  Mass.,  20
May,  1850.  His  ancestors,  who  were  of  Welsh  ori-
gin, were  among  the  first  settlers  of  New  England.
Winslow  went  to  sea  in  early  youth,  subsequently
settled  in  Boston,  and  became  a  lighthouse  con-
tractor. He  built  200  government  lighthouses,
and  was  the  first  to  introduce  modern  methods  of
illumination  and  to  lay  the  foundation  for  improve-
ment in  the  structures  as  well  as  in  lantern  lamps
and  reflectors,  and  invented  the  binnacle  illumina-
tor. During  the  war  of  1812  he  was  commander
of  the  Boston  sea  fencibles,  a  body  of  sea-captains
and  mates  who  armed  and  disciplined  themselves
to  resist  invasion.  For  several  years  he  was  port-
warden  of  Boston  and  president  of  the  Marine  so-
ciety.— His  son,  Winslow,  surgeon,,  b.  in  Boston,
8  July,  1799;  d.  in  Grantville,  Mass.,  3  Aug.,  1875,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1819  and  in  the  medi-
cal department  there  in  1822.  He  continued  his
studies  in  Paris  and  London,  and  on  his  return  to
the  United  States  practised  with  success  in  Boston.
He  was  for  many  years  consulting  physician  of  the
Massachusetts  general  hospital,  served  several
terms  in  the  legislature,  was  city  physician  in  1861,
and  president  of  the  New  England  historic-genea-
logical society  from  this  year  till  1866.  He  trans-
lated from  the  French  "  Gall  on  the  Structure  and
Functions  of  the  Brain"  (Boston,  1835);  edited
Paxon's  "Anatomy"  (1837):  and  the  "Journal  of
the  Boston  Gynaecological  Society,"  one  volume  of
which  was  published  (1869).


708


LEWIS


LHERMINIER


LEWIS,  Zachariah,  scholar,  b.  in  Wilton,
Conn.,  1  Jan.,  1773 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  14  Nov.,
1840.  His  father,  Isaac,  was  a  Congregational  cler-
gyman. Zachariah  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1794,
was  tutor  there  in  1796-'9,  studied  theology  in
Philadelphia  under  Rev.  Ashbel  Green,  and  at  the
same  time  was  tutor  in  Gen.  Washington's  family.
He  was  licensed  to  preach,  but  delicate  health  pre-
vented his  accepting  a  charge,  and  in  1803  he  be-
came editor  of  the  New  York  "  Commercial  Adver-
tiser "  and  of  the  New  York  "  Spectator,"  continu-
ing in  this  employment  till  1820,  when  he  began
the  publication  of  the  "  American  Missionary  Reg-
ister." In  1814-'20  he  was  corresponding  secretary
of  the  New  York  religious  tract  society,  out  of
which  grew  some  years  afterward  the  American
tract  society.  At  the  latter  date  he  took  charge
of  the  domestic  correspondence  of  the  United  for-
eign missionary  society,  continuing  in  this  office
till  1825.  About  this  date  he  retired  from  active
pursuits  and  devoted  his  time  and  means  to  chari-
table objects.  He  published  an  oration  before  the
Connecticut  Society .  of  the  Cincinnati  in  1799 ;
"Remarks  on  a  Subterranean  Wall  in  North  Caro-
lina "  (Philadelphia,  1800);  and  the  "Annual  Re-
ports of  the  New  York  Religious  Tract  Society
from  1815  till  1820"  (New  York,  1815-'20).— His
twin-brother,  Isaac,  d.  in  New  York  city,  23  Sept.,
1854,  became  an  eminent  clergyman  of  the  Presby-
terian church,  and  was  the  author  of  numerous
popular  tracts,  sermons,  and  addresses.  Delaware
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1844.

LEYBURN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lexington,
Va.,  25  April,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at  Wash-
ington college,  Lexington,  and  at  Princeton  in
1833,  and  studied  theology  at  Union  theological
seminary,  Va.,  and  at  Columbia,  S.  C.  He  then
organized  a  Presbyterian  church  in  Gainesville,
Ala.,  and  after  remaining  there  two  years  went  to
Petersburg,  Va.,  where  he  served  nine  years,  dur-
ing which  time  a  new  church  was  erected.  He  then
removed  to  Philadelphia,  being  appointed  secretary
of  the  Presbyterian  board  of  publication,  changing
the  character  of  its  publications  and  enlarging  its
operations.  In  1847  he  became  half  owner  and
chief  editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Presbyterian."
At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he  went  to  the
south,  and  was  secretary  of  the  board  of  publica-
tion of  the  southern  Presbyterian  church.  After
the  war  he  settled  in  Baltimore,  where  he  was  pas-
tor for  twenty  years  of  an  independent  Presby-
terian church,  of  which  he  is  now  (1887)  pastor
emeritus.  He  has  travelled  widely  in  Europe  and
in  oriental  lands,  and  has  contributed  accounts  of
his  travels  to  the  "New  York  Observer"  and  to
"  The  Presbyterian."  Hampden  Sidney  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1849.  In  addition  to  numer-
ous pamphlets,  editorials,  and  reviews,  he  is  the  au-
thor of  "  The  Soldier  of  the  Cross "  (New  York,
1851 ;  Edinburgh,  1853).  He  has  just  completed
"  Hints  to  Young  Men  from  the  Parable  of  the
Prodigal  Son,"  and  has  now  (1887)  in  manuscript
"  Lectures  on  the  Journeyings  of  the  Children  of
Israel,  from  the  Land  of  Bondage  to  the  Land  of
Promise,"  illustrated  from  his  travels.

LEYDT,  Johannes,  clergyman,  b.  in  Holland
in  1718 ;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1783.  He
emigrated  to  this  country  early  in  life  with  an
elder  brother,  settling  in  Dutchess  county,  near
Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  and,  after  studying  theology,  was
licensed  in  1748,  and  he  became  pastor  of  the
united  churches  of  New  Brunswick  and  Six  Mile
Run,  N.  J.,  which  charges  he  held  until  his  death.
In  the  conflict  between  the  Coetus  and  the  Confer-
entie  he  was  actively  identified  with  the  former


party,  which  insisted  upon  the  education  of  minis-
ters in  this  country  and  upon  an  independent
church  organization  separate  from  the  Reformed
church  of  the  mother-country.  During  the  Revo-
lution he  was  a  firm  patriot,  preaching  boldly  upon
the  questions  of  the  time,  arousing  much  enthusi-
asm and  advising  the  young  men  to  join  the  army
of  freedom.  He  was  active  in  the  founding  of
Queens  (now  Rutgers)  college  in  1770,  and  was  one
of  its  trustees.  His  publications  are  "  True  Liberty
the  Way  to  Peace"  (Philadelphia,  1760)  and  "A
Defence  of  True  Liberty  the  Way  to  Peace"  (1762).
Several  pamphlets  on  the  church  question  men-
tioned above,  with  replies  by  Johannes  Ritzema,
and  a  letter  of  the  synod  of  North  Holland  in  1765
condemning  the  Coetus,  were  collected  in  a  vol-
ume, and  are  in  the  Sage  library  in  New  Bruns-
wick. They  have  been  translated  by  Rev.  Maurice
G.  Hansen,  of  Coxsackie,  and  are  now  (1887)  pre-
pared for  publication.

LEYPOLDT,  Frederick,  bibliographer,  b.  in
Stuttgart,  Germany,  17  Nov.,  1835 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  31  March,  1884.  He  had  an  early  liking  for
the  drama  and  books,  and  when  a  boy  wrote  a  play,
which  he  offered  unsuccessfully  to  German  mana-
gers. He  left  school  in  1851,  and  in  1854,  making
his  way  to  the  United  States,  entered  the  service
of  a  bookseller  in  New  York.  In  1859  he  established
himself  in  business,  opening  a  bookstore  and  read-
ing-room in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1863  he  began  to
publish,  first  translations  of  foreign  books,  and
afterward  foreign  text-books  with  English  notes.
In  January,  1866,  with  Henry  Holt,  he  established
the  firm  of  Leypoldt  and  Holt ;  but  in  1868,  though
the  firm-name  continued  much  longer,  he  deter-
mined to  devote  himself  personally  to  bibliographi-
cal work.  The  monthly  "Literary  Bulletin,"  his
first  periodical,  which  he  established  in  1868,  be-
came in  1870  the  "  Trade  Circular " ;  in  January,

1872,  it  absorbed  George  W.  Childs's  "  Publishers'
Circular,"  and  was  issued  weekly,  and  in  1873  it
became  the  "  Publishers'  Weekly."  Mr.  Leypoldt
published  an  "  American  Catalogue  "  for  1869,  and
in  1876  he  began  work  on  the  American  catalogue
proper,  which  was  completed  in  1880.  His  "  Pub-
lishers' Uniform  Trade-List  Annual "  was  begun  in

1873,  the  "  Literary  News  "  in  1875,  the  "  Library
Journal "  in  1876,  and  the  "  Index  Medicus,"  a
monthly  medical  bibliography,  in  1880.  He  was
among  the  founders  of  the  American  book-trade
union  in  1875,  and  of  the  American  library  asso-
ciation in  1876.  Under  the  anagram  of  "  F.  Pylo-
det "  he  edited  a  successful  series  of  French  text-
books, and  he  wrote  also  some  German  verse  and
some  translations  into  German.

LHERMINIER,  Felix  Louis  (lair'-meen'-yay'),
French  naturalist,  b.  in  Paris,  18  May,  1779;  d.
there  in  October,  1833.  After  studying  under  the
ablest  professors  of  chemistry  and  natural  history
in  Paris,  he  went  to  the  island  of  Guadeloupe  in
1795,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  his  favorite
sciences,  making  a  thorough  investigation  of  the
varieties  of  plants  and  of  the  mineral  and  entomo-
logical productions  of  the  country.  He  was  com-
pelled to  leave  Guadeloupe  in  consequence  of  the
troubles  that  ensued  on  the  change  of  government
in  1815,  came  to  South  Carolina,  and  afterward
went  to  the  island  of  St.  Bartholomew.  When  peace
was  restored  he  resumed  his  scientific  pursuits  in
Guadeloupe  till  1829,  when  he  returned  to  France.
His  works  are  "  Recherches  sur  l'appareil  sternal
des  oiseaux,  considere  sous  le  double  rapport  de
l'osteologie  et  la  myologie,  suivies  d'un  essai  sur  la
distribution  de  cette  classe  de  vertebres "  (Paris,
1827) ;  "  Memoire  sur  le  guacharo  de  la  caverne  de


LHERMITTE


LIEBER


709


Caripe  " ;  and  "  Recherches  anatoraiques  sur  quel-
ques  oiseaux  rares  ou  peu  connusdans  leur  organi-
sation profonde."  The  last  two  appeared  in  the
"Annates  du  museum  d'histoire  naturelle"  (Paris).

LHERMITTE,  Jean  Mart  lie  Adrien,  Baron
(lair-meet),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Coutances,
France,  29  Sept.,  1766 ;  d.  in  Plessis  Piquet,  near
Paris,  28  Aug.,  1826.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman in  1780,  and  was  engaged  in  the  war  of
American  independence.  He  became  a  lieutenant
in  1787,  served  in  Santo  Domingo  in  1790-'3,  was
made  a  commander  in  1796,  and  in  1805  appointed
to  the  command  of  a  squadron  of  eight  vessels  to
prey  on  English  commerce.

L'HOMMEDIEU,  Ezra,  lawyer,  b.  in  Strong-
hold, L.  I.,  30  Aug.,  1734 ;  d.  there,  28  Sept.,  1811.
His  ancestor,  Benjamin,  was  a  Huguenot,  of  Ro-
chelle,  France,  who  came  to  New  York  in  1687.  and
settled  in  Southold  in  1690.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1754,  studied  law.  and  practised  in  New
York  city.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Xew  York
provincial  congress  in  1775-'8,  and  assisted  in
forming  the  first  state  constitution.  Mr.  L'Hom-
medieu  was  a  member  of  the  Xew  York  assembly
in  l777-'83,  and  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Conti-
nental congress  in  1779,  1781,  1783. 1787,  and  1788.
He  was  state  senator  from  1784  till  1792.  and  from
1794  till  1809,  was  once  a  member  of  the  council
of  appointment,  and  was  regent  of  the  state  uni-
versity from  1787  until  his  death.  In  politics  he
was  a  Federalist.  Mr.  L'Hommedieu  contributed
papers  to  the  first  Xew  York  agricultural  society.

LIBRAMENTO,  Joaquim  Francisco  do  (lee-
brah-men'-to),  Brazilian  philanthropist,  b.  in  Nossa
Senhora  do  Desterro,  22  March,  1761 ;  d.  in  Mar-
seilles, France,  in  1829.  He  made  good  progress
at  school,  and  at  the  death  of  his  father  gave  for
charitable  purposes  all  the  property  that  he  in-
herited, and  entered  a  convent,  where,  instead  of
his  family  name  of  Costa,  he  took  that  of  Libra-
mento.  He  founded  an  asylum  for  the  destitute
by  asking  alms  throughout  the  province,  and  after-
ward went  to  Lisbon-,  where  Queen  Maria  granted
the  institution  an  income  of  300  millreis.  He  re-
turned in  1796,  took  charge  of  the  asylum,  and.
after  erecting  the  chapel  "  Do  Menino  Deus,"  went
in  1800  to  Bahia,  where  he  built  the  "Seminario  de
Orphaos  de  San  Joaquim,"  which  was  also  granted
an  annual  income  by  the  queen.  In  1809  Libra-
mento  visited  the  province  of  Sao  Paulo,  where  he
founded  two  seminaries  amid  great  obstacles  and
persecutions.  In  1820  he  went  to  Rio  de  Janeiro,
where,  after  many  difficulties,  the  Seminary  of  Ja-
caucanga,  for  the  education  of  the  poor,  was
opened  under  his  direction,  and,  though  he  was  old
and  in  feeble  health,  he  gave  lessons  because  the
institution  had  no  means  to  pay  teachers.  In  1826
he  went  to  Lisbon  and  Rome  on  a  charitable  mis-
sion, but  in  the  latter  city  his  health  failed,  and  lie
died  on  his  way  home.

LICK,  James,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Fredericks-
burg, Pa.,  25  Aug.,  1796 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
1  Oct.,  1876.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, and  obtained  employment  as  an  organ-  and
piano-maker  in  Hanover,  Pa.,  and  then  in  Balti-
more, Md.  In  1820  he  established  himself  in  busi-
ness in  Philadelphia,  but  a  year  later  emigrated  to
Buenos  Ayres,  where  for  some  time  he  engaged  in
the  manufacture  of  musical  instruments.  Subse-
quently he  went  to  Valparaiso  and  various  other
places,  but  in  1847  settled  in  California,  where  he
invested  largely  in  real  estate,  and  employed  his
means  in  other  enterprises,  which  resulted  in  his
accumulating  a  great  fortune.  The  last  years  of
his  life  were  spent  in  San  Francisco,  where  he  was


President  of  the  Society  of  California  pioneers.  He
ad  the  reputation  of  being  "  unlovable,  eccentric,
solitary,  selfish,  and  avaricious,"  and  it  is  said  that
his  disagreeable  character  was  the  result  of  disap-
pointment in  love.  In  his  younger  days  he  was
attached  to  the  daughter  of  a  wealthy  miller,  but
his  suit  was  rejected  by  the  father  on  account  of
Lick's  poverty.  The  disappointed  suitor  then
vowed  to  build  a  mill  which  should  be  far  superior
to  that  of  the  Pennsylvania  miller,  and  in  after-
years  erected  one  near  San  Jose"  at  an  expense  of
$200,000.  The  interior  was  finished  in  costly  Cali-
fornia woods,  highly  polished,  and  before  it  was
burned  it  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  curiosities  of
the  neighborhood.  In  1874  he  assigned  real  and
personal  property  valued  at  about  $ 3,000,000  to
seven  trustees  for  various  public  and  philanthropic
enterprises ;  but  twice  before  his  death  he  revoked
this  gift,  requiring  each  time  a  new  board  of  trustees.
Besides  many  bequests  to  friends,  relatives,  and
charities,  he  left  $60,000  for  the  erection  of  a  bronze
monument  in  Golden  Gate  park  to  Francis  Scott
Key,  the  author  of  "  The  Star-Spangled  Banner,"
$100,000  for  three  groups  of  bronze  statuary  rep-
resenting three  historical  periods  of  California  his-
tory, to  be  erected  in  front  of  the  city  hall  in
San  Francisco,  $100,000  to  found  an  old  ladies'
home  in  San  Francisco,  $150,000  for  the  building
and  maintenance  of  free  public  baths  in  that  city,
$540,000  to  found  and  endow  a  California  school
of  mechanical  arts,  and  $700,000  to  construct  an


observatory  and  erecting  therein  a  telescope  more
powerful  than  any  that  had  been  made,  the  same
to  be  a  department  of  the  University  of  California.
During  the  present  year  (1887)  the  trustees  who
have  had  charge  of  the  construction  of  this  ob-
servatory since  Mr.  Lick's  death  will,  when  it  is
completed,  transfer  it  to  the  regents  of  the  Uni-
versity of  California.  (See  illustration.)  It  is  on  the
summit  of  Mount  Hamilton,  fifty  miles  south  of
San  Francisco,  on  a  reservation  of  1,790  acres,  em-
bracing a  circle  of  over  one  mile  below  the  sum-
mit of  the  mountain.  The  telescope,  which  is  the
largest  in  the  world,  has  an  object-glass  of  thirty-
six  inches  clear  aperture,  and  the  dome  is  turned
by  hydraulic  power  and  the  floor  is  elevated  and
lowered  by  like  means,  whereby  the  chair  is  ad-
justed to  any  height  to  reach  the  eye-piece  of  the
telescope,  the  base  of  the  pier  sustaining  the
great  equatorial  telescope  contains,  in  a  vault  with-
in its  foundations,  the  remains  of  James  Lick,  which
were  placed  there  in  January,  1887,  and  above  which
the  pier  rises  thirty  feet.

LIEBER,  Francis,  publicist,  b.  in  Berlin,  Ger-
many. 18  March,  1800;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  2  Oct.,
1872.  His  father,  William,  was  engaged  in  com-
merce, and  suffered  heavy  losses  during  the  Napo-
leonic wars  of  1789-1815.  The  son  had  begun  the
study  of  medicine  when,  in  1815,  he  joined  the
Prussian  army  as  a  volunteer,  fought  at  Ligny  and


710


L1EBER


Waterloo,  and  was  severely  wounded  in  the  assault
of  Namur.  At  the  close  of  the  campaign  he  re-
turned to  his  studies  and  entered  the  gymnasium
of  Berlin,  but  was  arrested  as  a  Liberal  and  con-
fined several  months  in  prison.  After  his  dis-
charge, without  a  trial  he  was  prohibited  from
studying  in  the  Prussian  universities,  and  according-
ly went  to  Jena,  where  he  took  his  degrees  ih  1820,
but  was  again  persecuted  as  a  member  of  a  stu-
dents' society.  He  then  went  to  Halle ;  but,  being
subject  to  surveillance,  he  sought  refuge  in  Dres-
den, and  afterward  took  part  in  the  Greek  revolu-
tion. He  spent  one  year,  in  1822-3,  in  Rome  in
the  family  of  Niebuhr,  then  Prussian  ambassador,

as  tutor  to  his  son.
While  there  he
wrote  in  German  a
journal  of  his  so-
journ in  Greece  un-
der the  title  of
"The  German  An-
acharsis"  (Leipsic,
1823).  With  the
king's  promise  of
protection  he  re-
turned to  Berlin  in
1824,  and  went  to
the  University  of
Halle,  but  was
again  imprisoned
at  Kopenick,  where

__2f  • S-  /.  he  wrote  a  collec-

^74^**,  c-tx> o^*^^-  tion  of  poems  enti.

tied  "  Wein-  und
Wonne-Lieder,"  which  on  his  release,  through  the
influence  of  Niebuhr,  were  published  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Franz  Arnold  (Berlin,  1824).  An-
noyed by  persecutions,  he  fled  to  England  in  1825,
and  supported  himself  for  a  year  in  London,  giv-
ing lessons  and  contributing  to  German  periodicals.
He  also  wrote  a  tract  on  the  Lancasterian  system
of  instruction.  In  1827  he  came  to  this  country
and  lectured  on  history  and  politics  in  the  large
cities.  He  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  edited  the
"  Encyclopaedia  Americana,"  based  on  Brockhaus's
"Conversations-Lexicon"  (13  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1829-'33).  At  this  time  he  made  translations  of
a  French  work  on  the  revolution  of  July,  1830,
and  of  the  life  of  Kaspar  Hauser  by  Feuerbach.
In  1832  he  received  a  commission  from  the  trus-
tees of  the  newly  founded  Girard  college  to  form
a  plan  of  education  (Philadelphia,  1834).  He  re-
sided in  Philadelphia  from  1833  till  1835,  when
he  accepted  the  professorship  of  history  and  politi-
cal economy  in  the  University  of  South  Carolina,
Columbia,  remaining  there  until  1856,  when  he
was  appointed  to  the  same  chair  in  Columbia  col-
lege, New  York.  He  held  this  until  1865,  and
in  1860  became  also  professor  of  political  science
in  the  law-school  of  that  institution,  which  post
he  held  until  his  death.  His  inaugural  address  as
professor  at  Columbia,  on  "Individualism;  and
Socialism,  or  Communism,"  was  published  by  the
college.  As  early  as  1851  he  delivered  an  address  in
South  Carolina  warning  the  southern  states  against
secession,  and  during  the  civil  war  was  active  in  up-
holding the  Union,  frequently  being  summoned  to
Washington  by  the  secretary  of  war  for  consulta-
tion on  important  subjects.  In  1863  he  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  "  Loyal  publication  society,"
of  which  he  served  as  president.  More  than  one
hundred  pamphlets  were  issued  by  it  under  his  su-
pervision, of  which  ten  were  by  himself.  His
"  Guerrilla  Parties  considered  with  reference  to  the
Law  and  Usages  of  War,"  written  at  the  request


LIEBER


of  Gen.  Halleck,  was  often  quoted  in  Europe  dur-
ing the  Franco-German  war ;  and  his  "  Instruc-
tions for  the  Government  of  the  Armies  of  the
United  States  in  the  Field "  (Washington,  1863)
was  ordered  by  President  Lincoln  to  be  promul-
gated in  the  general  orders  of  the  war  department,
and  has  formed  the  basis  for  many  later  European
codes.  In  1865  he  was  appointed  superintendent
of  a  bureau  in  Washington  that  had  for  its  object
the  collection,  arrangement,  and  preservation  of
the  records  of  the  Confederate  government,  and  in
1870  he  was  chosen  by  the  United  States  and  Mexi-
co as  final  arbitrator  in  important  disputes  between
the  two  countries,  which  work  was  not  completed
at  his  death.  In  1844  he  visited  Europe,  when  he
published  in  Germany  an  essay  on  "  Extramural
and  Intramural  Executions,"  proposing  measures
which  have  since  been  adopted,  and  also  "  Frag-
ments on  Subjects  of  Penology."  In  1848  he  re-
visited Europe,  and  published  several  essays  on
political  science.  He  translated  the  work  of  De
Beaumont  and  De  Tocqueville  on  the  "  Penitenti-
ary System  in  the  United  States,"  adding  an  intro-
duction and  notes  (Philadelphia,  1833),  and  was
the  author  of  "  Letters  to  a  Gentleman  in  Ger-
many, written  after  a  Trip  from  Philadelphia  to
Niagara"  (Philadelphia,  1834;  republished  under
the  title  "  The  Stranger  in  America,"  2  vols.,  Lon-
don, 1835).  His  other  works  are  "  Reminiscences
of  Niebuhr"  (Philadelphia  and  London,  1835);
"  Manual  of  Political  Ethics,"  which  was  adopted
by  Harvard  as  a  text-book  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1838 ;
revised  ed.,  edited  by  Theodore  D.  Woolsey,  Phila-
delphia, 1875) ;  "  Legal  and  Political  Hermeneutics,
or  Principles  of  Interpretation  and  Construction
in  Law  and  Politics  (1838 ;  3d  ed.,  edited  by
Prof.  William  G.  Hammond,  of  Iowa  university,
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  1880) ;  a  translation  of  Lewis  Rams-
horn's  "  Dictionary  of  Latin  Synonymes  "  (1839 ;
Philadelphia,  1870) ;  "  Laws  of  Property :  Essavs  on
Property  and  Labor"  (New  York,  1842);  "Great
Events  described  by  Great  Historians"(1847) ;  "  The
West  and  other  Poems  "  (1848) ;  and  "  Civil  Liberty
and  Self-Government "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1852 ;
new  ed.,  adopted  as  a  text-book  by  Yale,  1874).
Special  branches  of  civil  polity  also  largely  occupied
his  attention,  particularly  the  subject  of  penal
legislation,  on  which  he  wrote  "  Essays  on  Subjects
of  Penal  Law  and  the  Penitentiary  System,"  pub-
lished by  the  Philadelphia  prison  discipline  socie-
ty ;  "  Abuse  of  the  Penitentiary  Power,"  published
by  the  legislature  of  New  York:  "Remarks  on
Mrs.  Fry's  Views  of  Solitary  Confinement,"  pub-
lished in  England ;  "  Letter  on  the  Pardoning  Sys-
tem," published  by  the  legislature  of  South  Caro-
lina. Among  his  more  notable  occasional  papers  are
"  Letter  on  Anglican  and  Gallican  Liberty,  trans-
lated into  German,  and  annotated  by  the  distin-
guished jurist,  Mittermaier,  who  also  superintended
a  translation  of  "  Civil  Liberty  "  ;  a  paper  on  the
vocal  sounds  of  Laura  Bridgman,  the  blind  deaf-
mute,  compared  with  the  elements  of  phonetic  lan-
guage, published  in  the  "Smithsonian  Contribu-
tions to  Knowledge  " ;  a  series  of  political  articles
in  "  Putnam's  Monthly  "  on  "  Napoleon  "  and
"  Shall  Utah  be  admitted  to  the  Union  1 "  and  nu-
merous anniversary  and  other  addresses.  In  1867
he  published  "  Reflections  on  the  Changes  Neces-
sary in  the  Present  Constitution  of  the  State  of
New  York,"  "  Memorial  relative  to  the  Verdict  of
Jurors,"  and  "  The  Unanimity  of  Juries,"  and  in
1868  "  International  Copyright  and  Fragments  of
Political  Science,  or  Nationalism  and  Internation-
alism." As  regards  the  exterior  relations  of  politi-
cal economy  he  believed  in free-trade,  and  his


LIEBER

pamphlet  "  Notes  on  Fallacies  of  American  Pro-
tectionists" was  published  in  this  country  and
in  England.  He  also  contributed  articles  on  po-
litical subjects  to  the  New  York  "  Evening  Post,"
under  the  signature  of  "  Americus."  Dr.  Lieber
was  a  member  of  the  French  institute,  and  of
many  learned  and  scientific  bodies  in  Europe  and
America.  A  volume  of  his  minor  works  has  been
issued  entitled  "The  Miscellaneous  Writings  of
Francis  Lieber  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1880).  This
also  contains  a  discourse  on  his  life,  character,  and
writings,  delivered  before  the  Historical  society  of
Pennsylvania  by  M.  Russell  Thayer,  and  previously
printed  (Philadelphia,  1873).  See  "  Life  and  Let-
ters of  Francis  Lieber,"  edited  bv  Thomas  S.  Perry
(Boston,  1882).— His  son,  Oscar  Montgomery,
geologist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1830 ;  d.  in
Richmond,  Va..  27  June,  1862,  was  educated  at
Berlin,  Gottingen,  and  Freiburg.  He  was  state
geologist  of  Mississippi  in  1850-1,  engaged  in  the
geological  survey  of  Alabama  in  1854^'5,  and  from
1856  till  1860  held  the  office  of  mineralogical,  geo-
logical, and  agricultural  surveyor  of  South  Caro-
lina. His  first  annual  report  of  the  last-mentioned
survey  was  published  in  1857,  and  the  fourth  and
last  in  1860.  In  1860  he  accompanied  the  Ameri-
can astronomical  expedition  to  Labrador  as  geolo-
gist. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  lie  joined
the  Confederate  army,  and  died  of  wounds  that  he
received  in  the  battle  of  Williamsburg.  He  was
the  author  of  "The  Assayer's  Guide"  (Philadel-
phia, 1862X  "The  Analytical  Chemist's  Assistant,"
translated  from  the  German  of  Wohler's  "Beispiele
zur  Uebung  in  der  analytischen  Chemie,"  with  an
introduction  (1852),  and  various  articles  on  mining
in  this  country  in  the  New  York  "Mining  Maga-
zine."— Another  son.  Hamilton,  b.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  7  June,  1835;  d.  in  Baden-Baden.  Germany,
18  Oct.,  1876,  entered  the  volunteer  army  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  as  1st  lieutenant.  9th
Illinois  regiment,  and  was  badly  wounded  at  Fort
Donelson.  Afterward  he  was  appointed  a  captain
in  the  veteran  reserve  corps,  and  served  during  the
draft  riots  in  New  York  city  in  1863.  In  1806  he
was  made  a  captain  and  military  storekeeper  in  the
regular  army,  and  was  retired  on  account  of  dis-
abilities contracted  in  the  line  of  duty. — Another
son,  Gnido  Norman,  b.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  21
May,  1837,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
South  Carolina  in  1856,  and  at  Harvard  law-school
in  1859,  and  in  that  year  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  New  York.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  became  1st  lieutenant  in  the  11th  infantry.  V.  S.
army,  and  was  appointed  regimental  adjutant,  and
served  during  the  peninsular  campaign  under  Mc-
Clellan,  being  brevetted  captain  for  gallantry  at
the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills,  27  June,  1862.  He  was
with  his  regiment  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull
Run,  Va.,  27  Aug.,  1862,  being  then  appointed  aide-
de-camp  to  the  general-in-chief.  In  1862  he  was
appointed  major  and  judge-advocate,  and  he  served
in  this  capacity  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,
being  present  in  the  Teche  and  Red  River  cam-
paigns. For  gallantry  during  the  latter  he  re-
ceived another  brevet,  and  he  was  brevetted  a  third
time  for  services  during  the  war.  He  also  served
as  adjutant-general  of  the  department,  and  as  judge
of  the  provost  court  in  New  Orleans.  He  was  then
transferred  to  the  judge-ad voeate-general's  office
in  Washington,  and  subsequently  appointed  assist-
ant to  his  father.  Dr.  Francis  Lieber,  in  the  bureau
of  Confederate  archives.  He  afterward  served  as
judge-advocate  of  various  military  departments
and  divisions,  being,  when  stationed  in  New  York,
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Militarv  service  institu-


LIGON


711


tion.  He  was  professor  of  law  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  from  1878  till  1882,  when  he  was  assigned
to  duty  in  Washington  in  the  bureau  of  military
justice.  In  1884  he  was  appointed  assistant  judge-
advocate-general,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  he
has  since  then  been  on  duty  as  acting  judge-advo-
cate-general of  the  army.

LIGHT,  Alexander  Lnder,  Canadian  engi-
neer, b.  in  Durham,  England,  17  April,  1822.  He
came  to  Canada  in  1834,  attended  the  Kingston
grammar-school,  and  in  1842  became  assistant  en-
gineer on  the  board  of  works  of  Canada.  In  1846
he  entered  the  employ  of  the  Great  Western  rail-
way, in  1851  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  the
St.  Andrews  and  Quebec  (now  New  Brunswick  and
Canada)  railway.  Subsequently  he  was  chief  en-
gineer of  government  railways  in  Nova  Scotia  and
New  Brunswick,  and  built  the  European  and  North
American  railway.  He  went  to  England  in  1863,
was  elected  a  member  of  the  institute  of  civil  en-
gineers there,  and  soon  afterward  appointed  engi-
neer of  the  Santos  and  Silo  Paulo  railway  in  Bra-
zil. He  was  in  charge  of  the  construction  of  a
section  of  the  Intercolonial  railway  in  1869,  in
1874  became  government  engineer  for  the  province
of  Quebec,  and  in  1884  was  chosen  by  the  Do-
minion government  as  engineer  in  charge  of  sur-
veys of  one  division  of  the  proposed  short-line
railway  from  Montreal  to  St.  John  and  Halifax.

LIGHT,  George  Washington,  journalist,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  21  Jan.,  1809;  d.  in  Somerville,
Mass.,  27  Jan.,  1868.  He  was  educated  in  the
schools  of  his  native  place,  and  became  a  printer
and  publisher,  also  editing  in  Boston  the  "Young
Mechanic,"  "The  Essayist"  (1829-30).  and  the
"  Young  Men's  Magazine"  (1847).  Mr.  Light  was
the  author  of  a  "Life  of  Timothy  Claxton"  (Bos-
ton, 1839).  and  of  "  Keep  Cool,  Go  Ahead,  and  a
Few  Other  Poems"  (1851).

LIGHTIH'RN.  Joseph  Andrew  Jackson,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Westmoreland  county,  Pa.,  21  Sept..
1*24.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
removed  to  western  Virginia,  and  represented  Lewis
county  in  the  convention  that  reorganized  the  state
government  in  1861.  He  organized  the  4th  Vir-
ginia regiment  of  the  National  army,  was  made  its
colonel.  14  Aug..  1861.  and  in  1862  commanded  the
District  of  the  Kanawha.  He  conducted  the  retreat
from  Kanawha  valley  in  September  of  that  year,
and  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, 16  March,  1863.  He  then  took  part  in  the
siege  and  capture  of  Yieksburg.  and  the  battle  of
Missionary  Kidge.  and  was  witli  Sherman  in  his
campaign  to  Atlanta,  where  in  August,  1864,  he
received  a  gun-shot  wound  in  the  head.  After  his
recovery  he  led  a  brigade  in  Shenandoah  valley,
and  was  then  president  of  an  examining  board
22  June,  1865,  when  he  resigned  his  commission.
In  186(i-'7  he  was  a  member  of  the  West  Yirginia
legislature.

LIGON,  Richard,  English  traveller.  He  was
a  royalist,  lost  his  fortune  in  the  troubles  of
1647,  and  went  in  that  year  to  Barbadoes,  where
he  bought  a  house  and  land.  He  was  subsequently
attacked  by  a  fever,  and  after  narrowlv  escaping
death  returned  to  England  in  1650.  Before  his
departure  from  England  he  had  been  intimate
with  Abraham  Duppa,  bishop  of  Salisbury, and  on
his  return  the  prelate  was  so  much  impressed  with
Ligon's  account  of  Barbadoes  that  he  advised  him
to  publish  a  narrative  of  his  adventures.  The  au-
thor was  soon  afterward  cast  into  prison  by  his
creditors,  and  whether  he  died  there  or  was  re-
leased by  his  friends  is  uncertain.  His  work,  a
folio,  with  maps  and  illustrations,  is  entitled  "A


712


LIGON


LIMA


True  and  Exact  History  of  Barbadoes  "  (London,
1650).  From  this  work  Steele  drew  the  facts  for
his  tale  of  "  Inkle  and  Yarico  "  in  the  "  Spectator."
Yarico  was  one  of  Ligon's  Indian  slaves.  The
Abbe  Raynal  has  also  drawn  largely  on  the  same
author  in  his  "  Histoire  philosophique  des  Indes,"
and  the  Englishman,  Inkle,  and  his  victim,  Yari-
co, have  been  the  subjects  of  several  romances.

LIGON,  Thomas  Watkins,  governor  of  Mary-
land, b.  in  Prince  Edward  county,  Va.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  studied
at  the  Yale  law-school,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  began  to  practise  law  in  Baltimore.  Subse-
quently he  removed  to  Ellicott's  Mills,  and  thence
to  Elkton,  Md.  He  served  in  congress  from  1  Dec,
1845,  till  3  March,  1849,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Democrat,  and  from  1854  till  1858  he  was  governor
of  the  state  of  Maryland.

LILIENTHAL,  Max,  clergyman,  b.  in  Munich,
Bavaria,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  5  April,
1882.  After  studying  for  the  Jewish  ministry  and
being  graduated  at  the  university  of  that  city,  he
was  called  in  1839  to  Riga,  Russia,  as  director  of
its  Hebrew  school,  and,  after  several  years'  success-
ful educational  work,  he  came  to  New  York  in
1845,  being  chosen  rabbi  of  three  congregations.
In  1855  he  was  called  to  the  rabbinate  of  a  Cin-
cinnati congregation,  and  remained  at  its  head
until  his  death.  Dr.  Lilienthal  was  widely  known
in  the  west,  and  in  Cincinnati  filled  posts  of  dis-
tinction on  the  board  of  education  and  at  the  uni-
versity, while  his  best  efforts  were  always  enlisted
in  the"  cause  of  charity.  He  took  an  active  part  in
the  task  of  uniting  the  American-Jewish  congre-
gations, and  established  the  "  Sabbath-School  Visit-
or "  and  the  "  Rabbinical  Quarterly  Review."  He
was  a  speaker  of  power,  and  belonged  to  the  pro-
gressive school  of  Jewish  thought.

LILLIE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kelso,  Scot-
land, 16  Dec,  1812 ;  d.  in  Kingston,  N.  Y.,  in  Feb-
ruary, 1867.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Edinburgh  in  1833,  studied  theology  in  that
city  for  two  years,  and  then,  coming  to  the  United
States,  completed  his  course  in  the  New  Bruns-
wick seminary,  and  in  1836-'41  was  pastor  of  the
Dutch  Reformed  church  at  Kingston,  N.  Y.  He
then  had  charge  till  1843  of  the  grammar-school
of  New  York  university,  held  a  pastorate  in  New
York  city  till  1848,  and  in  1844-'8  was  also  editor
of  the  "Jewish  Chronicle."  He  was  a  translator
for  the  American  Bible  union  in  1851-'7,  and  from
1858  until  his  death  served  as  pastor  of  the  Presby-
terian church  in  Kingston,  N.  Y.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh
.in  1855.  Dr.  Lillie  was  a  fine  scholar,  clear  and
direct  as  a  pulpit  orator,  and  was  an  outspoken
opponent  of  slavery  when  to  be  such  was  to  risk

Eopularity.  He  revised  and  translated  several
ooks  of  the  New  Testament  for  the  Anglo-Ameri-
can edition  of  "  Lange's  Commentary,"  and  pub-
lished, besides  various  sermons  and  addresses,  "  The
Perpetuity  of  the  Earth,"  embodying  his  millena-
rian  views  (1842).

LILLINGTON,  John  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in
Barbadoes,  W.  I.,  about  1725 ;  d.  in  North  Carolina
in  1786.  His  grandfather,  Alexander,  came  to  Al-
bemarle county,  N.  C,  from  Barbadoes,  and  was
deputy  governor  of  North  Carolina  in  1693.  His  fa-
ther, Col.  George  Lillington,  an  officer  in  the  British
army,  was  a  member  of  the  royal  council  of  Barba-
does in  1698,  and  came  to  North  Carolina  about
1734.  His  son,  who  accompanied  him,  early  be-
came a  decided  Whig,  and  in  August,  1775,  was
appointed  by  the  Provincial  congress  colonel  for
the  Wilmington  district. He  was  second  in  com-


mand under  Col.  Richard  Caswell  (q.  v.)  in  the  de-
feat of  the  Scotch  Tories  at  Moore's  Creek  Bridge,

27  Feb.,  1776,  and  had  charge  of  the  field  before
Caswell's  arrival.  On  4  April  he  became  colonel  of
the  6th  North  Carolina  regiment  of  the  Continental
army.  He  was  afterward  promoted  to  brigadier-
general,  and  served  under  Gen.  Gates  in  1780.  He
is  described  as  a  man  of  herculean  frame  and  great
courage.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  retired  to  his
house,  Lillington  Hall,  which  is  still  standing,  about
forty  miles  above  Wilmington,  N.  C.  It  was  par-
tially burned  by  Cornwallis  on  his  march  to  Wil-
mington. The  town  of  Lillington,  N.  C,  was  named
in  his  honor. — His  son,  John,  was  a  colonel  in  the
Revolutionary  army,  and  served  through  the  war.

LILLO,  Eusebio  (leel'-yo),  Chilian  statesman,  b.
in  Santiago  in  1826.  He  studied  in  the  university  of
his  native  city,  where  he  was  graduated  in  law.  He
began  early  to  take  part  in  politics,  in  1849  and
1850  was  a  constant  contributor  to  the  Liberal  pa-
pers, and,  on  account  of  his  opposition  to  the  Con-
servative government,  was  banished  in  1851.  He
went  to  Bolivia,  and  during  his  sojourn  there
founded  in  La  Paz  the  Bank  of  Bolivia.  After  the
assumption  of  the  executive  by  Perez  in  1860  he
returned  to  his  native  country,  and  in  1864  became
editor  of  "  La  Patria  "  in  Valparaiso.  In  1870  he
was  appointed  professor  of  law  at  the  University
of  Chili,  but  did  not  accept.  He  has  been  elected
to  congress  several  times,  and  during  the  war  with
Peru  and  Bolivia  he  was  one  of  the  active  advisers
of  the  government.  In  October,  1880,  he  was  ap-
pointed Chilian  commissioner  to  attend  the  con-
ferences that  were  held  on  board  the  U.  S.  corvette
"  Lackawanna  "  in  the  port  of  Arica,  by  suggestion
of  the  U.  S.  minister,  to  treat  concerning  condi-
tions of  peace  between  the  three  republics,  but
which  did  not  produce  the  desired  result.  In  1883
he  was  sent  as  minister  to  Bolivia,  and  concluded
a  treaty  of  peace  with  that  republic.  In  1884  he
was  called  by  President  Santa  Maria  to  the  cabi-
net as  secretary  of  state,  and  in  the  autumn  of  the
same  year  elected  to  congress  as  senator  for  six
years.  He  has  achieved  fame  in  South  America  as
a  poet.  Among  his  principal  compositions  are
"  El  Junco,"  "  Loco  de  amor,"  "  Cancion  nacional
de  Chile,"  "Recuerdos  del  Proscrito,"  "Rosa  y
Carlos,"  "  Deseos,"  "  La  Violeta,"  and  "  Plegaria."
A  collection  of  his  poems  has  also  been  published
in  several  editions  (Santiago,  1862-'84).

LILLY,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,

28  Oct.,  1815  ;  d.  in  Lambertville,  N.  J.,  3  April,
1880.  He  was  educated  at  a  classical  school  in
Lambertville,  N.  J.,  where  he  practised  his  profes-
sion after  his  graduation  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1837.
He  was  elected  a  representative  to  the  33d  con-
gress as  a  Whig,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1853,  till  3
March,  1855,  was  also  judge  of  the  Hunterdon
county  court  and  of  the  court  of  errors  and  ap-

feals  of  New  Jersey,  and  consul-general  in  British
ndia.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  Jersey  medi-
cal society,  of  which  he  was  vice-president  and
president,  and  contributed  to  medical  journals.

LIMA,  Francisco  (lee'-mah),  Brazilian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Portugal  early  in  the  17th  century;
d.  in  Olinda,  Brazil,  29  April,  1704.  In  1695  he
was  rector  of  a  parish  in  Lisbon,  when  he  was  sur-
prised by  the  appointment  of  bishop  of  Pernam-
buco.  His  diocese  was  in  a  disorganized  state,  but
he  preached,  founded  churches  and  schools,  and
gave  his  whole  income  to  establish  thirty  missions
among  the  Indians,  and  raised  money  to  found
four  hospitals  for  the  poor.  In  1703  he  spent  a
year  in  visiting  his  Indian  missions,  and,  returning


LIMA


LIMA  E  SILVA


713


to  Olinda  in  failing  health,  he  died  in  one  of  the
hospitals  that  he  had  founded.

LIMA,  Joao  de  Brito,  Brazilian  poet,  b.  in
Bahia,  22  Oct.,  1671 ;  d.  there,  25  Nov.,  1747.  He
received  his  education  from  private  tutors,  and  en-
tered a  convent  in  early  life.  Soon  afterward  he
became  known  as  one  of  the  best  Portuguese  poets
of  his  time.  In  1718  "O  conde  de  Villaflor  was
published  in  Lisbon,  and  other  poems  soon  ap-
peared. A  second  volume  of  his  compositions  was
published  (Lisbon,  1742),  and  he  left "  Poema  epico
Cezaria,  narrando  la  genealogia  de  D.  Vasco  Fer-
nandes,  conde  de  Sabugosa,  suas  accoes  e  sucessos
nos  governos  da  India  e  do  Brazil,"  "  A  profissao
de  duas  irmaes  no  convento  de  Santa  Clara  na
Bahia,"  and  "  D.  Luiz  Alvares  de  Figueiredo,"
which  are  now  (1887)  in  course  of  publication  by
the  Institute  geographico  Brazileiro.

LIMA,  Jose  Ignacio  Ribeiro  Abren  de,  Bra-
zilian revolutionist,  b.  in  Recife  about  1770;  d.  in
Bahia,  29  March,  1817.  He  studied  theology,  and
was  graduated  in  Coimbra,  where  he  was  ordained
priest  in  1792,  but  suffered  persecution  and  went
to  Rome  to  answer  an  accusation  of  heresy.  On
his  return  he  retired  from  the  ministry,  was  gradu-
ated in  law  in  1796,  and  opened  an  office  in  Per-
nambuco.  When  he  heard,  at  the  end  of  1807,  of
the  determination  of  the  royal  family  to  come  to
Brazil,  he  tried  to  induce  the  people  of  Bahia  to
prevent  their  landing  unless  the  regent  promised
to  give  a  constitution  to  Brazil.  This  plot  was
discovered  and  Lima  was  cast  into  prison,  but  set
free  two  years  later,  and  continued  to  work  secret-
ly for  independence.  In  1812  he  published  several
articles  in  the  daily  papers,  and  founded  the  "  Jus-
tica  e  Progresso,"  which  was  discontinued  a  year
later.  In  1817  Lima  wa<«  the  leader  in  the  repub-
lican revolution  of  Pernambuco.  He  went  to  Ala-
goas  and  Bahia  for  aid,  and,  being  successful,  was
about  to  sail  for  Pernambuco  when  he  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  royalists,  tried  by  a  military  tribu-
nal, and  condemned  to  death.  He  was  shot  with-
out revealing  his  accomplices.  He  published  "  Un
commentario  as  ordenacoes  do  reino"  (1816). — His
son,  Jos§  Ignacio  de  Abren  de,  Brazilian  sol-
dier, b.  in  Pernambuco,  6  April,  1796  :  d.  in  Recife,
20  Jan.,  1869.  received  his  early  education  at  Olinda.
and  was  graduated  at  the  military  academy  of  Rio
Janeiro  in  1814.  Soon  afterward  he  was  appointed
captain,  joined  the  Revolutionary  party  in  1817.
and  was  arrested,  but  escaped  to  the  United  States,
whence  he  went  to  Venezuela  and  offered  his  ser-
vices to  Gen.  Bolivar.  He  fought  in  the  battle  of
Queseras  under  Gen.  Paez.  that  of  Angostura  under
Gen.  Soublette.  and  in  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota.  In
1821  he  accompanied  the  expedition  to  Ecuador,
where  he  did  good  service,  and  when  the  Inde-
pendents triumphed  he  accompanied  Sucre  in  his
expedition  to  Peru,  whence  he  returned  to  New
Granada,  and  was  sent  on  a  commission  from  that
government  to  the  United  States.  During  his
service  in  Spanish  America  he  was  promoted  to
general.  The  government  of  Venezuela  admitted
him  to  the  military  order  of  "Los  libertadores  de
Venezuela,"  and  that  of  New  Granada  inscribed
his  name  among  those  of  the  liberators  of  the  na-
tion. After  the  war  he  did  not  mix  in  the  politics
of  the  Columbian  republic,  but  remained  faithful
to  Bolivar.  After  the  latter's  death  in  1830,  Lima
went  to  Europe,  and  remained  two  years  in  Paris ;
but  when  the  parliament  of  Brazil  acknowledged
his  services,  recognizing  his  rank  of  general,  he
returned  to  that  country.  He  then  began  to  col-
lect documents  for  completing  the  history  of  his
country,  but  his  studies  were  several  times  inter-


rupted by  his  labors  as  a  journalist.  In  1835  he
was  the  editor  of  "  O  Raio  de  Jupiter,"  and  from
this  year  to  1840  he  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Me-
sageiro  Nictheroyense "  and  "O  Maiorista."  In
1847  he  began  to  publish  in  the  press  his  ideas  re-
garding civil  marriage,  which  caused  him  to  be
bitterly  attacked  by. the  clergy  of  the  Roman
Catholic  church.  At  that  time  he  was  a  contribu-
tor to  the  "  Diario  Novo."  In  1848  he  published
in  Pernambuco  the  paper  "A  Barca  de  Sao  Pedro."
He  retired  from  journalism,  but  for  years  con-
tinued to  advocate  his  ideas.  On  account  of  im-
paired health  he  went  to  Recife  in  1869.

LIMA,  Manoel  de,  Brazilian  explorer,  b.  in
Sao  Pablo  in  1685  ;  d.  in  Para  in  1750.  He  was  a
Jesuit,  and  was  emploved  for  many  years  in  the
missions  of  the  Moxos  Indians,  of  which  he  became
president  in  1735.  As  the  missions  that  had  been
founded  since  1684  covered  a  large  area.  Lima  had
ample  opportunity  during  his  travels  to  explore  the
country.  The  Moxos  missions  having  become  im-
portant, Antonio  Rolira  de  Moura,  governor  of
Para,  saw  the  necessity  of  opening  a  more  direct
way  between  them  and  the  capital  of  the  province,
and  summoned  Lima  to  Belem  in  1742.  His  health
failed  in  consequence  of  the  fatigue  of  his  journey,
and,  being  unable  to  return  to  his  missions,  he  re-
mained in  Para,  using  his  influence  to  promote  use-
ful works  and  explorations  of  the  province  under
his  charge.  In  1751  Rolim  de  Moura  utilized  the
road  that  was  first  traversed  by  Lima,  and,  sending
an  expedition  to  the  Moxos  missions,  secured  to  Eu-
ropeans the  vast  countrv  explored  by  the  Jesuit.

LIMA  E  SILVA,  Francisco  de  ("lee -mah).  Bra-
zilian soldier,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  8  July,  1785;  <1.
there.  2  Dec.  1853.  At  five  years  of  age  he  was
entered  as  cadet  in  the  regiment  of  Braganca,
which  was  commanded  by  his  father,  and  rose  in
rank  until  he  became  his  father's  successor.  In
1821  he  was  active  in  the  cause  of  independence,
and  rendered  great  service  to  the  city  of  Rio  Ja-
neiro in  keeping  order  in  that  time  of  popular  com-
motion. During  the  republican  revolution  in
Pernambuco  in  1824,  Lima  was  sent  as  general  of
the  forces  to  repress  the  rebellion,  and  was  also
made  provisional  president  of  the  province.  At
the  beginning  he  employed  severe  measures,  but
after  the  suppression  of  the  movement  made  every
effort  to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  leaders.  He
was  appointed  governor  of  the  province  of  S.
Paulo  in  1828,  in  1829  commander  of  the  forces  in
Rio  Janeiro,  and  in  1831  of  those  in  the  province
of  S.  Paulo,  but  on  7  April  of  the  same  year  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  regency.  Lima  re-
ceived the  decree  of  abdication  of  Pedro  I.,  and
read  it  to  the  troops,  proclaiming  Pedro  II.  em-
peror of  Brazil.  He  was  regent  of  the  empire  four
years,  and  by  his  calmness  and  prudence  prevented
many  public  evils.  He  organized  the  arm  v.  tried
to  settle  the  difficulties  of  the  national  treasury,
which  was  in  a  wretched  condition,  and  endeav-
ored to  preserve  the  public  peace.  On  12  Oct.,
1835,  Father  Feijo  was  appointed  sole  regent,  and
Lima  retired  to  private  life.  In  1837  he  was  elect-
ed senator  by  the  province  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and
in  that  year  the  assembly  voted  him  a  pension.  In
1840  he*  took  an  active  part  in  declaring  the  ma-
jority of  Pedro  II. — His  son,  Lnis  Alves,  Brazil-
ian soldier,  b.  in  Estrella,  25  Aug.,  1803,  was  en-
tered as  a  cadet  in  the  1st  regiment  of  the  line  in
1808,  and  finished  his  studies  in  the  military
academy  in  1819.  In  1822  he  was  appointed  by
Pedro  I.  adjutant  of  the  battalion  of  the  emperor,
and  fought  in  Bahia  against  the  Portuguese
troops. After  the  abdication  of  Pedro  I.  in  1831,


714


L1NAN  Y  CISNEROS


LINCECUM


when  Rio  Janeiro  was  in  danger  of  being  sacked
by  a  mob,  Lima  formed  among  his  friends  and
fellow-officers  a  force  for  the  security  of  the  city,
and  was  appointed  second  in  command.  In  1837,
as  a  colonel,  he  accompanied  the  secretary  of  war
in  the  campaign  of  Rio  Grande  do  Sul,  and  on  14
Dec,  1839,  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  prov-
ince of  Maranhao,  which  office  he  held  till  1841.
In  that  year  he  was  promoted  to  brigadier  and
created  Baron  of  Caxias,  and  the  province  of  Ma-
ranhao  elected  him  its  representative  to  congress.
On  18  May,  1842,  he  was  appointed  commander-
in-chief  and  vice-president  of  the  province  of  S.
Paulo,  which  he  pacified  before  23  July.  The  em-
peror now  made  him  his  adjutant,  and  two  days
afterward  sent  him  as  commander  of  the  forces  to
the  province  of  Mina,  where,  by  the  battle  of  Santa
Luzia,  on  20  Aug.,  he  put  an  end  to  a  revolution.
On  his  return  he  was  promoted  major-general  and
sent  to  the  province  of  Rio  Grande,  where,  in  two
years,  he  re-established  peace.  He  then  was  cre-
ated Count  of  Caxias,  and  elected  senator  for
the  province  of  Rio  Grande.  He  was  in  congress
till  1851,  in  which  year  he  was  appointed  for  the
second  time  president  of  the  province  of  Rio
Grande  and  commander  of  the  army  that  was  to
invade  the  Argentine  Republic.  At  the  head  of
20,000  men,  aided  by  Gens.  Urquiza  and  Garson,
he  defeated  Rosas  in  Arroyo  Moron  on  3  Feb.,
1852,  and  on  his  return  he  was  made  a  marquis
and  lieutenant-general.  On  14  July,  1855,  he  was
appointed  secretary  of  war,  and  in  September,  1856,
president  of  the  imperial  council.  In  1866  he  was
promoted  to  field-marshal  and  appointed  to  com-
mand the  army  against  the  republic  of  Paraguay.
Under  his  command  the  Brazilians  defeated  the
enemy  at  Villeta,  Angostura,  and  Loma  Valen-
tura,  and  on  5  Jan.,  1869,  entered  Asuncion.  On
23  March  he  was  created  Duke  of  Caxias.

LINAN  Y  CISNEROS,  Melchor  de  (leen-yan'),
Peruvian  archbishop,  b.  in  Madrid,  Spain,  19  Dec,
1629 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  20  Oct.,  1708.  He  studied
in  Alcala,  where  he  was  graduated  as  doctor  in
theology.  He  was  pastor  of  several  parishes  in
Madrid,  in  1661  member  of  the  supreme  council  of
the  Inquisition,  and  in  1664  became  bishop  of  Santa
Marta.  In  1666  he  was  promoted  bishop  of  Popa-
yan,  and  in  1671  he  was  appointed  by  the  king
visitor  of  the  kingdom  of  New  Granada  with  the
titles  of  president,  governor,  and  captain-general.
His  administration  is  said  to  have  saved  to  the
treasury  $130,000  annually.  On  24  Feb.,  1672,  he
was  made  archbishop  of  Charcas,  and  in  1674  he
took  charge  of  his  diocese.  On  14  Dec,  1676,  he
was  appointed  archbishop  of  Lima,  and  on  14  Feb.,
1678,  took  charge  of  that  diocese.  On  the  occasion
of  the  earthquake  in  Lima,  17  June,  1678,  he  was
active  in  the  assistance  of  the  wounded.  On  7
July  of  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  temporary
viceroy  of  Peru,  which  place  he  held  till  20  Nov.,
1681.  During  his  civil  administration  he  intro-
duced several  reforms  in  the  public  and  military
service,  constructed  forts,  enlarged  the  army,  and
fortified  the  city  against  the  pirates.  In  his  eccle-
siastic government  he  reformed  the  service,  estab-
lished monasteries,  and  gave  much  to  charity.

LINARES,  Jos6  Maria  (lee-nah'-reth),  Bolivian
statesman,  b.  in  Potosi,  10  July,  1810 ;  d.  in  Valpa-
raiso, Chili,  in  1861.  He  studied  in  La  Paz,  was
graduated  as  doctor  in  jurisprudence  in  1835,  and
in  early  life  began  to  take  part  in  politics,  being
called  to  several  important  public  places,  including
membership  in  the  commission  to  form  a  code  of
laws  for  Bolivia.  At  the  downfall  of  the  adminis-
tration of  Gen.  Santa  Cruz  he  was  called  by  Gen.


Velasco  to  take  charge  of  the  portfolio  of  the  inte-
rior in  1839,  and  afterward  was  sent  as  minister  to
Spain,  where  he  negotiated  the  treaty  for  the  recog-
nition of  the  independence  of  Bolivia.  In  1848,  as
president  of  the  senate,  he  was  called,  during  the
absence  of  Velasco,  to  take  charge  provisionally  of
the  executive,  and  he  was  soon  the  acknowledged
leader  of  the  "  Rejenerador  "  party.  He  was  sev-
eral times  presented  as  a  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency, and  finally  in  1857  was  elected  by  a  large
majority.  His  administration  was  one  of  the  most
energetic  and  honest  that  the  country  had  seen.
He  introduced  many  reforms,  and  vigorously  at-
tacked the  abuses  that  had  crept  into  the  public
administration ;  but  his  course  made  him  enemies,
and  in  1861  he  was  overthrown  by  a  revolution  that
was  favored  by  his  own  cabinet,  and  banished  to
Chili,  where  he  died.

L'INCARNATION,  Mother  Marie  de,  educator,
b.  in  Tours,  France,  18  Oct.,  1599 ;  d.  in  Quebec,  30
April,  1672.  The  name  of  her  parents  was  Guyard.
She  was  noted  for  her  piety  in  early  life,  and  wished
to  enter  a  convent,  but,  in  deference  to  the  wishes  of
her  parents,  married,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  M.
Martin,  a  silk-manufacturer.  She  aided  him  in  his
business,  showing  an  ability  for  management  which
was  subsequently  to  be  of  great  assistance  to  her.
Her  husband  died  when  she  was  nineteen,  and
when  her  son  had  attained  the  age  of  twelve  she
entered  the  Ursuline  convent  of  Tours,  in  1631.
Here  she  met  Madame  De  la  Peltrie,  and  formed
with  her  the  project  of  founding  an  Ursuline  con-
vent in  Quebec  She  arrived  in  Canada  with  a  few
nuns  in  1639.  She  immediately  began  the  work  of
instruction  in  Quebec,  the  nuns  taking  as  pupils
not  only  the  daughters  of  the  colonists,  but  also
those  of  the  friendly  Indian  tribes.  This  led  her
to  acquire  several  of  the  Indian  languages,  in  which
she  wrote  instructions  for  her  pupils.  She  was  not
able  to  begin  her  monastery  until  1641,  which  was
finished  in  1642.  It  was  destroyed  by  fire  in  1650,
in  the  middle  of  a  Canadian  winter.  Notwithstand-
ing poverty  and  trials  of  various  kinds,  she  set  to
work  with  energy  and  soon  rebuilt  it.  She  con-
tinued to  direct  the  monastery  up  to  her  last  illness.
In  the  troubles  of  the  colony  caused  by  the  war
waged  by  the  Iroquois,  she  was  frequently  con-
sulted, and  her  advice  often  adopted.  In  one  of
her  letters  she  predicted  the  great  future  in  store
for  whatever  people  should  occupy  the  valley  of  the
Hudson,  and  endeavored  to  persuade  her  country-
men to  take  possession  of  it.  She  was  styled  by
Bossuet  "  the  Teresa  of  our  days  and  of  the  New
World."  The  cause  of  her  canonization  as  a  saint
of  the  Roman  Catholic  church  was  introduced
before  the  papal  authorities  several  years  ago,  and
is  still  prosecuted  in  Rome.  She  was  the  author
of  "  Lettres  "  (Paris,  1677) ;  "  Retraite,  avec  une
expression  succinate  du  cantique  des  cantiques"
(1682) ;  and  "  Ecole  chretienne,  ou  explication  fami-
liere  des  mysteres  de  la  foi "  (1684).  These  were  all
published  after  her  death  by  her  son,  Dom  Claude
Martin,  who  also  issued  her  life,  written  by  herself
by  order  of  her  superiors  (Paris,  1677).  See  also  a
shorter  biography  by  Charlevoix  (Paris,  1724).

LINCECUM,  Gideon,  naturalist,  b.  in  Han-
cock county,  Ga.,  22  April,  1793 ;  d.  in  Brenham,
Washington  eo.,  Tex.,  28  Nov.,  1874.  He  was  self-
educated,  and  became  a  practising  physician,  serv-
ing also  as  county  judge  in  Lowndes  county,  Miss.,
about  1815,  as  postmaster  of  two  towns  in  that
state  about  1840,  and  in  the  same  office  in  Long
Point.  Tex.,  in  1856.  During  the  war  of  1812  he
served  in  the  Georgia  militia.  In  1868  he  went  to
Tuxpan,  Mexico,  where  he  spent  five  years. Dr.


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


715


Lincecum  was  an  enthusiast  in  natural  history,  a
regular  correspondent  of  Charles  Darwin,  Alexan-
der von  Humboldt,  Louis  Agassiz,  and  other  natu-
ralists in  this  country  and  abroad,  and  a  member
of  numerous  scientific  societies,  to  whose  publica-
tions, notably  those  of  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion, the  Franklin  institute,  and  the  Essex  institute,
Mass.,  he  contributed  valuable  papers.  To  the
latter  institution  he  gave  a  collection  representing
forty-eight  different  families  of  ants  and  butter-
flies, and  to  the  Jardin  des  plantes  in  Paris  he
sent  specimens  of  all  the  flora  of  Texas.  Among
his  published  papers  is  a  valuable  monograph  on
the  red  ant,  to  the  study  of  which  he  devoted
fourteen  years.  He  wrote  several  works,  which
remain  unpublished.  These  include  "  Traditions
of  the  Choctaw  Indians,"  among  whom  he  lived
for  many  years,  ''Medical  History  of  the  Southern
United  States,"  and  an  autobiography,  now  in  the
possession  of  his  daughter.

LINCOLN,  Abraham,  sixteenth  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Hardin  county,  Ky.,  12  Feb.,
1809;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  15  April,  1865.
His  earliest  ancestor  in  America  seems  to  have
been  Samuel  Lincoln,  of  Norwich,  England,  who
settled  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  where  he  died,  leav-
ing a  son,  Mordecai,
whose  son  of  the
same  name  removed
to  Monmouth,  X.  J.,
and  thence  to  Berks
county,  Pa.,  dying
there  in  1735.  He
was  a  man  of  some
property,  which  at
his  death  was  divid-
ed among  his  sons
and  daughters,  one
of  whom,  John  Lin-
coln, having  dis-
posed of  his  land  in
Pennsylvania  and
New  Jersey,  estab-
lished himself  in
Rockingham  coun-
ty, Va.  The  records
of  that  county  show
that  he  was  pos-
sessed of  a  valuable
estate,  which  was  divided  among  five  sons,  one  of
whom,  named  Abraham,  emigrated  to  Kentucky
about  1780.  At  this  time  Daniel  Boone  was  en-
gaged in  those  labors  and  exploits  in  the  new  coun-
try of  Kentucky  that  have  rendered  his  name  illus-
trious; and  there  is  no  doubt  that  Abraham  Lin-
coln was  induced  by  his  friendship  for  Boone  to
give  up  what  seems  to  have  been  an  assured  social
position  in  Virginia  and  take  his  family  to  share
with  him  the  risks  and  hardships  of  life  in  the  new
territory.  The  families  of  Boone  and  Lincoln  had
been  closely  allied  for  many  years.  Several  mar-
riages had  taken  place  between  them,  and  their
names  occur  in  each  other's  wills  as  friends  and
executors.  The  pioneer  Lincoln,  who  took  with
him  what  for  the  time  and  place  was  a  sufficient
provision  in  money,  the  result  of  the  sale  of  his
property  in  Virginia,  acquired  by  means  of  cash
and  land-warrants  a  large  estate  in  Kentucky,  as
is  shown  by  the  records  of  Jefferson  and  Camp-
bell counties.  About  1784  he  was  killed  by  In-
dians while  working  with  his  three  sons — Mor-
decai, Josiah,  and  Thomas — in  clearing  the  forest.
His  widow  removed  after  his  death  to  Washington
county,  and  there  brought  up  her  family.  The
two  elder  sons  became  reputable  citizens,  and  the


two  daughters  married  in  a  decent  condition  of
life.  Thomas,  the  youngest  son,  seems  to  have
been  below  the  average  of  the  family  in  enterprise
and  other  qualities  that  command  success.  He
learned  the  trade  of  a  carpenter,  and  married,  12
June,  1806,  Nancy  Hanks,  a  niece  of  the  man  with
whom  he  learned  his  trade.  She  is  represented,  by
those  who  knew  her  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,
as  a  handsome  young  woman  of  twenty-three,  of
appearance  and  intellect  superior  to  her  lowly  for-
tunes. The  young  couple  began  housekeeping  with
little  means.  Three  children  were  born  to  them ;
the  first,  a  girl,  who  grew  to  maturity,  married,  and
died,  leaving  no  children;  the  third  a  boy,  who
died  in  infancy ;  the  second  was  Abraham  Lincoln.
Thomas  Lincoln  remained  in  Kentucky  until  1816,
when  he  resolved  to  remove  to  the  still  newer
country  of  Indiana,  and  settled  in  a  rich  and  fertile
forest  country  near  Little  Pigeon  creek,  not  far
distant  from  the  Ohio  river.  The  family  suffered
from  diseases  incident  to  pioneer  life,  and  Mrs.
Lincoln  died  in  1818  at  the  age  of  thirty-five.
Thomas  Lincoln,  while  on  a  visit  to  Kentucky,
married  a  worthy,  industrious,  and  intelligent
widow  named  Sarah  Bush  Johnston.  She  was  a
woman  of  admirable  order  and  system  in  her
habits,  and  brought  to  the  home  of  "the  pioneer  in
the  Indiana  timber  many  of  the  comforts  of  civil-
ized life.  The  neighborhood  was  one  of  the
roughest.  The  president  once  said  of  it :  "It  was
a  wild  region,  with  many  bears  and  other  wild
animals  still  in  the  woods,  and  there  were  some
schools,  so  called;  but  no  qualification  was  ever
required  of  a  teacher  beyond  readin',  writ  in',  and
cipherin'  to  the  rule  of  three.  If  a  straggler  sup-
posed to  understand  Latin  happened  to  sojourn  in
the  neighborhood,  he  was  looked  upon  as  a  wizard.
There  was  absolutely  nothing  to  excite  ambition
for  education."  But  in  spite  of  this  the  boy
Abraham  made  the  best  use  of  the  limited  oppor-
tunities afforded  him,  and  learned  all  that  the
half-educated  backwoods  teachers  could  impart ;
and  besides  this  he  read  over  and  over  all  the  books
he  could  find.  He  practised  constantly  the  rules
of  arithmetic,  which  he  had  acquired  at  school,
and  began,  even  in  his  early  childhood,  to  put  in
writing  his  recollections  of  what  he  had  read  and
his  impressions  of  what  he  saw  about  him.  By
the  time  he  was  nineteen  years  of  age  he  had  ac-
quired a  remarkably  clear  and  serviceable  hand-
writing, and  showed  sufficient  business  capacity  to
l)e  intrusted  with  a  cargo  of  farm  products,  which
lie  took  to  New  Orleans  and  sold.  In  1830  his  father
emigrated  once  more,  to  Macon  county,  111.  Lin-
coln had  by  this  time  attained  his  extraordinary
stature  of  six  feet  four  inches,  and  with  it  enormous
muscular  strength,  which  was  at  once  put  at  the
disposal  of  his  father  in  building  his  cabin,  char-
ing the  field,  and  splitting  from  the  walnut  forests,
which  were  plentiful  in  that  county,  the  rails  with
which  the  farm  was  fenced.  Thomas  Lincoln,
however,  soon  deserted  this  new  home,  his  last
migration  being  to  Goose  Nest  Prairie,  in  Coles
county,  where  he  died  in  1851.  seventy-three  years
of  age.  In  his  last  days  he  was  tenderly  cared  for
by  his  son.

Abraham  Lincoln  left  his  father's  house  as  soon
as  the  farm  was  fenced  and  cleared,  hired  himself
to  a  man  named  Denton  Offutt,  in  Sangamon
county,  assisted  him  to  build  a  flat-boat,  accom-
panied him  to  New  Orleans  on  a  trading  voyage,
and  returned  with  him  to  New  Salem,  in  Menard
county,  where  Offutt  opened  a  store  for  the  sale  of
general  merchandise.  Little  was  accomplished  in
this  way,  and  Lincoln  employed  his  too  abundant


716


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


leisure  in  constant  reading  and  study.  He  learned
during  this  time  the  elements  of  English  grammar,
and  made  a  beginning  in  the  study  of  surveying
and  the  principles  of  law.  But  the  next  year  an
Indian  war  began,  occasioned  by  the  return  of
Black  Hawk  with  his  bands  of  Sacs  and  Foxes
from  Iowa  to  Illinois.  Lincoln  volunteered  in  a
company  raised  in  Sangamon  county,  and  was  im-
mediately elected  captain.  His  company  was  or-
ganized at  Richland  on  21  April,  1832;  but  his
service  in  command  of  it  was  brief,  for  it  was
mustered  out  on  27  May.  Lincoln  immediately
re-enlisted  as  a  private,  and  served  for  several
weeks  in  that  capacity,  being  finally  mustered  out
on  16  June,  1832,  by  Lieut.  Robert  Anderson,  who
afterward  commanded  Port  Sumter  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war.  He  returned  home  and  began
a  hasty  canvass  for  election  to  the  legislature.  His
name  had  been  announced  in  the  spring  before  his
enlistment ;  but  now  only  ten  days  were  left  before
the  election,  which  took  place  in  August.  In  spite
of  these  disadvantages,  he  made  a  good  race  and
was  far  from  the  foot  of  the  poll.  Although  he
was  defeated,  he  gained  the  almost  unanimous
vote  of  his  own  neighborhood,  New  Salem  giving
him  277  votes  against  3.  He  now  began  to  look
about  him  for  employment,  and  for  a  time  thought
seriously  of  learning  the  trade  of  a  blacksmith ;  but
an  opportunity  presented  itself  to  buy  the  only  store
in  the  settlement,  which  he  did,  giving  his  notes  for
the  whole  amount  involved.  He  was  associated  with
an  idle  and  dissolute  partner,  and  the  business  soon
went  to  wreck,  leaving  Lincoln  burdened  with  a
debt  which  it  required  several  years  of  frugality  and
industry  for  him  to  meet ;  but  it  was  finally  paid
in  full.  After  this  failure  he  devoted  himself  with
the  greatest  earnestness  and  industry  to  the  study
of  law.  He  was  appointed  postmaster  of  New  Sa-
lem in  1833,  an  office  which  he  held  for  three  years.
The  emoluments  of  the  place  were  very  slight,  but  it
gave  him  opportunities  for  reading.  At  the  same
time  he  was  appointed  deputy  to  John  Calhoun,  the
county  surveyor,  and,  his  modest  wants  being  sup-

})lied  by  these  two  functions,  he  gave  his  remaining
eisure  unreservedly  to  the  study  of  law  and  politics.
He  was  a  candidate  for  the  legislature  in  August,
1834,  and  was  elected  this  time  at  the  head  of  the
list.  He  was  re-elected  in  1836, 1838,  and  1840,  af-
ter which  he  declined  further  election.  After  enter-
ing the  legislature  he  did  not  return  to  New  Salem,
but,  having  by  this  time  attained  some  proficiency
in  the  law,  he  removed  to  Springfield,  where  he
went  into  partnership  with  John  T.  Stuart,  whose
acquaintance  he  had  begun  in  the  Black  Hawk
war  and  continued  at  Vandalia.  He  took  rank
from  the  first  among  the  leading  members  of  the
legislature.  He  was  instrumental  in  having  the
state  capital  removed  from  Vandalia  to  Springfield,
and  during  his  eight  years  of  service  his  ability,
industry,  and  weight  of  character  gained  him  such
standing  among  his  associates  that  in  his  last  two
terms  he  was  the  candidate  of  his  party  for  the
speakership  of  the  house  of  representatives.  In
1846  he  was  elected  to  congress,  his  opponent  being
the  Rev.  Peter  Cartwright.  The  most  important
congressional  measure  with  which  his  name  was
associated  during  his  single  term  of  service  was  a
scheme  for  the  emancipation  of  the  slaves  in  the
District  of  Columbia,  which  in  the  prevailing  tem-
per of  the  time  was  refused  consideration  by  con-
gress. He  was  not  a  candidate  for  re-election,  but
for  the  first  and  only  time  in  his  life  he  applied  for
an  executive  appointment,  the  commissionership
of  the  general  land-office.  The  place  was  given  to
another  man,  but  President  Taylor's  administra-


tion offered  Mr.  Lincoln  the  governorship  of  the
territory  of  Oregon,  which  he  declined.

Mr.  Lincoln  had  by  this  time  become  the  most
influential  exponent  of  the  principles  of  the  Whig
party  in  Illinois,  and  his  services  were  in  request
in  every  campaign.  After  his  return  from  con-
gress he  devoted  himself  with  great  assiduity  and
success  to  the  practice  of  law,  and  speedily  gained
a  commanding  position  at  the  bar.  As  he  says
himself,  he  was  losing  his  interest  in  politics  when
the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise  aroused  him
again.  The  profound  agitation  of  the  question  of
slavery,  which  in  1854  followed  the  repeal  of  the
Missouri  compromise,  awakened  all  the  energies  of
Lincoln's  nature.  He  regarded  this  act,  in  which
Senator  Douglas  was  the  most  prominent  agent  of
the  reactionary  party,  as  a  gross  breach  of  faith,
and  began  at  once  a  series  of  earnest  political
discussions  which  immediately  placed  him  at  the
head  of  the  party  that,  not  only  in  Illinois  but
throughout  the  west,  was  speedily  formed  to  pro-
test against  and  oppose  the  throwing  open  of  the
territories  to  the  encroachments  of  slavery.  The
legislature  elected  in  Illinois  in  the  heat  of  this
discussion  contained  a  majority  of  members  op-
posed to  the  policy  of  Douglas.  The  duty  of  select-
ing a  senator  in  place  of  Gen.  Shields,  whose  term
was  closing,  devolved  upon  this  legislature,  and
Mr.  Lincoln  was  the  unanimous  choice  of  the  Whig
members.  But  they  did  not  command  a  clear  ma-
jority of  the  legislature.  There  were  four  mem-
bers of  Democratic  antecedents  who,  while  they
were  ardently  opposed  to  the  extension  of  slavery,
were  not  willing  to  cast  their  votes  for  a  Whig
candidate,  and  adhered  tenaciously  through  several
ballots  to  Lyman  Trumbull,  a  Democrat  of  their
own  way  of  thinking.  Lincoln,  fearing  that  this
dissension  among  the  anti-slavery  men  might  re-
sult in  the  election  of  a  supporter  of  Douglas,  urged
his  friends  to  go  over  in  a  body  to  the  support  of
Trumbull,  and  his  influence  was  sufficient  to  ac-
complish this  result.  Trumbull  was  elected,  and
for  many  years  served  the  Republican  cause  in  the
senate  with  ability  and  zeal.

As  soon  as  the  Republican  party  became  fully
organized  in  the  nation,  embracing  in  its  ranks
the  anti-slavery  members  of  the  old  Whig  and
Democratic  parties,  Mr.  Lincoln,  by  general  con-
sent, took  his  place  at  the  head  of  the  party  in
Illinois  ;  and  when,  in  1858,  Senator  Douglas  sought
a  re-election  to  the  senate,  the  Republicans  with
one  voice  selected  Mr.  Lincoln  as  his  antagonist.
He  had  already  made  several  speeches  of  remark-
able eloquence  and  power  against  the  pro-slav-
ery reaction  of  which  the  Nebraska  bill  was  the
significant  beginning,  and  when  Mr.  Douglas  re-
turned to  Illinois  to  begin  his  canvass  for  the
senate,  he  was  challenged  by  Mr.  Lincoln  to  a
series  of  joint  discussions.  The  challenge  was  ac-
cepted, and  the  most  remarkable  oratorical  combat
the  state  has  ever  witnessed  took  place  between
them  during  the  summer.  Mr.  Douglas  defended
his  thesis  of  non-intervention  with  slavery  in  the
territories  (the  doctrine  known  as  "  popular  sover-
eignty," and  derided  as  "squatter  sovereignty")
with  remarkable  adroitness  and  energy.  The
ground  that  Mr.  Lincoln  took  was  higher  and
bolder  than  had  yet  been  assumed  by  any  Ameri-
can statesman  of  his  time.  In  the  brief  and  sen-
tentious speech  in  which  he  accepted  the  champion-
ship of  his  party,  before  the  Republican  convention
of  16  June,  1858,  he  uttered  the  following  pregnant
and  prophetic  words :  "  A  house  divided  against
itself  cannot  stand.  I  believe  this  government  can-
not endui'e  permanently  half  slave  and  half  free.


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


717


I  do  not  expect  the  Union  to  be  dissolved ;  I  do
not  expect  the  house  to  fall ;  but  I  do  expect  that
it  will  cease  to  be  divided.  It  will  become  all  the
one  thing  or  all  the  other.  Either  the  opponents
of  slavery  will  arrest  the  further  spread  of  it  and

Elace  it  where  the  public  mind  shall  rest  in  the  be-
ef that  it  is  in  course  of  ultimate  extinction,  or
its  advocates  will  push  it  forward  until  it  shall  be-
come alike  lawful  in  all  the  states,  old  as  well  as
new,  north  as  well  as  south."  This  bold  utterance
excited  the  fears  of  his  timid  friends,  and  laid  him
open  to  the  hackneyed  and  conventional  attacks  of
the  supporters  of  slavery ;  but  throughout  the  con-
test, while  he  did  not  for  an  instant  lower  this
lofty  tone  of  opposition  to  slavery  and  hope  of  its
extinction,  he  refused  to  be  crowded  by  the  fears  of
his  friends  or  the  denunciations  of  his  enemies  away
from  the  strictly  constitutional  ground  upon  which
his  opposition  was  made.  The  debates  between
him  and  Senator  Douglas  aroused  extraordinary
interest  throughout  the  state  and  the  country.  The
men  were  perhaps  equally  matched  in  oratorical
ability  and  adroitness  in  debate,  but  Lincoln's  su-
periority in  moral  insight,  and  especially  in  far-
seeing  political  sagacity,  soon  became  apparent.
The  most  important  and  significant  of  the  debates
was  that  which  took  place  at  Freeport.  Mr.  Doug-
las had  previously  asked  Mr.  Lincoln  a  series  of
questions  intended  to  embarrass  him,  which  Lin-
coln without  the  slightest  reserve  answered  by  a
categorical  yes  or  no.  At  Freeport.  Lincoln,  tak-
ing his  turn,  inquired  of  Douglas  whether  the  peo-
ple of  a  territory  could  in  any  lawful  way.  against
the  wish  of  any  citizen  of  the  United  States,  ex-
clude slavery  from  its  limits  prior  to  the  formation
of  a  state  constitution.  By  his  reply,  intimating
that  slavery  might  be  excluded  by  unfriendly  ter-
ritorial legislation,  Douglas  gained  a  momentary
advantage  in  the  anti-slavery  region  in  which  he
spoke,  but  dealt  a  fatal  blow'  to  his  popularity  in
the  south,  the  result  of  which  was  seen  two  years
afterward  at  the  Charleston  convention.  The
ground  assumed  by  Senator  Douglas  was,  in  fact,
utterly  untenable,  and  Lincoln  showed  this  in  one
of  histerse  sentences.  "  Judge  Douglas  holds,"  he
said,  "that  a  thing  may  lawfully  be  driven  away
from  a  place  where  it  has  a  lawful  right  to  go."

This  debate  established  the  reputation  of  Mr.
Lincoln  as  one  of  the  leading  orators  of  the  Repub-
lican party  of  the  Union,  and  a  speech  that  he  de-
livered at  Cooper  Institute,  in  New  York,  on  27
Feb.,  1860,  in  which  he  showed  that  the  unbroken
record  of  the  founders  of  the  republic  was  in  favor
of  the  restriction  of  slavery  and  against  its  exten-
sion, widened  and  confirmed  his  reputation ;  so  that
when  the  Republican  convention  came  together  in
Chicago  in  May,  1860,  he  was  nominated  for  the
presidency  on  the  third  ballot,  over  William  H.
Seward,  who  was  his  principal  competitor.  The
Democratic  convention,  which  met  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  broke  up  after  numerous  fruitless  ballotings,
and  divided  into  two  sections.  The  southern  half,
unable  to  trust  Mr.  Douglas  with  the  interests  of
slavery  after  his  Freeport  speech,  first  adjourned
to  Richmond,  but  again  joined  the  other  half  at
Baltimore,  where  a  second  disruption  took  place,
after  which  the  southern  half  nominated  John  C.
Breckinridge,  of  Kentucky,  and  the  northern  por-
tion nominated  Mr.  Douglas.  John  Bell,  of  Ten-
nessee, was  nominated  by  the  so-called  Constitu-
/  tional  Union  party.  Lincoln,  therefore,  supported
by  the  entire  anti-slavery  sentiment  of  the  north,

¥  lined  an  easy  victory  over  the  three  other  parties,
he  election  took  place  on  6  Nov.,  and  when  the
electoral  college  cast  their  votes  Lincoln  was  found


to  have  180,  Breckinridge  72,  Bell  39,  and  Doug-
las 12.  The  popular  vote  stood :  for  Lincoln,  1.866-
462;  for  Douglas,  1,375,157;  for  Breckinridge,
847,953  ;  for  Bell,  590,631.

The  extreme  partisans  of  slavery  had  not  even
waited  for  the  election  of  Lincoln,  to  begin  their
preparations  for  an  insurrection,  and  as  soon  as  the
result  was  declared  a  movement  for  separation  was
begun  in  South  Carolina,  and  it  carried  along  with
her  the  states  of  Georgia,  Alabama,  Florida,  Missis-
sippi, Louisiana,  and  Texas.  A  provisional  govern-
ment, styled  the  "  Confederate  States  of  America,"
of  which  Jefferson  Davis,  of  Mississippi,  was  made
president,  was  promptly  organized,  and  seized,  with
few  exceptions,  all  the  posts,  arsenals,  and  public
property  of  the  United  States  within  their  limits.
Confronted  by  this  extraordinary  crisis,  Mr.  Lin-
coln kept  his  own  counsel,  and  made  no  public  ex-
pression of  his  intentions  or  his  policy  until  he  was
inaugurated  on  4  March,  1861.

He  called  about  him  a  cabinet  of  the  most  promi-
nent members  of  the  anti-slavery  parties  of  the
nation,  giving  no  preference  to  any  special  faction.
His  secretary  of  state  was  William  H.  Seward,  of
New  York,  who  had  been  his  principal  rival  for
the  nomination,  and  whose  eminence  and  abili-
ties designated  him  as  the  leading  member  of  the
administration  ;  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  was
Salmon  P.  Chase,  of  Ohio,  whose  pre-eminence  in
the  west  was  as  unquestioned  as  Seward's  in  the
east  ;  of  war,  Simon  Cameron,  of  Pennsylvania,  the
!  most  influential  politician  of  that  state ;  of  the
navv,Gideon  Welles,  of  Connecticut;  of  the  interior,
J  Caleb  B.  Smith,  of  Indiana :  the  border  slave-states
■  were  represented  in  the  government  by  Edward
Bates,  of  Missouri,  attorney -general,  and  Montgom-
ery Blair,  of  Maryland,  postmaster-general — both  of
!  them  men  of  great  distinction  of  character  and
j  high  standing  as  lawyers.  Seward,  Smith,  and
Bates  were  of  Whig  antecedents ;  all  the  rest  of
i  Democratic.  The  cabinet  underwent,  in  the  course
of  Mr.  Lincoln's  term,  the  following  modifications  :
Sec.  Chase,  after  a  brilliant  administration  of  the
finances,  resigned  in  1864  from  personal  reasons,
and  was  succeeded  by  William  P.  Fessenden,  of
Maine  ;  Sec.  Cameron  left  the  war  department  at  the
close  of  the
yearl861,and
was  appoint-
ed minister  to
Russia,  and
his  place  was
taken  by  Ed-
win M.  Stan-
ton, a  war
Democrat  of
singular  en-
ergy and  vig-
or, and  equal
ability  and
devotion  ;  Sec.  Smith,  accepting  a  judgeship,  gave
wav  to  John  P.  Usher,  of  Indiana ;  Attorney-Gen-
eral Bates  resigned  in  the  last  year  of  the  adminis-
tration, and  was  succeeded  by  James  Speed,  of  Ken-
tucky :  and  Postmaster -General  Blair  about  the
same  time  gave  way  to  William  Dennison,  of  Ohio.
In  his  inaugural  address  President  Lincoln  treated
the  acts  of  secession  as  a  nullity.  He  declared  the
Union  perpetual  and  inviolate,  and  announced  with
perfect  firmness,  though  with  the  greatest  modera-
tion of  speech  and  feeling,  the  intention  of  the  gov-
ernment to  maintain  its  authority  and  to  hold  the
places  under  its  jurisdiction.  He  made  an  elabo-
rate and  unanswerable  argument  against  the  legal-
ity as  well  as  the  justice  of  secession,  and  further


718


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


showed,  with  convincing  clearness,  that  peaceful
secession  was  impossible.  "  Can  aliens  make  trea-
ties," he  said,  "  easier  than  friends  can  make  laws  ?
Can  treaties  be  more  faithfully  enforced  between
aliens  than  laws  can  among  friends  ?  Suppose  you
go  to  war ;  you  cannot  fight  always,  and  when,  after
much  loss  on  both  sides  and  no  gain  on  either,  you
cease  fighting,  the  identical  old  questions  as  to
terms  of  intercourse  are  again  upon  you."  He
pleaded  for  peace  in  a  strain  of  equal  tenderness
and  dignity,  and  in  closing  he  said :  "  In  your  hands,
my  dissatisfied  fellow-countrymen,  and  not  in  mine,
is  the  momentous  issue  of  civil  war.  The  govern-
ment will  not
assail  you.  You
can  have  no
conflict  with-
out being  your-
selves the  ag-
gressors. You
have  no  oath
registered  in
heaven  to  de-
stroy the  gov-
ernment, while
I  shall  have  a
most  solemn
one  to  preserve,
protect,  and  de-
fend it."  This
speech  pro-
foundly affect-
ed the  public
opinion  of  the
north;  but  in
the  excited
state  of  senti-
ment that  then
controlled  the
south  it  natu-
rally met  only
contempt  and
defiance  in  that  section.  A  few  weeks  later  the
inevitable  war  began,  in  an  attack  upon  Fort
Sumter  by  the  secessionists  of  South  Carolina
under  Gen.  G.  T.  Beauregard,  and  after  a  long
bombardment  the  fort  surrendered  on  13  April,
1861.  The  president  instantly  called  for  a  force  of
75,000  three-months'  militiamen,  and  three  weeks
later  ordered  the  enlistment  of  64,000  soldiers  and
18,000  seamen  for  three  years.  He  set  on  foot  a
blockade  of  the  southern  ports,  and  called  congress
together  in  special  session,  choosing  for  their  day  of
meeting  the  4th  of  July.  The  remaining  states  of
the  south  rapidly  arrayed  themselves  on  one  side
or  the  other ;  all  except  Maryland,  Kentucky,  and
Missouri  were  drawn  into  the  secession  movement,
and  the  western  part  of  Virginia,  adhering  to  the
Union,  under  the  name  of  West  Virginia,  separated
itself  from  that  ancient  commonwealth.

The  first  important  battle  of  the  war  took  place  at
Bull  Run,  near  Manassas  station,  Va.,  21  July,  1861,
and  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  the  National  troops
under  Gen.  Irwin  McDowell  by  a  somewhat  larger
force  of  the  Confederates  under  Gens.  Joseph  E.
Johnston  and  Beauregard.  Though  the  loss  in
killed  and  wounded  was  not  great,  and  was  about
the  same  on  both  sides,  the  victory  was  still  one
of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  Confederates,  and
gave  them  a  great  increase  of  prestige  on  both
sides  of  the  Atlantic.  They  were  not,  however,
able  to  pursue  their  advantage.  The  summer  was
passed  in  enlisting,  drilling,  and  equipping  a  for-
midable National  army  on  the  banks  of  the  Poto-
mac, which  was  given  in  charge  of  Gen.  George  B.


McClellan,  a  young  officer  who  had  distinguished
himself  by  a  successful  campaign  in  western  Vir-
ginia. In  spite  of  the  urgency  of  the  government,
which  was  increased  by  the  earnestness  of  the  peo-

Sle  and  their  representatives  in  congress,  Gen.
[cClellan  made  no  advance  until  the  spring  of
1862,  when  Gen.  Johnston,  in  command  of  the
Confederate  army,  evacuated  the  position  which,
with  about  45,000  men,  he  had  held  during  the
autumn  and  winter  against  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, amounting  to  about  177,000  effectives.  Gen.
McClellan  then  transferred  his  army  to  the  penin-
sula between  the  James  and  York  rivers.  Al-
though there  was  but  a  force  of  16,000  opposed  to
him  when  he  landed,  he  spent  a  month  before  the
works  at  Yorktown,  and  when  he  was  prepared  to
open  fire  upon  them  they  were  evacuated,  and
Gen.  Johnston  retreated  to  the  neighborhood  of
Richmond.  The  battle  of  Seven  Pines,  in  which
the  Confederates,  successful  in  their  first  attack,
were  afterward  repelled,  was  fought  on  31  May,
1862.  Johnston  was  wounded,  and  the  command
devolved  upon  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee,  who  in  the
latter  part  of  June  moved  out  from  his  position
before  Richmond  and  attacked  McClellan's  right
flank,  under  Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter,  at  Gaines's
Mills,  north  of  the  Chickahominy.  Porter,  with
one  corps,  resisted  the  Confederate  army  all  day
with  great  gallantry,  unassisted  by  the  main  army
under  McClellan,  but  withdrew  in  the  evening,
and  McClellan  at  once  began  his  retreat  to  the
James  river.  Several  battles  were  fought  on  the
way,  in  which  the  Confederates  were  checked  ;
but  the  retreat  continued  until  the  National  army
reached  the  James.  Taking  position  at  Malvern
Hill,  they  inflicted  a  severe  defeat  upon  Gen.  Lee,
but  were  immediately  after  withdrawn  by  Gen.
McClellan  to  Harrison's  Landing.  Here,  as  at
other  times  during  his  career,  McClellan  labored
under  a  strange  hallucination  as  to  the  numbers  of
his  enemy.  He  generally  estimated  them  at  not  less
than  twice  their  actual  force,  and  continually  re-
proached the  president  for  not  giving  him  impos-
sible re-enforcements  to  equal  the  imaginary  num-
bers he  thought  opposed  to  him.  In  point  of  fact,
his  army  was  always  in  excess  of  that  of  Johnston
or  Lee.  The  continual  disasters  in  the  east  were
somewhat  compensated  by  a  series  of  brilliant
successes  in  the  west.  In  February,  1862,  Gen.
Ulysses  S.  Grant  had  captured  the  Confederate
forts  Henry  and  Donelson,  thus  laying  open  the
great  strategic  lines  of  the  Tennessee  and  Cumber-
land rivers,  and,  moving  southward,  had  fought
(6  and  7  April)  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  with  unfavor-
able results  on  the  first  day,  which  were  turned  to
a  victory  on  the  second  with  the  aid  of  Gen.  D.  C.
Buell  and  his  army,  a  battle  in  which  Gen.  Albert
Sidney  Johnston  was  killed  and  the  Confederate
invasion  of  Kentucky  baffled,  Farragut,  on  24
April,  had  won  a  brilliant  naval  victory  over  the
twin  forts  above  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi,
which  resulted  in  the  capture  of  New  Orleans  and
the  control  of  the  lower  Mississippi.  After  Gen.
McClellan's  retreat  to  the  James,  the  president
visited  the  army  at  Harrison's  Landing  (8  July),
and,  after  careful  consultations  with  the  corps
commanders,  became  convinced  that  in  the  actual
disposition  of  the  officers  and  the  troops  there
was  no  reasonable  expectation  of  a  successful
movement  upon  Richmond  by  McClellan.  An  or-
der was  therefore  issued  for  the  withdrawal  of  the
army  from  the  James,  and.  Gen.  Halleck  having
been  appointed  general-in-chief,  Gen.  Pope  was
sent  forward  from  Washington  with  a  small  force
to  delay  the  Confederate  army  under  Gen.  Lee  un-


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


719


til  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  could  arrive  and  be
concentrated  to  support  him.  McClellan's  move-
ments, however,  were  so  deliberate,  and  there  was
such  a  want  of  confidence  and  co-operation  on  the

Sart  of  his  officers  toward  Gen.  Pope,  that  the
rational  army  met  with  a  decisive  defeat  on  the
same  battle-field  of  Bull  Run  that  saw  their  first
disaster.  Gen.  Pope,  disheartened  by  the  lack  of
sympathy  and  support  that  he  discerned  among
the  most  eminent  officers  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  retreated  upon  Washington,  and  Gen.
McClellan,  who  seemed  to  be  the  only  officer  under
whom  the  army  was  at  the  moment  willing  to
serve,  was  placed  in  command  of  it.  Gen.  Lee,
elated  with  his  success,  crossed  the  Potomac,  but
was  met  by  the  army  under  McClellan  at  South
Mountain  and  Antietam,  and  after  two  days  of
great  slaughter  Lee  retreated  into  Virginia.

President  Lincoln  availed  himself  of  this  occa-
sion to  give  effect  to  a  resolve  that  had  long  been
maturing  in  his  mind  in  an  act  the  most  momen-
tous in  its  significance  and  results  that  the  century
has  witnessed.  For  a  year  and  a  half  he  had  been
subjected  to  urgent  solicitations  from  the  two  great
political  parties  of  the  country,  the  one  side  ap-
pealing to  him  to  take  decided  measures  against
slavery,  and  the  other  imploring  him  to  pursue  a
conservative  course  in  regard  to  that  institution.
His  deep-rooted  detestation  of  the  system  of  domes-
tic servitude  was  no  secret  to  any  one ;  but  his  rev-
erence for  the  law,  his  regard  for  vested  interests,
and  his  anxiety  to  do  nothing  that  should  alienate
any  considerable  body  of  the  supporters  of  the
government,  had  thus  far  induced  him  to  pursue  a
middle  course  between  the  two  extremes.  Mean-
while the  power  of  events  had  compelled  a  steady
progress  in  the  direction  of  emancipation.  So  early
as  August,  1861,  congress  had  passed  an  act  to
confiscate  the  rights  of  slave-owners  in  slaves  em-
ployed in  a  manner  hostile  to  the  Union,  and  Gen.
Fremont  had  seized  the  occasion  of  the  passage  of
this  act  to  issue  an  order  to  confiscate  and  eman-
cipate the  slaves  of  rebels  in  the  state  of  Missouri.
President  Lincoln,  unwilling,  in  a  matter  of  such
transcendent  importance,  to  leave  the  initiative  to
any  subordinate,  revoked  this  order,  and  directed
Gen.  Fremont  to  modify  it  so  that  it  should  con-
form to  the  confiscation  act  of  congress.  This  ex-
cited violent  opposition  to  the  president  among  the
radical  anti-slavery  men  in  Missouri  and  elsewhere.
while  it  drew  upon  him  the  scarcely  less  embar-
rassing importunities  of  the  conservatives,  who
wished  him  to  take  still  more  decided  ground
against  the  radicals.  On  6  March,  1862,  he  sent  a
special  message  to  congress  inclosing  a  resolution,
the  passage  of  which  he  recommended,  to  offer  pe-
cuniary aid  from  the  general  government  to  states
that  should  adopt  the  gradual  abolishment  of
slavery.  This  resolution  was  promptly  passed  by
congress ;  but  in  none  of  the  slave-states  was  pub-
lic sentiment  sufficiently  advanced  to  permit  them
to  avail  themselves  of  it.  The  next  month,  how-
ever, congress  passed  a  law  emancipating  slaves  in
the  District  of  Columbia,  with  compensation  to
owners,  and  President  Lincoln  had  the  happiness
of  affixing  his  signature  to  a  measure  that  he  had
many  years  before,  while  a  representative  from  Illi-
nois, fruitlessly  urged  upon  the  notice  of  congress.
As  the  war  went  on,  wherever  the  National  armies
penetrated  there  was  a  constant  stream  of  fugitive
slaves  from  the  adjoining  regions,  and  the  com-
manders of  each  department  treated  the  compli-
cated questions  arising  from  this  body  of  "  contra-
bands, as  they  came  to  be  called,  in  their  camps,
according  to  their  own  judgment  of  the  necessities


or  the  expediencies  of  each  case,  a  discretion  which
the  president  thought  best  to  tolerate.  But  on  9
May,  1862,  Gen.  David  Hunter,  an  intimate  and
esteemed  friend  of  Mr.  Lincoln's,  saw  proper,  with-
out consultation  with  him,  to  issue  a  military  or-
der declaring  all  persons  theretofore  held  as  slaves
in  Georgia,  Florida,  and  South  Carolina  forever
free.  The  president,  as  soon  as  he  received  this
order,  issued  a  proclamation  declaring  it  void,  and
reserving  to  himself  the  decision  of  the  question
whether  it  was  competent  for  him,  as  commander-
in-chief  of  the  army  and  navy,  to  declare  the  slaves
of  any  state  or  states  free,  and  whether  at  any  time
or  in  any  case  it  should  have  become  a  necessity
indispensable  to  the  maintenance  of  the  govern-
ment to  exercise  such  supposed  power,  and  prohib-
iting to  commanders  in  the  field  the  decision  of
such  questions.  But  he  added  in  his  proclamation
a  significant  warning  and  appeal  to  the  slave-hold-
ing states,  urging  once  more  upon  them  the  policy
of  emancipation  by  state  action.  "  I  do  not  argue,
he  said ;  "  I  beseech  you  to  make  the  argument  for
yourselves.  You  cannot,  if  you  would,  be  blind
to  the  signs  of  the  times.  I  beg  of  you  a  calm  and
enlarged  consideration  of  them,  ranging,  if  it  may
be,  far  above  personal  and  partisan  politics.  This
proposal  makes  common  cause  for  a  common  ob-
ject, casting  no  reproaches  upon  any.  .  .  .  Will
you  not  embrace  it f  So  much  good  has  not  been
done,  by  one  effort,  in  all  past  time,  as  in  the
providence  of  God  it  is  now  your  high  privilege
to  do.  May  the  vast  future  not  have  cause  to  la-
ment that  you  have  neglected  it."  He  had  several
times  endeavored  to  bring  this  proposition  before
the  members  of  congress  from  the  loyal  slave-hold-
ing states,  and  on  12  July  he  invited  them  to  meet
him  at  the  executive  mansion,  and  submitted  to
them  a  powerful  and  urgent  appeal  to  induce
their  states  to  adopt  the  policy  of  compensated
emancipation.  He  told  them,  without  reproach  or
complaint,  that  he  believed  that  if  they  had  all
voted  for  the  resolution  in  the  gradual  emancipa-
tion message  of  the  preceding  March,  the  wai
would  now  have  been  substantially  ended,  and
that  the  plan  therein  proposed  was  still  one  of  the
most  potent  and  swift  means  of  ending  it.  "  Let
the  states,"  he  said,  "which  are  in  rebellion  see
definitely  and  certainly  that  in  no  event  will  the
states  you  represent  ever  join  their  proposed  con-
federacy, and  they  cannot  much  longer  maintain
the  contest."  While  urging  this  policy  upon  the
conservatives,  and  while  resolved  in  his  own  mind
upon  emancipation  by  decree  as  a  last  resource,
he  was  the  subject  of  vehement  attacks  from  the
more  radical  anti-slavery  supporters  of  the  gov-
ernment, to  which  he  replied  with  unfailing  mod-
eration and  good  temper.  Although  in  July  he
had  resolved  upon  his  course,  and  had  read  to  his
cabinet  a  draft  of  a  proclamation  of  emancipation
which  he  had  then  laid  aside  for  a  more  fitting  oc-
casion (on  the  suggestion  from  Mr.  Seward  that  its
issue  in  the  disastrous  condition  of  our  military
affairs  would  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  despera-
tion), he  met  the  reproaches  of  the  radical  Repub-
licans, the  entreaties  of  visiting  delegations,  and
the  persuasions  of  his  eager  friends  with  argu-
ments showing  both  sides  of  the  question  of  which
they  persisted  in  seeing  only  one.  To  Horace
Greeley,  on  22  Aug.,  Mr.  Lincoln  said:  "My  para-
mount object  is  to  save  the  Union,  and  not  either
to  save  or  destroy  slavery.  If  I  could  save  the
Union  without  freeing  any  slave,  I  would  do  it ;  if
I  could  save  it  by  freeing  all  the  slaves,  I  would
do  it :  and  if  I  could  do  it  by  freeing  some  and
leaving  others  alone,  I  would  also  do  that." And


720


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


even  so  late  as  13  Sept.  he  said  to  a  delegation  of  a
religious  society,  who  were  urging  immediate  ac-
tion :  "  I  do  not  want  to  issue  a  document  that  the
whole  world  will  see  must  necessarily  be  inopera-
tive, like  the  pope's  bull  against  the  comet.  ...  1
view  this  matter  as  a  practical  war  measure,  to  be
decided  on  according  to  the  advantages  or  disad-
vantages it  may  offer  to  the  suppression  of  the  re-
bellion." Still,  he  assured  them  that  he  had  not
decided  against  a  proclamation  of  liberty  to  the
slaves,  but  that  the  matter  occupied  his  deepest
thoughts.  The  retreat  of  Lee  from  Maryland  af-
ter his  defeat  at
Antietam  seemed
to  the  president
to  afford  a  proper
occasion  for  the
execution  of  his
long-matured  re-
solve, and  on  22
Sept.  he  issued  his
preliminary  proc-
lamation, giv-
ing notice  to  the
states  in  rebel-
lion that,  on  1
Jan.,  1863,  all
persons  held  as
slaves  within  any
state  or  designat-
ed part  of  a  state,
the  people  where-
of should  then
be  in  rebellion
against  the  Unit-
ed States,  should
be  then,  thence-
forward, and  for-
ever free.  When
congress  came  to-
gether on  1  Dec.
he  urged  them  to
supplement  what
had  already  been
done  by  constitutional  action,  concluding  his  mes-:
sage  with  this  impassioned  appeal :  "  Fellow-citi-
zens, we  cannot  escape  history.  We  of  this  congress
and  this  administration  will  be  remembered  in
spite  of  ourselves.  No  personal  significance  or  in-
significance can  spare  one  or  another  of  us.  The
fiery  trial  through  which  we  pass  will  light  us  down
in  honor  or  dishonor  to  the  latest  generation.  We
— even  we  here — hold  the  power  and  bear  the  re-
sponsibility. In  giving  freedom  to  the  slave,  we  as-
sure freedom  to  the  free — honorable  alike  in  what
we  give  and  what  we  preserve.  We  shall  nobly  save,
or  meanly  lose,  the  last,  best  hope  of  earth.  Other
means  may  succeed ;  this  could  not  fail.  The  way
is  plain,  peaceful,  generous,  just — a  way  which,  if
followed,  the  world  will  forever  applaud,  and  God
must  forever  bless."  It  was  hardly  to  be  expected,
however,  that  any  action  would  be  taken  by  con-
gress before  the  lapse  of  the  hundred  days  that  the
president  had  left  between  his  warning  and  its
execution.  On  1  Jan.,  1863,  the  final  proclamation
of  emancipation  was  issued.  It  recited  the  pre-
liminary document,  and  then  designated  the  states
in  rebellion  against  the  United  States.  They  were
Arkansas,  Texas,  a  part  of  Louisiana,  Mississippi,
Alabama,  Florida,  Georgia,  South  Carolina,  North
Carolina,  and  Virginia,  excepting  certain  counties.
The  proclamation  then  continued :  "I  do  order
and  declare  that  all  persons  held  as  slaves  within
said  designated  states  and  parts  of  states  are,  and
henceforward  shall  be,  free ;  and  that  the  execu-


tive government  of  the  United  States,  including
the  military  and  naval  authorities  thereof,  will
recognize  and  maintain  the  freedom  of  said  per-
sons." The  criticisms  and  forebodings  of  the  op-
ponents of  emancipation  had  well-nigh  been  ex-
hausted during  the  previous  three  months,  and  Hie
definitive  proclamation  was  received  with  general
enthusiasm  throughout  the  loyal  states.  The  dis-
satisfaction with  which  this  important  measure.
was  regarded  in  the  border  states  gradually  died
away,  as  did  also  the  opposition  in  conservative
quarters  to  the  enlistment  of  negro  soldiers.  Their
good  conduct,  their  quick  submission  to  discipline,
and  their  excellent  behavior  in  several  battles,  rap-
idly made  an  end  of  the  prejudice  against  them ;
and  when,  in  the  winter  session  of  congress  of
1863-'4,  Mr.  Lincoln  again  urged  upon  the  atten-
tion of  that  body  the  passage  of  a  constitutional
amendment  abolishing  slavery,  his  proposition
met  with  the  concurrence  of  a  majority  of  con-
gress, though  it  failed  of  the  necessary  two-third
vote  in  the  house  of  representatives.  During  the
following  year,  however,  public  opinion  made
rapid  progress,  and  the  influence  of  the  president
with  congress  was  largely  increased  after  his  tri-
umphant re-election.  In  his  annual  message  of  6
Dec,  1864,  he  once  more  pleaded,  this  time  with
irresistible  force,  in  favor  of  constitutional  emanci-
pation in  all  the  states.  As  there  had  been  much
controversy  during  the  year  in  regard  to  the  presi-
dent's anti-slavery  convictions,  and  the  suggestion
had  been  made  in  many  quarters  that,  for  the  sake
of  peace,  he  might  be  induced  to  withdraw  the
proclamation,  he  repeated  the  declaration  made
the  year  before :  "  While  1  remain  in  my  present
position  I  shall  not  attempt  to  retract  or  modify
the  emancipation  proclamation  ;  nor  shall  I  return
to  slavery  any  person  who  is  free  by  the  terms  of
that  proclamation  or  by  any  of  the  acts  of  con-
gress. If  the  people  should,  by  whatever  mode  or
means,  make  it  an  executive  duty  to  re-enslave
such  persons,  another,  and  not  I,  must  be  their
instrument  to  perform  it."  This  time  congress
acted  with  alacrity,  and  on  31  Jan.,  1865,  proposed
to  the  states  the  13th  amendment  to  the  constitu-
tion, providing  that  neither  slavery  nor  involun-
tary servitude,  except  as  a  punishment  for  crime,
whereof  the  party  shall  have  been  duly  convicted,
shall  exist  within  the  United  States,  or  any  place
subject  to  their  jurisdiction.  The  states  rapidly
adopted  the  amendment  by  the  action  of  their
legislatures,  and  the  president  was  especially
pleased  that  his  own  state  of  Illinois  led  the  van,
having  passed  the  necessary  resolution  within
twenty-four  hours.  Before  the  year  ended  twenty-
seven  of  the  thirty-six  states  (being  the  necessary
three  fourths)  had  ratified  the  amendment,  and
President  Johnson,  on  18  Dec,  1865,  officially  pro-
claimed its  adoption.

While  the  energies  of  the  government  and  of  the
people  were  most  strenuously  occupied  with  the  war
and  the  questions  immediately  concerning  it,  the
four  years  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  administration  had  their
full  share  of  complicated  and  difficult  questions  of
domestic  and  foreign  concern.  The  interior  and
post-office  departments  made  great  progress  in  de-
veloping the  means  of  communication  throughout
the  country.  Mr.  Chase,  as  secretary  Of  the  treasury,
performed,  with  prodigious  ability  and  remarkable
success,  the  enormous  duties  devolving  upon  him
of  providing  funds  to  supply  the  army  at  an  ex-
pense amounting  at  certain  periods  to  $3,000,000  a
day;  and  Mr.  Seward,  in  charge  of  the  state  de-
partment, held  at  bay  the  suppressed  hostility  of
European  nations. Of  all  his  cabinet,  the  presi-


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


721


dent  sustained  with  Mr.  Seward  relations  of  the
closest  intimacy,  and for  that  reason,  perhaps,
shared  more  directly  in  the  labors  of  his  depart-
ment. He  revised  the  first  draft  of  most  of  Sew-
ard's important despatches, and  changed and
amended  their  language  with  remarkable  wisdom
and  skill. He  was  careful  to  avoid  all  sources  of
controversy  or  ill-feeling  with  foreign  nations,  and
when  they  occurred  he  did  his  best  to  settle  them
in  the  interests  of  peace,  without  a  sacrifice  of
national  dignity. At  the  end  of  the  year  1861
the  friendly  relations  be-
tween England  and  the
United  States  were  seri-
ously threatened  by  the
capture  of  the  Confeder-
ate envoys,  Mason  and
Slidell,  on  board  a  Brit-
ish merchant-ship. (See
Wilkes,  Charles.)  Pub-
lic sentiment  approved
the  capture,  and,  as  far
as  could  be  judged  by
every  manifestation in
the press  and in  con-
gress,  was  in favor  of
retaining  the  prisoners
and defiantly refusing
the  demand  of  England
for their  return. But
when  the  president,  af-
ter mature  deliberation,
decided  that  the  capture
was against American
precedents,  and  direct-
ed their  return  to  Brit-
ish custody,  the  second
thought  of  the  country
was  with  him. His  pru-
dence and moderation
were  also  conspicuously
displayed  in his  treat-
ment of  the  question  of
the invasion
of  Mexico  by
France, and
the  establish-
ment by  mili-
tary power  of
the emperor
Maximilian  in
that coun-
try. Accept-
ing as  genuine
the protesta-
tions of the
emperor  of  the
French, that
he intended
no  interference  with  the  will  of  the  people  of  Mexi-
co, he  took  no  measures  unfriendly  to  France  or
the  empire,  except  those  involved  in  the  mainte-
nance of  unbroken  friendship  with  the  republican
government  under  President  Juarez,  a  proceeding
that,  although  severely  criticised  by  the  more  ar-
dent spirits  in  congress,  ended,  after  the  presi-
dent's death,  in  the  triumph  of  the  National  party
in  Mexico  and  the  downfall  of  the  invaders. He
left  no  doubt,  however,  at  any  time,  in  regard  to
his  own  conviction  that  "  the  safety  of  the  people
of  the  United  States  and  the  cheerful  destiny  to
which  thev  aspire  are  intimately  dependent  upon
the maintenance  of free republican  institutions
throughout  Mexico." He  dealt  in  a  sterner  spirit
with  the  proposition  for  foreign  mediation  that
vol.  in. — 46


the  emperor  of  the  French,  after  seeking  in  vain
the  concurrence  of  other  European  powers,  at  last
presented  singly  at  the  beginning  of  1863. This
proposition,  under  the  orders  of  the  president,  was
declined  by  Mr.  Seward  on  6  Feb.,  in  a  despatch
of remarkable ability  and dignity,  which put
an  end to  all discussion  of  overtures  of  inter-
vention from  European  powers. The  diplomatic
relations  with  England  were  exceedingly  strained
at  several  periods  during  the  war. The  build-
ing  and  fitting  out  of  Confederate  cruisers  in
English  ports,  and  their
escape,  after  their  con-
struction and  its  purpose
had  been  made  known
by  the  American  min-
ister,  more than once
brought  the  two  nations
to the verge of war;
but  the  moderation  with
which  the  claims  of  the
United  States  were  made
by  Mr.  Lincoln,  the  en-
ergy and ability dis-
played by  Sec.  Seward
and by Mr. Charles
Francis  Adams  in  pre-
senting these  claims,and,
it  must  now  be  recog-
nized,  the candor and
honesty  with  which  the
matter was treated  by
Earl  Russell,  the  British
minister  for  foreign  af-
fairs, saved  the  two  coun-
tries from  that  irrepara-
ble disaster ; and the
British  government at
last  took  such  measures
as  were  necessary  to  put
an  end  to  this  indirect
war  from  the  shores  of
England  upon  American
commerce.  In
the  course  of
two  years  the
war attained
such propor-
tions that  vol-
unteering was
no longer a
sufficient re-
source to  keep
the  army,  con-
sisting at  that
time  of  near-
ly a million
men, at its
full fighting
strength. Congress  therefore  authorized,  and  the
departments  executed,  a  scheme  of  enrolment  and
draft  of  the  arms-bearing  population  of  the  loyal
states. Violent  opposition  arose  to  this  measure
in  manv  parts  of  the  country,  which  was  stimu-
lated  bv the speeches of orators  of the  oppo-
sition,  and led, in many instances, to serious
breaches  of  the  public  peace. A  frightful  riot,
beginning  among  the  foreign  population  of  New
York,  kept  that  citv  in  disorder  and  terror  for
three  davs  in  July,  1863. But  the  riots  were  sup-
pressed, "the  disturbances  quieted  at  last,  and  the
draft  was  executed  throughout  the  country. Cle-
ment L.  Vallandigham,  of  Ohio,  one  of  the  most
eloquent  and  influential  orators  of  the  Democratic
party,  was  arrested  in  Ohio  by  Gen.  Burnside  for


722


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


his  violent  public  utterances  in  opposition  to  the
war,  tried  by  a  military  court,  and  sentenced  to
imprisonment  during  the  continuance  of  the  war.
The  president  changed  his  sentence  to  that  of
transportation  within  the  lines  of  the  rebellion.

These  proceedings
caused  a  great  fer-
ment among  his
party  in  Ohio,  who,
by  way  of  chal-
lenge to  the  gov-
ernment, nomi-
nated him  for  gov-
ernor of  that  state.
A  committee  of  its
prominent  politi-
cians demanded
from  the  president
his  restoration  to
his  political  rights,
and  a  correspond-
ence took  place  be-
tween them  and
the  president,  in
which  the  rights
and  powers  of  the
government  in  case  of  rebellion  were  set  forth  by
him  with  great  lucidity  and  force.  His  letters  ex-
ercised an  important  influence  in  the  political  dis-
cussions of  the  year,  and  Mr.  Vallandigham  was
defeated  in  his  candidacy  by  John  Brough  by  a
majority  of  100,000  votes.

The  war  still  continued  at  a  rate  that  appears
rapid  enough  in  retrospect,  but  seemed  slow  to  the
eager  spirits  watching  its  course.  The  disasters  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  did  not  end  with  the
removal  of  Gen.  McClellan,  which  took  place  in
November,  1862,  as  a  consequence  of  his  persistent
delay  in  pursuing  Lee's  retreating  army  after  the
battle  of  Antietam.  Gen.  Burnside,  who  succeeded
him,  suffered  a  humiliating  defeat  in  his  attack
upon  the  intrenched  position  of  the  Confederates
at  Fredericksburg.  Gen.  Hooker,  who  next  took
command,  after  opening  his  campaign  by  crossing
the  Rapidan  in  a  march  of  extraordinary  brilliancy,
was  defeated  at  Chancellorsville,  in  a  battle  where
both  sides  lost  severely,  and  then  retired  again
north  of  the  river.  Gen.  Lee,  leaving  the  National
army  on  his  right  flank,  crossed  the  Potomac,  and
Hooker  having,  at  his  own  request,  been  relieved
and  succeeded  by  Gen.  Meade,  the  two  armies  met
in  a  three  days'  battle  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  where
Gen.  Lee  sustained  a  decisive  defeat,  and  was
driven  back  into  Virginia.  His  flight  from  Gettys-
burg began  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  July,  a
day  that  in  this  year  doubled  its  lustre  as  a  histor-
ic anniversary.  For  on  this  day  Vicksburg,  the
most  important  Confederate  stronghold  in  the
west,  surrendered  to  Gen.  Grant.  He  had  spent
the  early  months  of  1863  in  successive  attempts  to
take  that  fortress,  all  of  which  had  failed ;  but  on
the  last  day  of  April  he  crossed  the  river  at  Grand
Gulf,  and  within  a  few  days  fought  the  successful
battles  of  Port  Gibson,  Raymond,  Jackson,  Cham-
pion Hills,  and  the  Big  Black  river,  and  shut  up
the  army  of  Pemberton  in  close  siege  in  the  city  of
Vicksburg,  which  he  finally  captured  with  about
30,000  men  on  the  4th  of  July.

The  speech  that  Mr.  Lincoln  delivered  at  the
dedication  of  the  National  cemetery  on  the  battle-
field of  Gettysburg,  19  Nov.,  1863,  was  at  once
recognized  as  the  philosophy  in  brief  of  the  whole
great  struggle,  and  has  already  become  classic.
There  are  slightly  differing  versions;  the  one
that  is  here  given  is  a  literal  transcript  of  the


speech  as  he  afterward  wrote  it  out  for  a  fair  in
Baltimore :

"Fourscore  and  seven  years  ago  our  fathers
brought  forth  on  this  continent,  a  new  nation,
conceived  in  liberty,  and  dedicated  to  the  proposi-
tion that  all  men  are  created  equal.  Now  we  are
engaged  in  a  great  civil  war,  testing  whether  that
nation,  or  any  nation  so  conceived  and  so  dedicat-
ed, can  long  endure.  We  are  met  on  a  great  bat-
tle-field of  that  war.  We  have  come  to  dedicate  a
portion  of  that  field,  as  a  final  resting-place  for
those  who  here  gave  their  lives  that  that  nation
might  live.  It  is  altogether  fitting  and  proper
that  we  should  do  this.  But,  in  a  larger  sense,  we
cannot  dedicate — we  cannot  consecrate — we  can-
not hallow — this  ground.  The  brave  men,  living
and  dead,  who  struggled  here,  have  consecrated  it*
far  above  our  poor  power  to  add  or  detract.  The
world  will  little  note,  nor  long  remember,  what  we
say  here,  but  it  can  never  forget  what  they  did
here.  It  is  for  us  the  living,  rather,  to  be  dedicat-
ed here  to  the  unfinished  work  which  they  who
fought  here  have  thus  far  so  nobly  advanced.  It
is  rather  for  us  to  be  here  dedicated  to  the  great
task  remaining  before  us — that  from  these  honored
dead  we  take  increased  devotion  to  that  cause  for
which  they  gave  the  last  full  measure  of  devotion
— that  we  here  highly  resolve  that  these  dead  shall
not  have  died  in  vain — that  this  nation,  under
God,  shall  have  a  new  birth  of  freedom — and  that
government  of  the  people,  by  the  people,  for  the
people,  shall  not  perish  from  the  earth."

Gen.  Grant  was  transferred  to  Chattanooga,
where,  in  November,  with  the  troops  of  Thomas,
Hooker,  and  Sherman,  he  won  the  important  vic-
tory of  Missionary  Ridge;  and  then,  being  ap-
pointed lieutenant-general  and  general-in-chief  of
the  armies  of  the  United  States,  he  went  to  Wash-
ington and  entered  upon  the  memorable  campaign
of  1864.  This  campaign  began  with  revived  hopes
on  the  part  of  the  government,  the  people,  and
the  army.  The  president,  glad  that  the  army  had
now  at  its  head  a  general  in  whose  ability  and
enterprise  he  could  thoroughly  confide,  ceased  from
that  moment  to  exercise  any  active  influence  on
its  movements.  He  wrote,  on  30  April,  to  Gen.
Grant :  "  The  particulars  of  your  plans  I  neither
know  nor  seek  to  know.  You  are  vigilant  and
self-reliant,  and,  pleased  with  this,  I  wish  not  to
obtrude  any  constraints  or  restraints  upon  you.
...  If  there  is  anything  wanting  which  is  in  my
power  to  give,  do  not  fail  to  let  me  know  it.  And
now,  with  a  brave  army  and  a  just  cause,  may  God
sustain  you."  Grant  crossed  the  Rapidan  on  4
May,  intending  to  move  by  the  right  flank  of  Gen.
Lee  ;  but  the  two  armies  came  together  in  a  gloomy
forest  called  the  Wilderness,  where,  from  the  5th
to  the  7th  of  May,  one  of  the  most  sanguinary
battles  known  to  modern  warfare  was  fought.
Neither  side  having  gained  any  decisive  advantage
in  this  deadly  struggle,  Grant  moved  to  the  left,
and  Lee  met  him  again  at  Spottsylvania  Court-
House,  where  for  ten  days  a  series  of  destructive
contests  took  place,  in  which  both  sides  were  alter-
nately successful  Still  moving  to  the  left,  Grant
again  encountered  the  enemy  at  the  crossing  of
North  Anna  river,  and  still  later  at  Cold  Har-
bor, a  few  miles  northeast  of  Richmond,  where,
assaulting  Gen.  Lee's  army  in  a  fortified  position,
he  met  with  a  bloodv  repulse.  He  then  crossed  the
James  river,  intending  by  a  rapid  movement  to
seize  Petersburg  and  the  Confederate  lines  of  com-
munication south  of  Richmond,  but  was  baffled
in  this  purpose,  and  forced  to  enter  upon  a  regular
siege  of  Petersburg,  which  occupied  the  summer


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


723


and  autumn.  While  these  operations  were  in  prog-
ress, Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheridan  had  made  one  of
the  most  brilliant  cavalry  raids  in  the  war,  threat-
ening Richmond  and  defeating  the  Confederate
cavalry  under  Gen.  J.  E.  B.  Stuart,  and  killing
that  famous  leader.  While  Grant  lay  before  Rich-
mond, Gen.  Lee,  hoping  to  induce  him  to  attack
his  works,  despatched  a  force  under  Gen.  Early  to
threaten  Washington ;  but  Grant  sent  two  corps
of  his  army  northward,  and  Early — after  a  sharp
skirmish  under  the  fortifications  of  Washington,
where  Mr.  Lincoln  was  personally  present — was
driven  back  through  the  Shenandoah  valley,  and
on  two  occasions,  in  September  and  October,  was
signally  defeated  by  Gen.  Sheridan.

Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  who  had  been  left  in
command  of  the  western  district  formerly  com-
manded by  Grant,  moved  southward  at  the  same
time  that  Grant  crossed  the  Rapidan.  Gen.  Joseph
E.  Johnston,  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  Confederate
generals,  retired  gradually  before  him,  defending
himself  at  every  halt  with  the  greatest  skill  and
address;  but  his  movements  not  proving  satis-
factory to  the  Richmond  government,  he  was  re-
moved., and  Gen.  John  B.  Hood  appointed  in  his
place.  After  a  summer  of  hard  fighting,  Sherman,
on  1  Sept.,  captured  Atlanta,  one  of  the  chief
manufacturing  and  railroad  centres  of  the  south,
and  later  in  the  autumn  organized  and  executed  a
magnificent  march  to  the  seaboard,  which  proved
that  the  military  power  of  the  Confederacy  had
been  concentrated  at  a  few  points  on  the  frontier,
and  that  the  interior  was  little  more  than  an  empty
shell.  He  reached  the  sea-coast  early  in  December,
investing  Savannah  on  the  10th,  and  capturing  the
city  on  the  21st.  He  then  marched  northward  with
the  intention  of  assisting  Gen.  Grant  in  the  closing
scenes  of  the  war.  The  army  under  Gen.  George
H.  Thomas,  who  had  been  left  in  Tennessee  to  hold
Hood  in  check  while  this  movement  was  going  on.
after  severely  handling  the  Confederates  in  the
preliminary  battle  of  Franklin,  30  Nov.,  inflicted
upon  Hood  a  crushing  and  final  defeat  in  the  bat-
tle of  Nashville,  16  Dec,  routing  and  driving  him
from  the  state.

During  the  summer,  while  Grant  was  engaged  in
the  desperate  and  indecisive  series  of  battles  that
marked  his  southward  progress  in  Virginia,  and
Sherman  had  not  yet  set  out  upon  his  march  to
the  sea,  one  of  the  "most  ardent  political  canvasses
the  country  had  ever  seen  was  in  progress  at  the
north.  Mr.  Lincoln,  on  8  June,  had  been  unani-
mously renominated  for  the  presidency  by  the  Re-
publican convention  at  Baltimore.  The  Demo-
cratic leaders  had  postponed  their  convention  to  a
date  unusually  late,  in  the  hope  that  some  advan-
tage might  be' reaped  from  the  events  of  the  sum-
mer. The  convention  came  together  on  29  Aug.
in  Chicago.  Mr.  Vallandigham,  who  had  returned
from  his  banishment,  and  whom  the  government
had  sagaciously  declined  to  rearrest,  led  the  ex-
treme peace  party  in  the  convention.  Prominent
politicians  of  New  York  were  present  in  the  in-
terest of  Gen.  McClellan.  Both  sections  of  the  con-
vention gained  their  point.  Gen.  McClellan  was
nominated  for  the  presidency,  and  Mr.  Vallandig-
ham succeeded  in  imposing  upon  his  party  a  plat-
form declaring  that  the  war  had  been  a  failure,
and  demanding  a  cessation  of  hostilities.  The
capture  of  Atlanta  on  the  day  the  convention  ad-
journed seemed  to  the  Unionists  a  providential
answer  to  the  opposition.  Republicans,  who  had
been  somewhat  disheartened  by  the  slow  progress
of  military  events  and  by  the  open  and  energetic
agitation that the peace party  had continued


through  the  summer  at  the  north,  now  took  heart
again,  and  the  canvass  proceeded  with  the  greatest
spirit  to  the  close.  Sheridan's  victory  over  Early  in
the  Shenandoah  valley  gave  an  added  impulse  to
the  general  enthusiasm,  and  in  the  October  elec-
tions it  was  shown  that  the  name  of  Mr.  Lincoln
was  more  popular,  and  his  influence  more  powerful,
than  any  one  had  anticipated.  In  the  election
that  took  place  on  8  Nov..  1864,  he  received
2,216,000  votes,  and  Gen.  McClellan  1,800,000.  The
difference  in  the  electoral  vote  was  still  greater,  Mr.
Lincoln  being  supported  by  212  of  the  presidential
electors,  while  only  21  voted  for  McClellan.

President  Lincoln's  second  inaugural  address,
delivered  on  4  March,  1865,  will  forever  remain  not
only  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  all  his  public
utterances,  but  will  also  hold  a  high  rank  among
the  greatest  state  papers  that  history  has  preserved.
As  he  neared  the  end  of  his  career,  and  saw  plainly
outlined  before  him  the  dimensions  of  the  vast
moral  and  material  success  that  the  nation  was
about  to  achieve,  his  thoughts,  always  predisposed
to  an  earnest  and  serious  view  of  life,  assumed  a
fervor  and  exaltation  like  that  of  the  ancient  seers
and  prophets.  The  speech  that  he  delivered  to  the
vast  concourse  at  the  eastern  front  of  the  capitol
is  the  briefest  of  all  the  presidential  addresses  in
our  annals :  but  it  has  not  its  equal  in  lofty  elo-
quence and  austere  morality.  The  usual  historical
view  of  the  situation,  the  ordinary  presentment  of
the  intentions  of  the  government,  seemed  matters
too  trivial  to  engage  the  concern  of  a  mind  stand-
ing, as  Lincoln's  apparently  did  at  this  moment,
face  to  face  with  the  most  tremendous  problems
of  fate  and  moral  responsibility.  In  the  briefest
words  he  announced  what  had  been  the  cause  of
the  war,  and  how  the  government  had  hoped  to
bring  it  to  an  earlier  close.  With  passionless  can-
dor he  admitted  that  neither  party  expected  for  the
war  the  magnitude  or  the  duration  it  had  attained.
"  Each  looked  for
an  easier  triumph
and  a  result  less
fundamental  and
astounding  " ;  and,
passing  into  a  strain
of  rhapsody,  which
no  lesser  mind  and
character  could  ev-
er dare  to  imitate,
he  said :  "  Both
read  the  same  Bible
and  pray  to  the
same  God,  and  each
invokes  his  aid
against  the  other.
It  may  seem  strange
that  "  any  men
should  dare  to  ask  a  just  God's  assistance  in  wring-
ing their  bread  from  the  sweat  of  other  men's  faces.
But  let  us  judge  not,  that  we  be  not  judged.  The
pravers  of  both  could  not  be  answered;  that  of
neither  has  been  answered  fully.  The  Almighty
has  his  own  purposes.  '  Woe  unto  the  world  lie-
cause  of  offences !  for  it  must  needs  be  that  offences
come ;  but  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence
eometh.'  If  we  shall  suppose  that  American  slavery
is  one  of  those  offences,  which,  in  the  providence  of
God,  must  needs  come,  but  which,  having  continued
through  H  is  appointed  time,  He  now  wills  to  remove,
and  that  He  gives  to  both  north  and  south  this  ter-
rible war,  as  the  woe  due  to  those  by  whom  the  of-
fence came,  shall  we  discern  therein  anv  departure
from  those  divine  attributes  which  the  believers  in
a  living  God  always  ascribe  to  Him  t Fondly  do


724


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


we  hope,  fervently  do  we  pray,  that  this  mighty
scourge  of  war  may  speedily  pass  away.  Yet,  if
God  wills  that  it  continue  until  all  the  wealth  piled
by  the  bondsman's  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  of
unrequited  toil  shall  be  sunk,  and  until  every  drop
of  blood  drawn  with  the  lash  shall  be  paid  by  an-
other drawn  with  the  sword,  as  was  said  three
thousand  years  ago,  so  still  it  must  be  said, '  The
judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous  al-
together.' With  malice  toward  none,  with  charity
for  all,  with  firmness  in  the  right,  as  God  gives  us
to  see  the  right,  let  us  strive  on  to  finish  the  work
we  are  in,  to  bind  up  the  nation's  wounds,  to  care
for  him  who  shall  have  borne  the  battle,  and  for
his  widow  and  his  orphan — to  do  all  which  may
achieve  and  cherish  a  just  and  a  lasting  peace
among  ourselves,  and  with  all  nations."


through  them  with  the  Confederate  authorities,  Mr.
Lincoln  despatched  him  to  Niagara  Falls,  and  sent
an  open  letter  addressed,  "  To  whom  it  may  con-
cern '  (see  illustration).  It  is  in  the  possession  of
Mr.  William  H.  Appleton,  of  New  York,  and  now
appears  in  fac-simile  for  the  first  time.  This  docu-
ment put  an  end  to  the  negotiation.  The  Confed-
erate emissaries  in  Canada,  and  their  principals  in
Richmond,  made  no  use  of  this  incident  except  to
employ  the  president's  letter  as  a  text  for  denuncia-
tion of  the  National  government.  But  later  in  the
year,  the  hopelessness  of  the  struggle  having  be-
come apparent  to  some  of  the  Confederate  leaders,
Mr.  Davis  was  at  last  induced  to  send  an  embassy
to  Portress  Monroe,  to  inquire  what  terms  of  ad-
justment were  possible.  They  were  met  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln  and  the  secretary  of  state  in  person.


(txtcntivt fHangifltt,


&^i*i**j


^2^*^-eyO


The  triumphant  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  no  less
than  the  steady  progress  of  the  National  armies,
convinced  some  of  the  more  intelligent  of  the
southern  leaders  that  their  cause  was  hopeless,  and
that  it  would  be  prudent  to  ascertain  what  terms
of  peace  could  be  made  before  the  utter  destruc-
tion of  their  military  power.  There  had  been
already  several  futile  attempts  at  opening  negotia-
tions ;  but  they  had  all  failed  of  necessity,  because
neither  side  was  willing  even  to  consider  the  only
terms  that  the  other  side  would  offer.  There  had
never  been  a  moment  when  Mr.  Lincoln  would
have  been  willing  to  receive  propositions  of  peace
on  any  other  basis  than  the  recognition  of  the  na-
tional integrity,  and  Mr.  Davis  steadfastly  refused
to  the  end  to  admit  the  possibility  of  the  restora-
tion of  the  national  authority.  In  July,  certain
unauthorized  persons  in  Canada,  having  persuaded
Horace  Greeley  that  negotiations  might  be  opened


The  plan  proposed  was  one  that  had  been  suggested,
on  his  own  responsibility,  by  Mr.  Francis  Preston
Blair,  of  Washington,  in  an  interview  he  had  been
permitted  to  hold  with  Mr.  Davis  in  Richmond,
that  the  two  armies  should  unite  in  a  campaign
against  the  French  in  Mexico  for  the  enforcement
of  the  Monroe  doctrine,  and  that  the  issues  of  the
war  should  be  postponed  for  future  settlement.
The  president  declined  peremptorily  to  entertain
this  scheme,  and  repeated  again  the  only  conditions
to  which  he  could  listen :  The  restoration  of  the
national  authority  throughout  all  the  states,  the
maintenance  and  execution  of  all  the  acts  of  the
general  government  in  regard  to  slavery,  the  ces-
sation of  hostilities,  and  the  disbanding  of  the  in-
surgent forces  as  a  necessary  prerequisite  to  the
ending  of  the  war.  The  Confederate  agents  re-
ported at  Richmond  the  failure  of  their  embassy,
and  Mr.  Davis  denounced  the  conduct  of  President


LINCOLN

Lincoln  in  a  public  address  full  of  desperate  de-
fiance. Nevertheless,  it  was  evident  even  to  the
most  prejudiced  observers  that  the  war  could  not
continue  much  longer.  Sherman's  march  had
demonstrated  the  essential  weakness  of  the  Confed-
erate cause ;  the  soldiers  of  the  Confederacy— who
for  four  years,  with  the  most  stubborn  gallantry,
had  maintained  a  losing  fight— began  to  show  signs
of  dangerous  discouragement  and  insubordination ;
recruiting  had  ceased  some  time  before,  and  de-
sertion was  going  on  rapidly.  The  armv  of  Gen.
Lee,  which  was  the  last  bulwark  of  the  Confeder-
acy, still  held  its  lines  stoutly  against  the  gradual-
ly enveloping  lines  of  Grant;  but  their  valiant
commander  knew  it  was  only  a  question  of  how
many  days  he  could  hold  his  works,  and  repeatedly
counselled  the  government  at  Richmond  to  evacu-
ate that  city,  and  allow  the  army  to  take  up  a  more
tenable  position  in  the  mountains.  Gen.  Grant's
only  anxiety  each  morning  was  lest  he  should  find
the  army  of  Gen.  Lee  moving  away  from  him.  and
late  in  March  he  determined  to  strike  the  final
blow  at  the  rebellion.  Moving  for  the  last  time  by
the  left  flank,  his  forces  under  Sheridan  fought
and  gained  a  brilliant  victory  over  the  Confederate
left  at  Five  Forks,  and  at'  the  same  time  Gens.
Humphreys,  Wright,  and  Parke  moved  against  the
Confederate  works,  breaking  their  lines  and  cap-
turing many  prisoners  and  guns.  Petersburg  was
evacuated  on  2  April.  The  Confederate  govern-
ment fled  from  Richmond  the  same  afternoon  and
evening,  and  Grant,  pursuing  the  broken  and  shat-
tered remnant  of  Lee's  army,  received  their  sur-
render at  Appomattox  Court-House  on  9  April.
About  28,000  Confederates  signed  the  parole,  and
an  equal  number  had  been  killed,  captured,  and
dispersed  in  the  operations  immediately  preceding
the  surrender.  Gen.  Sherman,  a  few  days  after-
ward, received  the  surrender  of  Johnston,  and  the
last  Confederate  army,  under  Gen.  Kirbv  Smith,
west  of  the  Mississippi,  laid  down  its  arms.

President  Lincoln  had  himself  accompanied  the
army  in  its  last  triumphant  campaign,  and  had
entered  Richmond  immediately  after  its  surren-
der, receiving  the  cheers  and  benedictions,  not  only
of  the  negroes  whom  he  had  set  free,  but  of  a
great  number  of  white  people,  who  were  weary  of
the  war,  and  welcomed  the  advent  of  peace.  Re-
turning to  Washington  with  his  mind  filled  with
plans  for  the  restoration  of  peace  and  orderly  gov-
ernment throughout  the  south,  he  seized  the  occa-
sion of  a  serenade,  on  11  April,  to  deliver  to  the
people  who  gathered  in  front  of  the  executive
mansion  his  last  speech  on  public  affairs,  in  which
he  discussed  with  unusual  dignity  and  force  the
problems  of  reconstruction,  then  crowding  upon
public  consideration.  As  his  second  inaugural  was
the  greatest  of  all  his  rhetorical  compositions,  so
this  brief  political  address,  which  closed  his  public
career,  is  unsurpassed  among  his  speeches  for  clear-
ness and  wisdom,  and  for  a  certain  tone  of  gentle
but  unmistakable  authority,  which  shows  to  what
a  mastery  of  statecraft  he  had  attained.  He  con-
gratulated the  country  upon  the  decisive  victories
of  the  last  week;  he  expressly  asserted  that,  al-
though he  had  been  present  in  the  final  opera-
tions, "  no  part  of  the  honor,  for  plan  or  execu-
tion, was  his " ;  and  then,  with  equal  boldness
and  discretion,  announced  the  principles  in  accord-
ance with  which  he  should  deal  wnh  the  restora-
tion of  the  states.  He  refused  to  be  provoked  into
controversy,  which  he  held  would  be  purely  aca-
demic, over  the  question  whether  the  insurrection-
ary states  were  in  or  out  of  the  Union.  "  As  ap-
pears to  me,"  he  said,  "  that  question  has  not  been,


LINCOLN


725


nor  yet  is,  a  practically  material  one,  and  any  dis-
cussion of  it,  while  it  thus  remains  practically  im-
material, could  have  no  effect  other  than  the  mis-
chievous one  of  dividing  our  friends. As  yet,  what-
ever it  may  hereafter  become,  that  question  is  bad,
as  the  basis  of  a  controversy,  and  good  for  nothing
at  all— a  merely  pernicious  abstraction. We  afl
agree  that  the  seceded  states,  so-ealled,%re  out  of
their  proper  practical  relation  with  the  Union,  and
that  the  sole  object  of  the  government,  civil  and
military,  in  regard  to  those  states,  is  to  again  get
them  into  that  proper  practical  relation, f  believe
it  is  not  only  possible,  but  in  fact  easier,  to  do  this
without  deciding,  or  even  considering,  whether
these  states  have  ever  been  out  of  the  Union  than
with  it. Finding  themselves  safely  at  home,  it
would  be  utterly  immaterial  whether  they  had  ever
been  abroad. Let  us  all  join  in  doing  the  acts  ne-
cessary to  restoring  the  proper  practical  relations
between  these  states  and  the  Union,  and  each  for-
ever after  innocently  indulge his own  opinion
whether  in  doing  the  acts  he  brought  the  states
from  without  into  the  Union,  or  only  gave  them
proper  assistance,  they  never  having  been  out  of
it." In  this  temper  he  discussed  the  recent  action
of  the  Unionists  of  Louisiana,  where  12,000  voters
had  sworn  allegiance,  giving  his  full  approval  to
their  course,  but  not  committing  himself  to  any
similar  method  in  other  cases;  "any  exclusive  and
inflexible  plan  would  surely  become  a  new  entangle-
ment. ...  If  we  reject  and  spurn  them,  we  do
our  utmost  to  disorganize  and  disperse  them. We,
in  effect,  say  to  the  white  men,  '  You  are  worth-
less or  worse,  we  will neither help you.  nor  be
helped  by  you.' To  the  blacks  we  say.  'This  cup
of  liberty  which  these,  your  old  masters,  hold  to
your  lips,  we  will  dash  from  you  and  leave  you  to
the  chances  of  gathering  the  spilled  and  scattered
contents  in  some  vague  and  unflefined  when,  where,
and  how.'  ...  If.  on  the  contrary,  we  sustain  the
new  government  of  Louisiana,  the  converse  is  made
true. Concede  that  it  is  only  to  what  it  should
be  as  the  egg  is  to  the  fowl,  we  shall  sooner  have
the  fowl  by  hatching  the  egg  than  by  smashing
it." These  words  were  the  last  he  uttered  in  pub-
lic; on  14  April,  at  a  cabinet  meeting,  he  devel-
oped these  views  in  detail,  and  found  no  difference
of  opinion  among  his  advisers. The  same  even-
ing he  attended  a  performance  of  "Our  American
Cousin"  at  Ford's  theatre,  in Tenth  street. He
was  accompanied  by  Mrs.  Lincoln  and  two  friends
— Miss Harris,  a  daughter  of Senator Ira Har-
ris, of  New  York,  and  Maj.  Henry  R.  Rathbone.
In  the  midst  of  the  play  a  shot  was  heard,  and
a  man  was  seen  to  leap  from  the  president's  box
to  the  stage. Brandishing  a  dripping  knife,  with
which,  after  shooting  the  president,  he  had  stabbed
Maj.  Rathbone,  and  shouting.  "Sic  semper  tyran-
nis! — the  south is avenged!" he rushed  to  the
rear  of  the  building,  leaped  upon  a  horse,  which
was  held there  in  readiness  for him,  and made
his  escape. The  president  was  carried  to  a  small
house  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street,  where,
surrounded  by  his  family  and  the  principal  offi-
cers of  the  government,  he  breathed  his  last  at  7
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  15  April. The  assas-
sin was found by  a  squadron  of  troops  twelve
days  afterward,  and  shot  in  a  barn  in  which  he  had
taken  refuge. The  illustration  on page  722  rep-
resents the  house  where  Mr.  Lincoln  passed  away.

The  body  of  the  president  lay  in  state  at  the
Capitol  on  20  April  and  was  viewed  by  a  great
concourse  of  people;  the  next  day  the  funeral
train  set  out  for  Springfield,  HI.  The  cortege
halted  at  all  the  principal  cities  on  the  way,  and


726


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


the  remains  of  the  president  lay  in  state  in  Balti-
more, Harrisburgh,  Philadelphia,  New  York,  Al-
bany, Buffalo,  Cleveland,  and  Chicago,  being  re-
ceived everywhere  with  extraordinary  demonstra-
tions of  respect  and  sorrow.  The  joy  over  the
return  of  peace  was  for  a  fortnight  eclipsed  by  the
universal  grief  for  the  dead  leader.  He  was  bur-
ied, amid  *he  mourning  of  the  whole  nation,  at  Oak
Ridge,  near  Springfield,  on  4  May,  and  there  on
15  Oct.,  1874,  an  imposing  monument — the  work
of  the  sculptor  Larkin  Gh  Mead — was  dedicated  to
his  memory.  The  monument  is  of  white  marble,
with  a  portrait-statue  of  Lincoln  in  bronze,  and
four  bronze  groups  at  the  corners,  representing  the
infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  arms  of  the  service
and  the  navy. (See  accompanying  illustration.)


The  death  of  President  Lincoln,  in  the  moment
of  the  great  national  victory  that  he  had  done
more  than  any  other  to  gain,  caused  a  movement
of  sympathy  throughout  the  world.  The  expres-
sions of  grief  and  condolence  that  were  sent  to
the  government  at  Washington,  from  national,
provincial,  and  municipal  bodies  all  over  the  globe,
were  afterward  published  by  the  state  department
in  a  quarto  volume  of  nearly  a  thousand  pages,
called  "The  Tribute  of  the  Nations  to  Abraham
Lincoln."  After  the  lapse  of  twenty  years,  the
high  estimate  of  him  that  the  world  appears  in-
stinctively to  have  formed  at  the  moment  of  his
death  seems  to  have  been  increased  rather  than
diminished,  as  his  participation  in  the  great  events
of  his  time  has  been  more  thoroughly  studied  and
understood.  His  goodness  of  heart,  his  abound-
ing charity,  his  quick  wit  and  overflowing  humor,
which  made  him  the  hero  of  many  true  stories  and
a  thousand  legends,  are  not  less  valued  in  them-
selves ;  but  they  are  cast  in  the  shade  by  the  evi-
dences that  continually  appear  of  his  extraordinary
qualities  of  mind  and  of  character.  His  powerful
grasp  of  details,  his  analytic  capacity,  his  unerring
logic,  his  perception  of  human  nature,  would  have
made  him  unusual  in  any  age  of  the  world,  while
the  quality  that,  in  the  opinion  of  many,  made
him  the  specially  fitted  agent  of  Providence  in
the  salvation  of  the  country,  his  absolute  freedom
from  prejudice  or  passion  in  weighing  the  motives
of  his  contemporaries  and  the  deepest  problems  of
state  gives  him  pre-eminence  even  among  the  illus-
trious men  that  have  preceded  and  followed  him
in  his  great  office.  Simple  and  modest  as  he  was
in  his  demeanor,  he  was  one  of  the  most  self-
respecting  of  rulers.  Although  his  kindness  of
heart  was  proverbial,  although  he  was  always  glad
to  please  and  unwilling  to  offend,  few  presidents
have  been  more  sensible  of  the  dignity  of  their
office,  and  more  prompt  to  maintain  it  against  en-
croachments. He  was  at  all  times  unquestionably


the  head  of  the  government,  and,  though  not  in-
clined to  interfere  with  the  routine  business  of
the  departments,  he  tolerated  no  insubordination
in  important  matters.  At  one  time,  being  con-
scious that  there  was  an  effort  inside  of  his  gov-
ernment to  force  the  resignation  of  one  of  its
members,  he  read  in  open  cabinet  a  severe  repri-
mand of  what  was  going  on,  mentioning  no  names,
and  ordering  peremptorily  that  no  questions  should
be  asked,  and  no  allusions  be  made  to  the  inci-
dent then  or  thereafter.  He  did  not  except  his
most  trusted  friends  or  his  most  powerful  generals
from  this  strict  subordination.  When  Mr.  Seward
went  before  him  to  meet  the  Confederate  envoys
at  Hampton  Roads,  Mr.  Lincoln  gave  him  this
written  injunction  :  "  You  will  not  assume  to  defi-
nitely consummate  anything  "  ;  and,  on  3  March,
1865,  when  Gen.  Grant  was  about  to  set  out  on  his
campaign  of  final  victory,  the  secretary  of  war
gave  him,  by  the  president's  order,  this  imperative
instruction :  '•  The  president  directs  me  to  say  to
you  that  he  wishes  you  to  have  no  conference  with
Gen.  Lee,  unless  it  be  for  the  capitulation  of  Gen.
Lee's  army,  or  on  some  other  minor  and  purely
military  matter.  He  instructs  me  to  say  that  you
are  not  to  decide,  discuss,  or  to  confer  upon  any
political  question.  Such  questions  the  president
holds  in  his  own  hands,  and  will  submit  them  to
no  military  conferences  or  conventions.  Mean-
while, you  are  to  press  to  the  utmost  your  military
advantages."  When  he  refused  to  comply  with
the  desire  of  the  more  radical  Republicans  in  con-
gress to  take  Draconian  measures  of  retaliation
against  the  Confederates  for  their  treatment  of
black  soldiers,  he  was  accused  by  them  of  weak-
ness and  languor.  They  never  seemed  to  perceive
that  to  withstand  an  angry  congress  in  Washing-
ton required  more  vigor  of  character  than  to
launch  a  threatening  decree  against  the  Confeder-
ate government  in  Richmond.  Mr.  Lincoln  was
as  unusual  in  personal  appearance  as  in  character.
His  stature  was  almost  gigantic,  six  feet  and  four
inches  ;  he  was  muscular  but  spare  of  frame,  weigh-
ing about  180  pounds.  His  hair  was  strong  and
luxuriant  in  growth,  and  stood  out  straight  from
his  head ;  it  began  to  be  touched  with  gray  in  his
last  years.  His  eyes,  a  grayish  brown,  were  deeply
set,  and  were  filled,  in  repose,  with  an  expression
of  profound  melancholy,  which  easily  changed  to
one  of  uproarious  mirth  at  the  provocation  of  a
humorous  anecdote,  told  by  himself  or  another.
His  nose  was  long  and  slightly  curved,  his  mouth
large  and  singularly  mobile.  Up  to  the  time  of
his  election  he  was  clean-shaven,  but  during  his
presidency  the  fine  outline  of  his  face  was  marred
by  a  thin  and  straggling  beard.  His  demeanor
was,  in  general,  extremely  simple  and  careless,  but
he  was  not  without  a  native  dignity  that  always
protected  him  from  anything  like  presumption  or
impertinence.

Mr.  Lincoln  married,  on  4  Nov.,  1842,  Miss  Mary
Todd,  daughter  of  Robert  S.  Todd,  of  Kentucky.
There  were  born  of  this  marriage  four  sons.  One,
Edward  Baker,  died  in  infancy ;  another,  William
Wallace,  died  at  the  age  of  twelve,  during  the
presidency  of  Mr.  Lincoln ;  and  still  another,
Thomas,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  several  years  after
his  father's  death.  The  only  one  that  grew  to  ma-
turity was  his  eldest  son,  Robert.  The  house  in
which  Mr.  Lincoln  lived  when  he  was  elected  presi-
dent, in  Springfield,  111.,  was  conveyed  to  the  state
of  Illinois  in  1887  by  his  son,  and  a  collection  of
memorials  of  him  is  to  be  preserved  there  perpetu-
ally. (See  illustration  on  page  717.)

There  were  few  portraits  of  Mr.  Lincoln  painted


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


727


in  his  lifetime;  the  vast  number  of  engravings
that  have  made  his  face  one  of  the  most  familiar
of  all  time  have  been  mostly  copied  from  photo-
graphs. The  one  on  page  715  is  from  a  photograph
taken  in  1858.  There  are  portraits  from  life  by
Frank  B.  Carpenter,  by  Matthew  Wilson,  by  Thom-
as Hicks,  and  an  excellent  crayon  drawing  by  Barry.
Since  his  death  G.  P.  A.  Healy,  William  Page,  and
others  have  painted  portraits"  of  him.  There  are
two  authentic  life-masks :  one  made  in  1858  by
Leonard  W.  Volk  (see  illustration  on  page  723),
who  also  executed  a  bust  of  Mr.  Lincoln  before  his
election  in  1860,  and  another  by  Clark  Mills  short-
ly before  the  assassination.  There  are  already  a
number  of  statues :  one  by  Henry  Kirke  Brown  in
Union  square,  New  York  (see  page  720) ;  another
by  the  same  artist  in  Brooklyn  ;  one  in  the  group
called  "  Emancipation,"  by  Thomas  Ball,  in  Lin-
coln Park,  Washington,  D.  C,  a  work  which  has
•especial  interest  as  having  been  paid  for  by  the
contributions  of  the  freed  people;  one  by  Mrs.
Vinnie  Ream  Hoxie  in  the  Capitol ;  one  by  Au-
gustus St.  Gaudens  in  Chicago,  set  up  in  Chicago,
22  Oct.,  1887;  and  one  by  Randolph  Rogers  in
Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia  (see  illustration  on
page  721).  There  is  a  bust  by  Thomas  D.  Jones,
modelled  from  life  in  1860.

The  Lincoln  bibliography  is  enormous,  compris-
ing thousands  of  volumes.  See  John  Russell
Bartlett's  "Catalogue  of  Books  and  Pamphlets
relating  to  the  Civil  War  in  the  United  States  "
{Boston,  1866).  The  most  noteworthy  of  the  lives
of  Lincoln  already  published  are  those  of  Joseph
H.  Barrett  (Cincinnati,  1865) ;  Henry  J.  Raymond
{New  York,  1865) ;  Josiah  G.  Holland  (Springfield,
Mass.,  1866) ;  Ward  H.  Lamon  (onlv  the  first  volume,
Boston,  1872) ;  William  0.  Stoddard  (New  York,
1884) ;  and  Isaac  N.  Arnold  (Chicago,  1885).  Briefer
lives  have  also  been  written  by  Mrs.  Harriet  Beecher
Stowe,  Mr.  D.  W.  Bartlett,  Charles  G.  Leland,  John
■Carroll  Power,  and  others.  The  most  extensive
work  upon  his  life  and  times  yet  attempted  is  now
(1887)  in  process  of  serial  publication  in  the  "  Cen-
tury "  magazine,  by  his  private  secretaries,  John  G.
Nicolay  and  John
Hay ;  and  the  same
writers  are  engaged
in  the  preparation
of  a  complete  edition
of  all  his  writings,
speeches,  and  letters.
—  His  wife,  Mary
Todd,  b.  in  Lexing-
ton, Ky..  12  Dec,
1818;  d.  in  Spring-
field, 111..  16  July,
1  182,  was  the  daugh-
ter of  Robert  S.  Todd,
whose  family  were
^--j  /?  among  the  most  infill-

^Wv  y^^v ^V"1  °/  *  ie  pi<T nrS
~Y  of  Kentucky  and  Illi-

/y  nois. Her  great-un-

cle, John  Todd,  was  one  of  the  associates  of  Gen.
George  Rogers  Clark,  in  his  campaign  of  1778,  and
took  part  in  the  capture  of  Kaskaskia  and  Vincennes.
Being  appointed  county  lieutenant  by  Patrick  Hen-
ry, at  that  time  governor  of  Virginia,  he  organized
the  civil  government  of  what  became  afterward  the
state  of  Illinois.  He  was  killed  in  the  battle  of
Blue  Licks,  18  Aug.,  1782,  of  which  his  brother
Levi,  Mrs.  Lincoln's  grandfather,  who  also  accom-
panied Clark's  expedition  as  a  lieutenant,  was  one
of  the  few  survivors.  Mary  Todd  was  carefully  ed-
ucated in  Lexington. When  twenty-one  years  of


age  she  went  to  Springfield  to  visit  her  sister,  who
had  married  Ninian  W.  Edwards,  a  son  of  Ninian
Edwards,  governor  of  the  state.  While  there  she
became  engaged  to  Mr.  Lincoln,  whom  she  married,
4  Nov.,  1842.  Her  family  was  divided  by  the  civil
war ;  several  of  them  were  killed  in  battle ;  and,  de-
voted as  Mrs.  Lincoln  was  to  her  husband  and  the
National  cause,  this  division  among  her  nearest  kin-
dred caused  her  much  suffering.  The  death  of  her
son,  William  Wallace,  in  1862,  was  an  enduring  sor-
row to  her.  One  of  her  principal  occupations  was
visiting  the  hospitals  and  camps  of  the  soldiers
about  Washington.  She  never  recovered  from  the
shock  of  seeing  her  husband  shot  down  before  her
eyes ;  her  youngest  son,  Thomas,  died  a  few  years
later,  and  her  reason  suffered  from  these  repeated
blows.  She  lived  in  strict  retirement  during  her
later  years,  spending  part  of  her  time  with  her  son
in  Chicago,  a  part  in  Europe,  and  the  rest  with  her
sister,  Mrs.  Edwards,  in  Springfield,  where  she  died
of  paralysis.— Their  son,  Robert  Todd,  lawyer,  b.
in  Springfield,  111.,
1  Aug.,  1843,  was
prepared  for  college
at  Phillips  Exeter
academy,  and  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in
1864.  He  entered
Harvard  law-school,
but  after  a  short
stay  applied  for  ad-
mission to  the  mili-
tary service,  and  his
father  suggested  his
appointment  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Grant,
as  a  volunteer  aide-
de-camp  without  pay
or  allowances.  This
exceptional  position
did  not  meet  with
Gen.  Grant's  approval,  and  at  his  suggestion
young  Lincoln  was  regularly  commissioned  as  a
captain,  and  entered  the  service  on  the  same  foot-
ing with  others  of  his  grade.  He  served  with
zeal  and  efficiency  throughout  the  final  campaign,
which  ended  at  Appomattox.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  resumed  the  study  of  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Illinois,  and  practised  his  profession
with  success  in  Chicago  until  1881,  with  an  interval
of  a  visit  to  Europe  in  1872  ;  he  steadily  refused
the  offers  that  were  repeatedly  made  him  to  enter
public  life,  though  taking  part,  from  time  to  time,
in  political  work  and  discussion.  In  1881,  at  the
invitation  of  President  Garfield,  he  entered  his
cabinet  as  secretary  of  war.  Mr.  Lincoln,  who,
sixteen  years  before,  had  returned  from  the  field
just  in  "time  to  stand  by  the  death-bed  of  his
father,  assassinated  while  president,  now  had  this
strange  experience  repeated  upon  the  assassina-
tion of  President  Garfield,  a  few  months  after  his
inauguration.  On  the  accession  of  Vice-President
Arthur  to  the  presidency.  Mr.  Lincoln  was  the
only  member  of  the  former  cabinet  who  was  re-
quested to  retain  his  portfolio,  anil  he  did  so  to
the  end  of  the  administration.  He  performed  the
duties  of  the  place  with  such  ability  and  fairness,
and  with  such  knowledge  of  the  law  and  apprecia-
tion of  the  needs  of  the  army,  as  to  gain  the  warm-
est approbation  of  its  officers  and  its  friends.  Note-
wort  hy  incidents  of  his  administration  of  the  civil
duties' of  the  department  were  his  report  to  the
house  of  representatives  upon  its  challenge  to  him
to  justify  President  Arthur's  veto  of  the  river
and  harbor  bill  of  1882,  and  the  thoroughness


728


LINCOLN


LINCOLN


and  promptness  of  the  relief  given,  from  Wheel-
ing to  New  Orleans,  to  those  suffering  from  the
freat  floods  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers  in
'ebruary,  1884.  In  the  latter  year  Mr.  Lincoln
was  prominently  spoken  of  for  the  presidency :  but
as  President  Arthur  was  a  candidate  before  the
Republican  convention,  Lincoln  refused  to  allow
his  name  to  be  presented  for  either  place  on  the
ticket.  He  returned  to  Chicago,  and  in  the  spring
of  1889  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Great  Britain.
LINCOLN,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Hingham,
Mass.,  24  Jan.,  1733 ;  d.  there,  9  May,  1810.  His
father,  Benjamin,  was  born  in  Hingham  in  1700,
his  family  having  been  among  the  first  settlers,  the
name  of  Thomas  Lincoln,  a  cooper,  appearing  on
the  town-records  as  early  as  1636.  He  received
only  a  common-school  education,  and  was  a  farmer
until  1773,  holding  the  offices  of  magistrate,  repre-
sentative in  the  provincial  legislature,  and  colonel
of  militia.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  provin-
cial congresses  of  Massachusetts,  of  which  he  was
secretary,  and  served  on  its  committee  of  corre-
spondence. He  was  active  in  organizing  and  train-
ing the  Continental  troops,  and  was  appointed
major-general  of  state  militia  in  1776,  and  on  23
May,  1776,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  a  committee
to  prepare  instructions  for  the  representatives  of
the  town  in  the  general  court,  previous  to  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence.  The  following  is  an  ex-
tract from  his  instructions  entered  on  the  records
of  the  town :  "  You  are  instructed  and  directed  at
all  times  to  give  your  vote  and  interest  in  support
of  the  present  struggle  with  Great  Britain.  We
ask  nothing  of  her  but  peace,  liberty,  and  safety.
You  will  never  recede  from  that  claim,  and,  agree-
ably to  a  resolve  of  the  late  house  of  representa-
tives, in  case  the  honorable  Continental  congress
declare  themselves  independent  of  Great  Britain,
solemnly  engage,  in  behalf  of  your  constituents,
that  they  will,  with  their  lives  and  fortunes,  sup-
port them  in  the  measure."  In  June  of  that  year
he  commanded  the  expedition  that  cleared  Boston
harbor  of  British  vessels.  After  the  American  de-
feat on  Long  Island  he  was  despatched  by  the
council  of  Massachusetts  to  re-enforce  Washington
with  a  body  of  militia,  and  he  subsequently  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  White  Plains  and  other  en-
gagements. At  the  close  of  1776  Lincoln,  with  the
greater  part  of  6,000  militia,  was  engaged  with
Gen.  William  Heath  in  the  attack  on  Port  Inde-
pendence, which  resulted  disastrously.  In  the  be-
ginning of  1777  he  joined  Washington  at  Morris-
town  with  a  new  levy  of  militia,  and  on  19  Feb.
was  promoted  to  major-general,  having  been  rec-
ommended by  Washington  in  a  letter  to  congress
dated  20  Dec,  1776 :  "  In  speaking  of  Gen.  Lincoln,
I  should  not  do  him  justice  were  I  not  to  add  that
he  is  a  gentleman  well  worthy  of  notice  in  the
military  line.  He  commanded  the  militia  from  Mas-
sachusetts last  summer,  or  fall  rather,  and  much  to
my  satisfaction,  having  proved  himself,  on  all  occa-
sions, an  active,  spirited,  sensible  man.  I  do  not
know  whether  it  is  his  wish  to  remain  in  the  military
line,  or  whether,  if  he  should,  anything  under  the
rank  he  now  holds  in  the  state  he  comes  from  would
satisfy  him."  He  was  then  stationed  at  Bound
Brook,  N.  J.,  the  advanced  post  of  the  British,  where
he  was  surprised  by  a  party  of  2,000  men  under  Lord
Cornwallis  and  Gen.  James  Grant  on  13  April,  but
escaped  with  his  aides  before  he  was  surrounded.
He  remained  attached  to  Washington's  command
till  July,  when  he  was  sent  with  Gen.  Benedict  Ar-
nold to  act  under  Gen.  Schuyler  against  Burgoyne,
for  which  purpose  he  raised  a  body  of  New  Eng-
land militia. He  sent  out  a  successful  expedition,


which  seized  the  posts  of  the  enemy  at  Lake  George,
and  broke  Burgoyne's  line  of  communication.  Gen.
Lincoln  then  joined  Gen.  Gates  at  Stillwater,  and
took  command  of  the  right  wing.  During  the  bat-
tle of  Bemis's
Heights  he  com-
manded inside
the  American
works,  and  on
the  next  day,  in
leading  a  small
force  to  a  post  in
the  rear  of  Bur-
goyne's army,
fell  in  with  a
party  of  British,
supposing  them
to  be  Ameri-
cans, and  re-
ceived a  severe
wound,  which
forced  him  to
retire  for  a  year

and  lamed  him  for  life.  He  rejoined  the  army  in
August,  1778,  on  25  Sept.  was  appointed  by  congress
to  the  chief  command  of  the  southern  department,
and  for  several  months  he  was  engaged  in  protecting
Charleston  against  Gen.  Augustine  Prevost.  Upon
the  arrival  of  Count  d'Estaing  he  co-operated  with
the  French  troops  and  fleet  in  the  unsuccessful  as-
sault on  Savannah ;  but  from  the  unwillingness  of
his  allies  to  continue  the  siege  he  was  forced  to  re-
turn to  Charleston,  where  in  the  spring  of  1780  he
was  besieged  by  a  superior  British  force  under  Sir
Henry  Clinton.  After  an  obstinate  defence  he  was
obliged  in  May  to  capitulate,  and  in  November  re-
tired to  Massachusetts  oh  parole.  In  the  spring  of
1781  he  was  exchanged,  and  immediately  joined
Washington  on  Hudson  river.  He  participated  in
the  siege  of  Yorktown,  and  Washington  appointed
him  to  receive  the  sword  of  Cornwallis  on  the  sur-
render of  the  British  forces.  He  held  the  office  of
secretary  of  war  from  1781  till  1784,  after  which  he
retired  to  his  farm,  receiving  the  thanks  of  con-
gress for  his  services.  In  1787  he  commanded  the
forces  that  quelled  Shays's  rebellion  in  western
Massachusetts,  and  in  that  year  was  elected  lieu-
tenant-governor of  the  state.  Upon  the  establish-
ment of  the  Federal  government  he  received  from
Washington  the  appointment  of  collector  of  the
port  of  Boston,  from  which  office  he  retired  about
two  years  before  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of
the  commission  that  made  a  treaty  with  the  Creek
Indians  in  1789,  and  of  the  one  that  in  1793  unsuc-
cessfully attempted  to  enter  into  negotiations  with
the  Indians  north  of  the  Ohio,  the  other  members
including  Thomas  Pickering  and  Beverly  Ran-
dolph, of  Virginia,  the  place  appointed  for  the  con-
ference being  Sandusky.  He  kept  a  journal  of  this
expedition,  which  was  published  entire  in  the  col-
lections of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society  (se-
ries iii.,  vol.  v.).  Accompanying  this  is  an  engrav-
ing of  an  outline  sketch  taken  by  a  British  officer
present  at  the  meeting  of  the  Indians  on  Buffalo
creek,  representing  Randolph,  Pickering,  and  Lin-
coln, Gen.  Chapin,  several  Quakers,  two  British
officers,  the  Indian  orator,  and  the  interpreter.  He
was  also  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  conven-
tion that  ratified  the  U.  S.  constitution  and  presi-
dent of  the  Massachusetts  society  of  the  Cincinnati
from  its  organization  until  his  death.  He  was
much  esteemed  by  Gen.  Washington,  who  present-
ed him  with  a  set  of  epaulettes  and  sword-knots,
which  he  had  received  from  a  French  officer.  He
devoted  his  last  years  to  literary  and  scientific  pur-


LINCOLN


suits,  and  was  a  member  of  the  American  academy
of  arts  and  sciences,  and  of  the  Massachusetts  his-
torical society.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
M.  A.  in  1780.  His  correspondence  during  the
adoptiqn  of  the  Federal  constitution  was  large  and
important,  including  letters  from  the  leading  pa-
triots, and  a  letter  from  Dr.  David  Ramsey,  the
historian,  dated  Charleston,  19  Jan.,  1788,  gives  an
interesting  view  of  the  relations  then  existing  be-
tween New  England  and  South  Carolina.  While
secretary  of  war  he  wrote  long  letters  to  his  son,
which  he  intended  to  be  read  at  the  meetings  of
the  academy,  containing  the  results  of  his  observa-
tions of  the  physical  features  of  the  south.  A  pa-
per upon  his  belief  that  trees  receive  nourishment
from  the  atmosphere  instead  of  the  earth,  and  one
on  the  ravages  of  worms  in  trees,  were  published  in
Cary's  "  American  Museum."  Many  of  his  writ-
ings appeared  about  1790,  including  a  paper  on  the
migration  of  fishes,  in  an  appendix  to  vol.  iii.  of
Dr.  Belknap's  "  History  of  New  Hampshire,"  and
three  essays,  published  in  the  collections  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society :  "  Observations  on
the  Climate,  Soil,  and  Value  of  the  Eastern  Coun-
ties in  the  District  of  Maine  "  ;  "  On  the  Religious
State  of  the  Eastern  Counties  "  ;  and  on  the  "  In-
dian Tribes,  the  Causes  of  their  Decrease,  their
Claims,  etc."  His  portrait  was  painted  by  Henry
Sargent,  a  copy  of  which  was  presented  to  the
Massachusetts  historical  society.  (See  his  life  by
Francis  Bowen  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biography,"
second  series,  Boston,  1847.)

LINCOLN,  David  Francis,  physician,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1861,  and  received  his  medical  degree
there  in  1864.  For  eighteen  months  previous  to
his  graduation  he  served'  as  acting  assistant  sur-
geon in  the  United  States  navy,  and  in  1865  lie
went  to  Europe,  where  he  studied  in  the  universi-
ties of  Berlin  and  Vienna.  He  established  himself
in  Boston  in  1867,  and  since  1871  has  made  a  spe-
cialty of  nervous  diseases.  He  is  a  member  of
various  medical  societies,  and  in  addition  to  essays
on  school  hvgiene  and  papers  in  the  "  Boston  Medi-
cal Journal "  has  published  "  Electro-Therapeutics  "
(Boston,  1875),  and  translated  a  treatise  on  thera-

geutics  from  the  French  of  A.  Trousseau  and  II.
idoux  (9th  ed.,  New  York,  1880).
LINCOLN,  John  Lark  in.  educator,  b.  in  Bos-
ton. Mass.,  23  Feb.,  1817;  d.  in  Providence.  R.  I.,
17  Oct.,  1891.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1836.  He  was  tutor  in  Columbian  college.  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  in  1836-*7.  studied  in  Newton  semi-
nary from  1838  till  1840.  and  was  tutor  at  Brown
from  1838  till  1841.  He  then  went  to  Europe,
where  he  studied  in  Halle  and  Berlin,  and  on  his  re-
turn in  1844  was  elected  professor  of  the  Latin  lan-
guage and  literature  at  Brown,  occupying  the  chair
until  his  death.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1859.  He  edited  "  Selections  from  Livy  "
(New  York,  1847;  new  ed..  1882);  "The  Works
of  Horace  "  (1851  ;  new  ed.,  1882) ;  "  Ovid,  with
Notes"  (1883);  "Ovid,  with  Vocabulary"  (1883);
and  Cicero's  "  De  Senectute  "  (in  preparation,  1887).
— His  brother,  Heman,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  14  April,  1821,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1840,  and  at  Newton  theological  institution  in  1845.
He  was  a  pastor  in  New  Britain,  Pa.,  for  five  years,
in  Philadelphia  for  three,  in  Jamaica  Plains,  Mass.,
for  six,  and  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  for  eight,  after
which  he  became,  in  1868,  professor  of  ecclesiastical
history  in  the  Newton  institution.  This  chair  he
exchanged  in  1873  for  that  of  homiletics  and  pas-
toral duties.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Rochester  in  1865. Dr.  Lincoln  has  contributed


LINCOLN


7-21)


much  to  the  press.  He  edited  the  "  Christian
Chronicle,"  published  in  Philadelphia,  from  1844
till  1853,  and  from  1854  till  1867  was  associate  edi-
tor of  the  "  Watchman  and  Reflector."  printed  in
Boston.  He  has  published  "  Outline  Lectures  in
Church  History  "  (1884),  and  "  Outline  Lectures  in
History  of  Doctrine  "  (1885).— Heman's  wife,  Jane
Elizabeth  (Larcombe),  b.  in  Colebrook,  Conn.,  in
1829,  was  before  her  marriage  in  1851  a  frequent
contributor,  under  the  pen-name  "  Kate  Campbell,"
to  the  magazines  published  by  Godey,  Sartain,  Pe-
terson, and  Neal,  and  to  the  annuals.  Subsequent-
ly she  wrote  for  Baptist  journals.

LINCOLN,  Levi,  statesman,  b.  in  Hingham,
Mass.,  15  May,  1749;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  14
April,  1820.  His  father,  a  fanner  of  Hingham,
destined  his  son  for  mechanical  employment,  but,
during  his  apprenticeship,  the  latter  devoted  his
leisure  to  study,  and  entered  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1772.  When  the  battle  of  Lex-
ington occurred  he  was  studying  law  in  North-
ampton, but  wont  as  a  volunteer  with  the  min-
ute-men to  Cambridge.  He  was  zealous  in  the
cause  of  independence,  and  was  the  author  of  nu-
merous patriotic  appeals,  and  a  series  of  political
papers  entitled  "  Farmer's  Letters."  Between  1775
and  1781  he  was  successively  clerk  of  the  court  and
judge  of  probate  of  Worcester  county.  In  1779  he
was  government  commissioner  for  confiscated  es-
tates under  the  absentee  acts,  and  also  to  expedite
the  payment  of  the  Continental  tax.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  convention  in  Cambridge  for  fram-
ing a  state  constitution,  and  in  1781  was  elected  to
the  Continental  congress,  but  declined  to  serve.
In  1796  he  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  represent-
atives, and  in  1797  of  the  senate,  of  Massachusetts.
In  1800  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  in
place  of  D wight  Foster,  who  had  been  chosen  to
the  senate,  serving  from  6  Feb.,  1801,  till  3  March
of  that  year,  when  he  was  appointed  attorney-
general  of  the  United  States.  During  the  few
months  preceding  the  arrival  of  James  Madison
he  was  provisional  secretary  of  state.  At  the  end
of  Jefferson's  first  term  in  March,  1805,  he  re-
signed, and  in  1806  elected  a  member  of  the  coun-
cil of  Massachusetts.  In  1807-'8  he  was  lieuten-
ant-governor of  the  state,  and,  after  the  death  of
Gov.  James  Sullivan  in  December.  1808,  he  was
acting  governor  until  the  following  May.  In  1811
he  was  appointed  by  President  Madison  an  as-
sociate justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  but
declined,  owing  to  his  failing  sight,  which  termi-
nated in  almost  total  blindness.  A  partial  resto-
ration of  vision  enabled  him  afterward  to  resume
his  classical  studies  and  the  cultivation  of  his
farm.  He  was  an  original  member  of  the  Ameri-
can academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  a  member
of  other  learned  societies,  and  from  the  close  of
the  Revolution  was  considered  the  head  of  the
Massachusetts  bar. — His  son,  Levi,  governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  25  Oct.,
1782;  d.  there,  29  May,  1868.  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1802.  He  studied  law  with  his  father,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1805.  and  began  to
practise  in  Worcester.  Between  1812  and  1822  he
was  elected  several  times  to  the  legislature,  was
speaker  of  the  house  in  1822,  and  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  Democratic  party.  In  1814  he  entered
warmly  into  the  debate  in  opposition  to  the  Hart-
ford convention,  and  drew  up  a  protest  against
that  body,  which  was  signed  by  seventy-five  other
members'  of  the  legislature  and  widely  circulated.
In  1820  he  was  a  member  of  the  convention  called
to  revise  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  was
lieutenant-governor  of  the  state  in  1823,  and  in


730


LINCOYAN


LIND-GOLDSCIIMIDT


1824  was  appointed  judge  of  the  supreme  court.
In  1825  he  was  selected  by  both  political  parties
as  their  candidate  for  governor  of  the  state,  which
office  he  held  until  1834.  He  is  believed  to  have
been  the  first  governor  under  the  state  constitu-
tion that  exercised  the  veto  power.  The  measure
that  he  vetoed  was  an  act  for  building  a  new
bridge  between  Boston  and  Charlestown.  From
1835  till  1841  he  served  in  congress,  having  been
chosen  as'a  Whig.  In  1841  he  became  collector  of
the  port  of  Boston,  and  Jn  1844-'5  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  s^tate  senate,  of  which  he  was  president
in  the  latter  year.  He  was  presidential  elector  in
1848,  and  presided  over  the  electoral  college.
Upon  the  organization  of  his  native  town  as  a
city  in  1848  he  became  its  first  mayor.  He  was
an  active  member  of  the  American  antiquarian
society,  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sci-
ences, and  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  and
agricultural  societies.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Williams  in  1824,  and  from  Harvard
in  1826. — Another  son,  Enoch,  governor  of  Maine,
b,in  Worcester.  Mass.,  28  Dec,  1788:  d.  in  Au-
gusta, Me.,  8  Oct.,  1829,  entered  Harvard  in  1806,
but  was  not  graduated.  He  studied  law  with  his
brother  Levi  at  Worcester,  where  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1811,  and  began  to  practise  in  Salem,
but  in  1812  removed  to  Fryeburg,  Me.,  and  in  1819
to  the  neighboring  town  of  Paris.  He  was  elected
to  congress,  serving  from  16  Nov.,  1818,  till  3
March,  1821.  When  Maine  became  a  state  he  was
again  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  1821  till
1826,  when  he  resigned.  In  1827  he  was  elected
governor  of  Maine,  and  twice  re-elected  with  lit-
tle opposition,  serving  until  his  death.  His  proc-
lamations were  marked  by  peculiar  felicity  and
terseness  of  expression,  and  his  official  correspond-
ence included  an  energetic  vindication  oi  the
rights  of  the  state  in  the  question  of  the  northeast
boundary.  Bowdoin  gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  A.
in  1821.  He  delivered  a  poem  at  the  centennial
celebration  of  the  fight  at  Lovewell's  Pond,  and  an
oration  at  the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  the
state  capitol  at  Augusta,  in  July,  1829.  He  had
declined  a  renomination  for  governor,  resolving  to
devote  his  life  to  agriculture  and  to  study.  He
contributed  papers  on  the  Indian  languages  and
the  French  missions  in  Maine,  to  the  first  volume
of  the  "  Maine  Historical  Collections,"  and  left  an
unfinished  manuscript  on  the  history,  resources,
and  policy  of  Maine.  He  was  the  author  of  a
poem  entitled  "The  Village,"  descriptive  of  the
scenery  and  romance  of  the  town  of  Fryeburg
(1816). — Another  son,  William,  antiquarian,  b.  in
Worcester  in  1801;  d.  there,  5  Oct..  1843,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1822.  and  studied  law
with  his  brother  Levi.  He  edited  the  "  National
^Egis."  and  was  one  of  the  publishers  of  the
"  Worcester  Magazine  "  in  1826-'7.  He  delivered
an  oration  at  Worcester  on  4  July,  1816,  and  was
the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Worcester"  (Worces-
ter, 1837;  new  ed.,  by  Charles  Mersey,  1862).

LINCOYAN  (lin-co-yang'),  Araucanian  toqui,  b.
in  Arauco,  South  America,  about  1519;  d.  in  Ca-
fiete  in  1560.  After  the  death  of  the  first  Arau-
canian toqui,  Caillavilu,  who  fought  against  the
Spaniards,  Lincoyan  took  the  command  of  the
army  in  1550.  He  was  of  gigantic  stature,  and  his
people  said  that  he  possessed  great  courage.  In
1551  he  attacked  Gen.  Valdivia  on  the  banks  of  the
Andalien,  but  the  neighboring  fort  resisted  his  as-
saults. During  part  of  that  year  and  in  1552  he
continued  fighting  against  Valdivia  along  Cauten
river.  In  1553  Caupolican  was  made  commander-
in-chief  in  his  stead,  but  he  was  given  the  com-


mand of  a  division.  In  this  year  he  took  part  in
the  capture  of  the  fortresses  of  Arauco  and  Tu-
capel.  Soon  after  this  battle  he  defeated  a  strong
Spanish  force  that  came  to  protect  Imperial.  He
followed  Caupolican  in  all  his  victories  and  in  all
his  battles  till  the  death  of  that  chief  in  1558.
Afterward  he  continued  the  war  against  the  Span-
iards till  he  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Cafiete.

LINDERMAN,  Henrv  Richard,  director  of
the  mint,  b.  in  Lehman,  Pa.,  26  Dec,  1825 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  27  Jan.,  1879.  He  studied
medicine  under  his  father,  but  completed  his  course
in  New  York  city.  Subsequently  he  followed  his
profession  in  Pike  county,  and  elsewhere  in  Penn-
sylvania, until  1853.  He  then  settled  in  Philadel-
phia, where  he  was  active  in  politics  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  was  chief  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  mint  in  that
city  in  1855-'64.  Dr.  Linderman  resigned  this
office  during  1864,  and  entered  business  as  a  stock-
broker. In  1867  he  was  appointed  director  of  the
mint,  and  held  that  place  for  two  years.  On  ac-
count of  his  great  experience  and  thorough  knowl-
edge of  such  subjects,  he  was  appointed  by  the
secretary  of  the  treasury  to  examine  the  mint  in
San  Francisco,  and  to  adjust  some  intricate  bullion
questions.  In  1871  he  was  sent  by  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment to  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin,  to  collect
information  concerning  the  mints  in  those  places,
and  in  1872  he  made  an  elaborate  report  on  the
condition  of  the  market  for  silver.  In  order  to
find  an  outlet  for  the  great  amount  of  silver  in
the  United  States,  he  proposed  the  trade-dollar,
and  he  was  associated  with  John  J.  Knox  in  the
preparation  of  the  coinage  act  of  1873,  which  was
a  codification  of  all  the  mint  and  coinage  laws  of
the  United  States,  with  important  amendments,
and  established  the  mint  and  assay  offices  as  a  bu-
reau of  the  treasury  department  in  Washington.
On  the  enactment  of  this  law  in  April,  1873,  he
was  appointed  superintendent  of  the  mint  and
organized  the  bureau,  and  from  that  time  had
the  general  supervision  of  all  the  mints  and  assay
offices  in  the  United  States.  During  his  adminis-
tration he  gathered  a  choice  collection  of  specimen
coins,  which  were  to  be  sold  by  auction  in  New
York  in  1887,  but  the  U.  S.  government  claimed
them.  His  annual  reports  while  he  was  superin-
tendent were  valuable,  and  that  for  1877  contains
an  elaborate  argument  in  favor  of  the  gold  stand-
ard. He  also  published  "  Money  and  Legal  Tend-
er in  the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1877).

LIND-GOLDSCHMIDT,  Jenny,  vocalist,  b.  in
Stockholm,  Sweden,  6  Oct.,  1821 :  d.  in  London,  2
Nov.,  1887.  She  early
manifested  musical
ability,  and  at  the  age
of  seventeen  appeared
on  the  operatic  stage  in
her  native  city.  After  a
thorough  training  with
eminent  masters  she  be-
gan her  musical  career,
appearing  with  remark-
able success  in  the  cap-
itals of  Europe.  Paris
remained  the  one  ex-
ception. In  1849  Jenny
Lind  came  to  this  coun-
try, under  the  manage-
ment of  Phineas  T.  Bar-
num,  for  an  extended
concert  tour  in  our  large
cities.  Under  this  ar-
rangement 95  concerts  were  given,  for  which  the
receipts  amounted  to $712,000,  her  share  being


LINDSAY


LINDSLEY


731


$176,000.  In  1851  she  was  married  in  Boston  to
Otto  Goldschmidt,  a  composer  and  pianist,  and
soon  afterward  went  to  Europe,  where  she  has  ap-
peared only  occasionally  in  concerts  and  oratorios.
For  many  years  she  has  lived  in  retirement  in
London,  and  is  well  known  for  her  private  chari-
ties and  Christian  character.  Her  voice  had  power,
sweetness,  flexibility,  and  the  extreme  range  of
high  soprano,  combined  with  purity  of  intonation
and  musical  sensibility.  Her  ornamentation  was
remarkable  for  variety  and  originality,  and  she  was
unrivalled  in  the  management  of  very  soft  pas-
sages. The  "  Swedish  Nightingale  "  continued  her
intercourse  to  the  last  with  many  New-World
friends,  and  to  the  writer  said,  "  I  shall  never  cease
to  love  America  and  the  Americans,  for  there  I
spent  some  of  ray  happiest  days."  She  suffered  a
stroke  of  paralysis  29  Sept.,  1887,  from  which  there
was  no  hope  oi  her  recovery.

LINDSAY,  John  Su  miner  field,  clergyman,  b.
in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  19  March,  1842.  He  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1859,  and  at
the  University  of  Virginia  in  1866,  and  was  for
several  years  a  minister  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  He  acted  as  chaplain  to  the  University
of  Virginia  from  1865  till  1867,  and  in  1868  took
orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  From
1871  till  1879  he  was  rector  of  St.  James's  church,
Warrenton,  Va.,  and  in  the  latter  year  took  charge
of  St.  John's,  Georgetown,  Va.,  where  he  still  re-
mains (1887).  From  1883  till  1885  he  was  chaplain
of  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives,  and  in  1887
he  was  elected  bishop  of  the  diocese  of  Easton,  Md.,
but  declined.  Dr.  Lindsay  has  published  several
occasional  sermons,  among  them  "A  Sketch  of
Hamilton  Parish,  Va."  (Baltimore,  1875),  and  "  A
Sketch  of  St.  John's  Church,  Georgetown  "  (Wash-
ington, 1886),  He  is  also  the  author  of  an  address
on  **  The  True  American  Citizen  "  (1887).

LINDSEY,  Charles,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Lincolnshire,  England,  in  1820.  He  came  to  Can-
ada in  1842,  became  sub-editor  of  the  Toronto
"Examiner"  in  1846,  and  in  1852  editor  of  the
Toronto  "Leader."  In  1867  he  was  appointed
registrar  of  Toronto.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Clergy
Reserves:  their  History  and  Present  Position"
<Toronto,  1851) ;  "  Prohibitory  Liquor  Laws :  their
Practical  Operation  in  the  United  States  "  (1855) ;
"Life  and  Times  of  William  Lyon  Mackenzie"  (2
vols.,  Philadelphia  a"nd  Toronto.  1862);  "An  In-
vestigation of  the  Unsettled  Boundaries  of  Onta-
rio "  (Toronto,  1873) ;  "  Rome  in  Canada :  The  Ul-
tramontane Struggle  for  Supremacy  over  the  Civil
Authority"  (1877).

LINDSEY,  Daniel  Weisiger,  soldier,  b.  in
Frankfort,  Ky.,  4  Oct.,  1835.  His  father,  Thomas
N.  Lindsey,  served  as  commonwealth's  attorney  in
1845-8,  was  several  times  in  the  legislature,  and  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
1849.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Kentucky  mili-
tary institute,  and  at  Louisville  law-school,  begin-
ning the  practice  of  his  profession  in  1858.  At  the
opening  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  National
service,  and  raised  and  organized  the  22d  Ken-
tucky volunteers,  of  which  he  was  elected  colonel.
He  led  it  in  the  campaign  of  Gen.  James  A.  Gar-
field in  eastern  Kentucky,  and  in  the  retreat  with
Gen.  George  W.  Morgan"  from  Cumberland  Gap.
He  was  soon  afterward  appointed  to  the  command
of  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Morgan's  division,  which  he  led
in  the  Vicksburg  campaign,  and  in  other  engage-
ments. In  1863  he  was  appointed  adjutant-general
of  Kentucky  by  Gov.  Thomas  E.  Bramlette,  and
served  till  the  close  of  the  term,  in  1867.  Since
then  Gen.  Lindsey  has  practised  law  in  Frankfort.


LINDSEY,  William,  b.  in  Rockbridge  county,
Va.,  4  Sept.,  1835.  He  received  an  education  in
the  schools  of  his  native  place,  and  in  1854  re-
moved to  Hickman  county,  Ky.,  where  he  taught,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1858.
At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the
Confederate  army  as  lieutenant,  and  was  soon
made  captain  in  the  22d  Tennessee  infantry,  lb-
served  as  staff-officer  with  Gen.  Buford  and  Gen.
Lyon,  and  remained  with  the  2d  Kentucky  brigade
until  paroled  as  a  prisoner  of  war  early  in  1865,  at
Columbus,  Miss.  At  the  close  of  hostilities  he  re-
turned to  Clinton,  Ky.,  resumed  the  practice  of  his
profession,  and  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in
1867.  In  1870  he  was  chosen  to  the  highest  judi-
cial bench  in  the  state,  and  in  September,  1876.  he
became  chief  justice  of  Kentucky,  leaving  the
bench  two  vears  afterward  with  a  high  reputation.
He  declined  a  renomination,  and  has  since  followed
the  profession  of  law  at  Frankfort.

LINDSLEY,  Philip,  educator,  b.  in  Morristown,
N.  J.,  21  Dec,  1786 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  25  May,
1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1804,
and  after  teaching  he  was  appointed  in  1807  tutor
in  Latin  and  Greek  at  Princeton.  Meanwhile  he
studied  theology,
and  was  licensed
to  preach  in  April,
1810.  In  1812
he  returned  to
Princeton,  after
preaching  in  va-
rious places,  as
senior  tutor.  He
was  made  profes-
sor of  languages
in  1813,  and  at
the  same  time  be-
came secretary  of
the  board  of  trus-
tees. In  1817
he  was  elected
vice-president  of
Princeton,  and,
after  the  resigna-
tion of  Ashbel
Green  in  1822,  he
was  for  one  year
acting  president,  but  in  the  succeeding  year  was
chosen  president  of  Cumberland  college  (now  Uni-
versity of  Nashville),  and  also  of  Princeton,  l>oth  of
which  he  declined  :  but  later  he  was  again  offered
the  presidency  of  Cumberland.  He  was  finally  in-
duced to  visit  Nashville,  and  the  result  of  his  trip
was  his  acceptance  of  the  office  in  1824.  He  con-
tinued his  relations  with  that  college  until  1850,
when  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  archaeology
and  church  polity  in  the  Presbyterian  theological
seminarv  in  New  Albany,  Ind..  which  he  held  until
1853.  Meanwhile  he  declined  the  presidency  of
numerous  colleges.  He  was  chosen  moderator  in
1834  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian
church,  held  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1855  commis-
sioner of  the  presbytery  to  the  general  assembly  in
Nashville.  In  1825  he'received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Dickinson  college.  His  publications,  consist-
ing chiefly  of  baccalaureate  addresses  ami  occasion-
al sermons,  were  collected  by  Leroy  J.  Halsey,  and
published  as  "  Dr.  Lindslev"s  Complete  Works  and
a  Biographv"  (3  vols..  Philadelphia,  1868).  See
also  "  A  Ske"tch  of  the  Life  and  Educational  La-
bors of  Philip  Lindslev,"  by  Leroy  J.  Halsey  (Hart-
ford, 1859).— His  son,  "Nathaniel  Lawrence,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Princeton.  N.  J..  11  Sept.,  1816;  d.  near
Lebanon,  Tenn.,  10  Oct.,  1868,  was  graduated  at  the


732


LINEN


LINN


University  of  Nashville  in  1836,  and  devoted  him-
self to  the  study  of  languages,  reaching  a  high  rank
as  a  philologist.  For  many  years  he  was  professor
of  languages  in  Cumberland  university,  and  sub-
sequently founded  Greenwood  seminary.  He  was
associated  with  Dr.  Joseph  E.  Worcester  in  the
preparation  of  the  dictionary  that  bears  his  name,
and  had  projected  a  great  work  to  be  entitled  "  An
Encyclo-Lexicon  of  the  English  Language."  In
1859  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  Cumber-
land university. — Another  son,  John  Berrien,
physician,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  24  Oct.,  1822,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Nashville  in  1839,
and  in  1843  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Nashville
in  1850,  and  held  that  chair  until  1873,  meanwhile
founding  the  medical  departments  of  that  univer-
sity and  becoming  its  dean.  He  was  its  chancellor
from  1855  until  1870,  preserving  the  university
unharmed  during  the  civil  war ;  and  also  was  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Tennessee  in  1880-'2.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Nashville  board  of  education  in  1856
-'60,  held  the  office  of  superintendent  of  city
schools  in  1866,  and  was  secretary  of  the  state
board  of  education  in  1875-'87.  He  was  health
officer  of  the  city  of  Nashville  in  1876-?80,  secre-
tary of  the  state  board  of  health  in  1877-9,  and
in  1884  was  chosen  again  for  a  term  of  eight  years.
Dr.  Lindsley  has  also  been  treasurer  of  the  Ameri-
can public  health  association  since  1879,  and  has
been  actively  connected  with  other  scientific  so-
cieties. In  1858  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Princeton.  He  has  contributed  articles  on
Cumberland  Presbyterian  history  to  the  "  Quarter-
ly "  of  that  church  (1875-'80),  also  papers  on  prison
reform  and  African  colonization,  which  have  been
reprinted  and  widely  circulated.  The  second  and
third  "  Reports  of  the  Nashville  Board  of  Health  "
(1877-9)  and  the  second  "  Report  of  the  State
Board  of  Health  "  (1880)  were  edited  by  him,  also
"  The  Military  Annals  of  Tennessee,  Confederate  "
(first  series,  Nashville,  1886).

LINEN,  James,  poet,  b.  in  Scotland  in  1808 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  20  Nov.,  1873.  He  emigrated
to  the  United  States,  and  for  many  years  carried
on  a  large  book-binding  establishment  in  New  York
city.  Later  he  spent  some  years  in  California,  where
he  was  an  active  member  of  the  Scottish  benevolent
societies.  His  last  years  were  passed  in  New  York
city.  He  contributed  poems,  mostly  in  the  Scotch
dialect,  to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  and  the
"  Scottish  American  Journal "  and  other  news-
papers, and  published  a  collection  under  the  title
of  "  Songs  of  the  Seasons,  and  other  Poems  "  (New
York,  1852).  A  large  collection  of  his  "  Poetical
and  Prose  Writings  "  (San  Francisco,  1865)  was  fol-
lowed by  a  smaller  one  (New  York,  1866).  He
published  also  "  The  Golden  Gate  "  (1869).

LINGrAN,  James  Maccubin,  soldier,  b.  in
Maryland  about  1752 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  28
July,  1812.  He  was  employed  in  a  store  in  George-
town, D.  C,  when  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolu-
tion he  obtained  a  commission  in  the  army.  He
fought  at  Long  Island,  York  Island,  and  Fort
Washington,  where  he  was  taken  prisoner  and  con-
fined in  a  prison-ship.  After  the  war  he  became
collector  of  the  port  of  Georgetown,  and,  as  he  is
given  the  title  of  "general,"  probably  obtained
this  rank  in  the  militia.  He  was  killed  in  Balti-
more jail,  where  he  had  taken  refuge,  by  the  mob
that  destroyed  the  office  of  the  "  Federalist,"  hav-
ing been  one  of  those  who  rallied  to  the  support  of
the  editor. (See  Hanson,  Alexander  C.)


LINING,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1708  ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1760.  He  studied
medicine,  emigrated  to  this  country  about  1730,
and  settled  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he  became
known  as  a  skilful  practitioner.  He  conducted
experiments  in  physics,  and  published  in  the
"Transactions"  of  the  Royal  society  a  series  of
observations  on  statical  phenomena  that  he  made
between  1738  and  1742.  He  was  a  correspondent
of  Benjamin  Franklin,  and  the  first  to  introduce  an
electrical  apparatus  into  Charleston.  Dr.  Lining
was  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Yellow  Fever
(Charleston,  1753),  which  was  the  earliest  Ameri-
can treatise  on  the  subject.

LINK,  Harvey,  surgeon,  b.  in  Washington
county,  Tenn.,  4  Feb.,  1824.  He  was  educated  at
Greenville  and  Tusculum  college,  Tenn.,  gradu-
ated at  the  Kentucky  school  of  medicine  in  1852,
and  practised  in  Greenville  and  New  Albany,  Ind.,
and  after  1856  in  Millard,  Neb.  He  has  held  local
offices,  and  sat  in  the  Nebraska  legislature.  He
has  successfully  treated  traumatic  tetanus  from  a
wound  in  the  foot  by  introducing  morphine  at  the
spot  in  the  well  foot  corresponding  to  the  place  of
the  injury,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  treatment,
proceeding  from  the  belief  that  sound  tissues  will
better  absorb  the  sedative  and  transmit  the  effect
to  the  nerve-centres  than  diseased  ones.

LINN,  James,  congressman,  b.  in  New  Jersey,
in  1750 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  29  Dec,  1820.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1769,  studied  law,
and  practised  in  Trenton.  He  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec.  1799,
till  3  March,  1801,  after  which  he  was  appointed  by
President  Jefferson  supervisor  of  the  revenue.
From  1805  till  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  secre-
tary of  state  of  New  Jersey.

LINN,  Lewis  Fields,  senator,  b.  near  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  5  Nov.,  1795;  d.  in  Sainte  Genevieve,
Mo.,  3  Oct.,  1843.  He  was  left  to  the  care  of  his
half-brother,  Henry  Dodge,  at  the  age  of  eleven,
studied  medicine  in  Louisville,  and  settled  in  prac-
tice at  Sainte  Gene-
vieve about  1815.
His  reputation  soon
extended  over  the
southern  counties  of
the  state.  In  1827
he  was  elected  to  the
state  senate,  and  in
1832  appointed  a
commissioner  to  de-
cide on  the  validity
of  old  land-titles  in
Missouri,  and  re-
moved in  the  follow-
ing year  to  St.  Louis
in  order  to  attend
the  meetings  of  the
board,  which  he  in-
duced to  confirm
French  and  Spanish
grants.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  senator  to  fill  the
vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  Alexander  Buck-
ner,  and  took  his  seat  on  16  Dec,  1833.  The  legis-
lature ratified  the  appointment,  and  at  the  two
next  succeeding  elections  retained  him  in  the  sen-
ate, where  he  was  a  conspicuous  and  popular  mem-
ber. He  was  zealous  in  promoting  the  interests  of
the  Mississippi  valley,  and  of  his  state,  for  which
he  secured  Platte  county.  He  urged  on  congress
the  duty  of  refunding  the  fine  imposed  on  Gen.
Andrew  Jackson  by  Judge  Hall  in  1815,  and  was
a  strong  advocate  of  the  acquisition  and  coloniza-
tion of  Oregon,  and  the  author  of  the  Oregon  bill.


LINN

LINN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Shippensburg,
Pa.,  27  Feb,  1752;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  8  Jan.,  1808.
His  grandfather,  William,  and  his  father  of  the
same  name,  came  from  the  north  of  Ireland  to
Chester  county,  Pa,  in  1732.  The  grandson  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1772,  ordained  bv  Done-
gal presbytery  in  1775,  and  in  1776  served  as  a
chaplain  in  the  Continental  army.  After  holding
a  pastorate  at  Big  Spring  (now'Newville).  Pa,  in
1777-84,  he  was  president  of  Washington  college,
Md,  till  1785,  and  had  charge  of  the  collegiate
Dutch  church,  New  York  city,  from  1786  till  1805,
when  feeble  health  compelled  him  to  retire.  He
also  acted  as  president  of  Rutgers  college  in
1791-4,  was  a  regent  of  the  University  of  the  state
of  New  York  from  1787  till  his  death,  and  in  1789
was  first  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  house  of  representa-
tives. He  was  chosen  president  of  Union  college
shortly  before  his  death,  but  was  not  inaugurated.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1789.
Dr.  Linn  was  a  pulpit  orator  of  much  power.  He
published  "  Sermons,  Historical  and  Characteristi-
cal"  (New  York,  1791);  "Signs  of  the  Times"
(1794) ;  a  "  Funeral  Eulogy  on  Gen.  Washington,"
delivered  22  Feb,  1800,  before  the  New  York  soci-
ety of  the  Cincinnati,  and  various  separate  ser-
mons.— His  son,  John  Blair,  clergyman,  b.  in
Shippensburg,  Pa,  14  March,  1777;  d.'in  Philadel-
phia, 30  Aug,  1804,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1795,  and  read  law  with  Alexander  Hamilton.
While  a  law-student  he  wrote  a  drama  called
"  Bourville  Castle,"  which  was  produced  at  the
John  street  theatre  in  1797,  but  was  unsuccessful.
He  afterward  studied  theology,  was  licensed  as  a
Presbyterian  clergyman  in  1798,  and  on  13  June,
1799,  installed  as  joint  pastor  of  the  1st  Presby-
terian church.  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  till
his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1803,  and  from
Columbia  in  1804.  Several  years  before  his  death
an  exposure  to  the  sun  resulted  in  an  affection  of
the  brain,  which  often  made  it  difficult  for  him  to
speak  in  the  pulpit.  Dr.  Linn  was  a  man  of  much
promise.  He  published  a  poem  on  "  The  Death  of
Washington  "  (1800) ;  "  The  Power  of  Genius,"  a
poem  in  the  style  of  Ossian  (1801) ;  two  replies  to
Unitarian  tracts  by  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley  (1803);
and  "  Valerian,"  a  narrative  poem,  which  was  issued
after  his  death,  with  a  sketch  of  his  life  by  his
brother-in-law,  Charles  Brockden  Brown  (1805).
He  also  published  anonymously  two  volumes  of
miscellanies  soon  after  he  left  college. — Another
son,  William,  lawver,  b.  in  New  York  city,  31  Aug,
1790;  d.  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y,  14  Jan,  1867,  studied
law,  and  practised  his  profession  at  Ithaca,  N.  Y.
He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Thomas  Jeffer-
son "  (Ithaca,  1834),  and  the  "  Roorbach  Papers,"
purporting  to  be  extracts  from  the  travels  of  a
"  Baron  Roorbach  "  (1844).  From  these  the  name
of  "Roorbach"  came  to  be  applied  to  any  po-
litical canard.  Mr.  Linn  was  also  the  author  of
a  "Legal  and  Commercial  Commonplace  Book"
(1850).— Another  son,  Archibald  Laidlie,  lawyer,
b.  in  New  York  city,  15  Oct,  1802 ;  d.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y,  10  Oct,  1857,  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1820,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to
practise  in  Schenectady.  He  was  twice  mayor  of
that  town,  served  in  congress  in  1841-3,  having
been  elected  as  a  Whig,  and  in  1844  was  a  member
of  the  New  York  legislature.  He  also  served  as  a
county  judge. — John  Blair,  grandson  of  William's
brother,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lewisburg,  Pa,  15  Oct,
1831,  was  graduated  at  Mai-shall  college,  Pa,  in  1848,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Union  county,  Pa,  in
1851. He  became  1st  lieutenant  in  the  51st  Penn-


LINTNER


733


sylvania  regiment  in  1862,  served  in  the  civil  war,
and  was  deputy  secretary  of  the  state  in  1873-'8,
and  secretary  in  1878-'9.  His  published  works  are
"  Annals  of  Buffalo  Valley  "  (1877) :  "  Pennsylvania
Archives,"  2d  series,  with  William  H.  Eglo.  M  I  >
(12  vols,  1874-'80);  and  "History  of  Center  and
Clinton  Counties  "  (1883).

LINSLEY,  James  Harvey,  naturalist,  b.  in
Northford,  Conn,  5  May,  1787;  d.  in  Stratford,
Conn,  26  Dec,  1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1817,  and  ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry,  but
delicate  health  prevented  his  preaching.  He  then
devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  natural  history.
and  collected  a  valuable  cabinet  of  specimens,  dis-
covering more  species  of  birds  in  Connecticut  alone
than  had  previously  been  catalogued  as  existing  in
the  United  States,  more  mammalia  than  had  been
found  elsewhere  in  New  England,  and  double  the
number  of  shells  that  were  supposed  to  exist  there.
He  prepared  a  series  of  papers  on  the  zoology  of
Connecticut  for  the  Yale  natural  history  society
that  were  published  under  the  title  of  "Catalogue
of  the  Mammalia  of  Connecticut"  in  the  "Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,"  and  also  contrib-
uted to  that  magazine  "  Catalogues  of  the  Birds,
Fishes,  and  Reptiles  of  Connecticut,  with  Notes "
(1842-'3).  See  "  Memoir  of  James  H.  Linsley,"  by
his  daughter  (Hartford,  1845).

LINSLEY,  Joel  Hervey,  clergyman,  b.  in  Corn-
wall. Vt,  16  July,  1790;  d.  in  Greenwich,  Conn,
22  March,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury
in  1811,  was  tutor  there  in  1812-'13,  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1815,  and,  after  practising  with  success  for
seven  years,  studied  theology  at  Andover  seminary,
was  licensed  to  preach,  and  became  a  domestic
missionary  in  South  Carolina.  He  was  pastor  of  the
1st  Presbyterian  church  of  Hartford  in  1824-31,
afterward  of  the  Park  street  Presbyterian  church
in  Boston,  and  in  1835-'45  was  president  of  Mari-
etta college,  raising  a  large  endowment  for  that
institution.  lie  was  subsequently  agent  of  the
Society  for  the  aid  of  western  colleges,  and  from
1847  till  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  2d  Congrega-
tional church,  Greenwich,  Conn.

LINSLY,  Jared,  phvsician,  b.  in  Northford,
Conn,  30  Oct,  1803 ;  d."  there,  12  July,  1887.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1826,  and  subsequently
at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  of  New
York  city  in  1829.  Since  that  time  until  his  last
illness  he  was  actively  engaged  in  the  practice  of
his  profession.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  of  the  Ophthalmic
and  aural  institute;  and  consulting  physician  to
the  Asylum  for  lying-in  women,  and  to  the  New
York  dispensary  and  the  Presbyterian  hospital.
He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  society  for  the
relief  of  the  widows  and  orphans  of  medical  men,
and  one  of  its  managers  and  benefactors.  He  was
also  a  member  of  medical  societies,  and  took  an
active  interest  in  Yale,  founding  the  Noah  and
Jared  Linsly  fund  for  supplying  books  to  the  col-
lege library!  in  memory  of  his  uncle  Noah,  a  grad-
uate of  Yale  in  1791,  who  made  one  of  the  earliest
similar  endowments  to  that  institution,  and  found-
ed the  first  free  school  in  a  slave  state.

LIXTNER,  Joseph  Albert,  entomologist,  b.  in
Schoharie,  N.  Y,  8  Feb,  1822.  He  studied  in  the
Jefferson  and  Schoharie  academies  until  1837,  and
then  engaged  in  business  pursuits  in  New  York
city  for  several  years,  during  which  time  his  studies
were  actively  continued  through  facilities  that  were
afforded  him  by  his  official  connection  with  the
mercantile  library  association.  In  1848  he  returned
to  Schoharie,  and  there  followed  a  mercantile  life.
About  1853  he  became  interested  in  the  study  and


734


LINTON


LIPPINCOTT


collection  of  insects,  to  which  his  leisure  thence-
forward was  devoted.  He  removed  to  Utica  in
1860,  and  then  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of
woollen  goods  until  1867,  when  he  became  the  zoo-
logical assistant  in  the  New  York  state  museum  of
natural  history  in  Albany.  This  office  he  held  for
the  ensuing  twelve  years,  during  which  time  his
attention  was  largely  devoted  to  entomological  re-
search, and  several  papers  in  this  department  of
science  were  prepared  by  him,  and  published  in  the
annual  reports  of  the  museum  and  elsewhere.  In
1881  he  became  state  entomologist,  and  in  1883  was
placed  on  the  scientific  staff  of  the  museum.  He
received  the  honorary  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
regents  of  the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York
in  1884,  and,  in  addition  to  membership  in  about
twenty  scientific  associations  in  the  United  States
and  Europe,  has  held  the  presidency  of  the  depart-
ment of  natural  science  in  the  Albany  institute
since  1879.  His  scientific  papers  down  to  July,
1887,  number  413.  Officially  he  has  published  "  Re-
port on  the  Injurious  and  other  Insects  of  the
State  of  New  York "  (2  vols.,  1883-5) ;  also  " Re-
port of  the  State  Entomologist "  (1883  et  seq.).

LINTON,  William  James,  engraver,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  in  1812.  He  studied  under  George
W.  Bonner,  an  English  engraver,  quickly  estab-
lished a  reputation  as  a  draughtsman  on  wood,
and,  though  painting  occasionally  in  water-colors,
is  best  known  as  an  engraver.  He  became  a  part-
ner of  Orrin  Smith  in  1842,  and  was  engaged  on
the  "  London  Illustrated  News,"  in  1848  he  was
deputed  to  carry  to  the  French  provisional  govern-
ment the  first  congratulatory  address  from  Eng-
lish workmen.  In  1851,  with  others,  he  found-
ed the  "  London  Leader,"  and  he  was  a  manager
of  "  Pen  and  Pencil "  in  1855.  He  removed  to
the  United  States  in  1867,  settling  first  in  New
York  and  subsequently  in  New  Haven,  where  he
opened  a  large  engraving  establishment.  He  is
a  member  of  the  American  society  of  painters  in
water-colors,  and  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  of  design.  His  work  includes  his  illus-
trations in  the  "  History  of  Wood  Engraving "
for  the  " Illustrated  London  News "  (1846-7) ;  in
"  Works  of  Deceased  British  Painters "  for  the
"  London  Art  Union "  (1860) ;  in  Dr.  Josiah  G.
Holland's  "  Katrina "  (New  York,  1869);  in  Will-
iam Cullen  Bryant's  "  Flood  of  Years  "  (1878),  and
"  Thanatopsis "  (1878).  His  literary  works  in-
clude "  Claribel  and  other  Poems  "  (London,  1865) ;
"  The  Flower  and  the  Star  "  (Boston,  1878),  which
he  also  illustrated  and  engraved ;  "  Some  Practical
Hints  on  Wood  Engraving  "  (1879) ;  "  A  Manual
of  Wood  Engraving  "  (1887) ;  edited  "  Rare  Poems
of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries  "  (1882);
and,  with  Richard  H.  Stoddard,  "  English  Verse  "
(5  vols.,  New  York,  1883).— His  wife,  Eliza  Lynn,
author,  b.  in  Keswick,  England,  in  1822,  is  the
daughter  of  a  clergyman.  Since  the  appearance
of  her  first  novel,  "  Azeth,  the  Egyptian "  (Lon-
don, 1846),  she  has  been  connected  with  the  press.
She  married  Mr.  Linton  in  1858.  She  has  recent-
ly acknowledged  the  authorship  of  a  series  of  pa-
pers entitled  "  The  Girl  of  the  Period "  that  ap-
peared anonymously  in  the  "  Saturday  Review,"
and  were  collected  in  book-form  (London,  1883),
and  of  most  of  the  papers  on  the  woman  ques-
tion that  have  been  published  in  that  journal.
Her  other  works  include  "  Witch  Stories  "  (1861) ;
"  The  Lake  Country,"  illustrated  by  her  husband
(1864) ;  "  The  True  History  of  Joshua  Davidson  "
(1872);  "Patricia  Kemball"  (1874);  "The  World
Well  Lost"  (1877):  "My  Love"  (1881);  and  the
"  Autobiography  of  Christopher  Kirkland  "  (1885).


LIPPARI),  George,  author,  b.  near  Yellow
Springs,  Pa.,  10  April,  1822;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  9  Feb.,  1854.  He  began  to  study  law  at
fifteen  years  of  age,  but  was  never  admitted  to  the
bar.  His  sensational  novels  evince  vigor  and  im-
agination, but  have  few  other  recommendations.
He  founded  the  Brotherhood  of  the  Union,  a  se-
cret charitable  and  benevolent  institution,  and
wrote  for  it  a  ritual.  Previous  to  the  civil  war
this  order  was  one  of  the  strongest  in  the  country.
Lippard  is  described  as  a  brilliant  but  erratic
genius.  He  was  passionately  fond  *  country  life,
and,  living  with  an  aunt  near  Germantown,  roamed
along  the  banks  of  the  romantic  Wissahickon  and
wrote  much  about  it.  With  a  strange  fancy,  he
was  married  at  sunrise  on  the  banks  of  this
stream.  He  was  regarded  as  an  eloquent  speak-
er. His  romances  include  "The  Ladye  Anna-
bel" (Philadelphia,  1842);  "The  Belle  of  Prarie
Eden"  (1844);  "Legends  of  Mexico"  (1847);
"  Legends  of  the  Revolution  "  (1847) ;  "  Blanche  of
Brandywine  " ;  "  The  Nazarene  " ;  "  New  York — its
Upper  Ten,  and  Lower  Million  " ;  "  The  Quaker
City  " ;  "  Paul  Ardenheim,  or  the  Monk  of  Wissa-
hickon " ;  "  Herbert  Tracy  " ;  "  Adonai " ;  and  "  Me-
moirs of  a  Preacher."  See  his  life,  with  selected
writings  (Philadelphia,  1855).  In  addition  to  the
novels  he  published  "  Washington  and  his  Gener-
als "  and  edited  the  "  White  Banner  Quarterly."

LIPPINCOTT,  James  Starr,  agriculturist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12  April,  1819;  d.  in  Haddon-
field,  N.  J.,  17  March,  1885.  He  was  educated  at
Haverford  college,  and  resided  for  many  years  in
Haddenfield,  N.  J.,  where  he  paid  much  attention
to  scientific  agriculture  and  meteorology.  He
patented  a  "  vapor  index,"  for  measuring  the
amount  of  moisture  in  the  atmosphere,  which  has
been  used  in  the  Smithsonian  institution  and  else-
where. He  was  the  author  of  six  treatises,  pub-
lished in  the  "  Reports  of  the  Agricultural  Depart-
ment "  (Washington,  1862-'7),  and  numerous  papers
on  horticulture  in  the  "  Gardener's  Monthly  " ;
compiled  a  "  Catalogue  of  the  Books  belonging  to
the  Library  of  the  Four  Monthly  Meetings  of
Friends  of  Philadelphia"  (Philadelphia,  1853);
and  edited  the  American  revision  of  "  Chambers's
Encyclopaedia  "  (1870-'l).  For  many  years  before
his  death  he  had  been  engaged  on  a  history  of
"  The  Lippincotts  of  England  and  America,"
which  is  now  (1887)  in  press.

LIPPINCOTT,  Joshua  Ballinger,  publisher,
b.  in  Juliustown,  N.  J.,  in  1816 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  5  Jan.,  1886.  He  was  of  Quaker  parentage,
and  after  receiving  a
common  -  school  edu-
cation went  to  Phila-
delphia, where  he  was
employed  in  a  book-
store, and  two  years
later,  when  eighteen
years  old,  was  put  in
charge  of  the  business.
In  1836  he  founded
the  publishing-house
of  J.  B.  Lippincott  and
Co.,  and  in  1850,  by
the  purchase  of  the
entire  stock  of  the
house  of  Grigg  and
Elliott,  he  placed  his
firm  at  the  head  of
the  book  -  trade  in
Philadelphia.  He  es-
tablished "  Lippincott's  Magazine "  in  1868,  the
"  Medical  Times  "  a  few  years  later,  and  in  1875  a


LIPPINCOTT


LISBOA


736


London  agency  to  facilitate  the  importation  of  Eu-
ropean literature  into  the  United  States.  For
many  years  he  was  a  director  of  the  Reading  rail-
road, the  Philadelphia  savings-bank,  the  Union
league  club,  and  the  Academy  of  fine  arts,  and  a
trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.

LIPPINCOTT,  Sara  Jane  (Clarke),  author,
b.  in  Pompey,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  23  Sept..  1823.
Much  of  her  childhood  was  passed  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  but  in  1842  she  removed  with  her  father  to
New  Brighton,  Pa.,  and  in  1853  married  Leander
K.  Lippincott,  of  Philadelphia.  She  published
occasional  verses  at  an  early  age  under  her  own
name,  and  in  1844  her  first  prose  publications
appeared  in  the  "New  York  Mirror"  under  the  pen-
name  of  '•  Grace  Greenwood,"  which  she  has  since
retained.  For  several  years  she  edited  the  "  Little
Pilgrim,"  a  juvenile  monthly  magazine  in  Phila-
delphia. She  is  also  the  author  of  several  addresses
and  lectures,  and  has  been  largely  connected  with
periodical  literature  as  editor  and  contributor.
"  Ariadne "  is  her  best  known  poem.  Her  other
works  include  "  Greenwood  Leaves  "  (Boston,  1850) ;
"  History  of  My  Pets  "  (1850) :  "  Poems  "  (1851) ;
"  Recollections  of  My  Childhood  "  (1851) ;  "  Haps
and  Mishaps  of  a  Tour  in  Europe  "  (1854) ;  "  Mer-
rie  England  "  (1855) ;  "  Forest  Tragedy  and  Other
Tales  "  (1856) ;  "  Stories  and  Legends  of  Travel  "
(1858);  "History  for  Children"  (1858):  "Stories
from  Famous  Ballads  "  (1860) ;  "  Stories  of  Many
Lands  "  (1867) ;  "  Stories  and  Sights  in  France  and
Italy"  (1868);  "Records  of  Five  Years"  (1868);
and  "New  Life  in  New  Lands"  (1873).

LIPPINCOTT,  William  Henry,  artist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  Dec,  1849.  He  was  educated
at  the  Friends'  school,  Philadelphia,  and  was  for
six  years  a  scene-painter  in  Philadelphia  theatres.
He  then  went  to  Paris  and  studied  under  Bonnat
from  1874  till  1884,  devoting  himself  to  portraits
and  studies  of  child-life.  He  is  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  of  design,  and  a  member  of
the  Water -color  society  anil  of  the  Salmagundi
club.  He  exhibited  "Lolette"  and  two  portraits
at  the  Paris  salon  of  1878,  and  "The  Duck's
Breast "  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  in  Philadel-

Ehia in  1876. His other works include "The
little Prince," various portraits, "Infantry in
Arms"  (1887),  and  numerous  etchings.

LIPPITT,  Christopher,  soldier,  b.  in  Crans-
ton, R.  I.,  in  1744;  d.  there,  18  June,  1824.  He
occupied  early  in  life  many  civil  and  military
offices,  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  in  September,
1776,  was  commissioned  colonel  in  the  Continental
army.  He  participated  in  the  battles  of  White
Plains,  Trenton,  and  Princeton,  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  the  Rhode  Island  militia,  and
served  in  the  battle  of  Rhode  Island.  He  subse-
quently sat  in  the  Rhode  Island  legislature.

LIPSCOMB,  Abner  Smith,  jurist,  b.  near
Abbeville,  S.  C,  10  Feb.,  1789;  d.  near  Austin,
Tex.,  3  Dec,  1857.  His  father,  Joel,  emigrated
from  Virginia  and  was  an  officer  of  the  Revolu-
tion. The  son  studied  law  with  John  C.  Calhoun,
who  shaped  the  political  opinions  that  he  had
throughout  his  life.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1811,  the  same  year  settled  in  St.  Stephens,  Ala.,
and  served  as  captain  of  a  volunteer  expedition
against  the  Indians  in  the  war  of  1812.  For
several  years  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,
became  judge  of  the  supreme  court  in  1819,  and  in
1823-'35  was  chief  justice  of  Alabama.  He  re-
moved to  Texas  in  1839,  was  secretary  of  state
under  President  Lamar,  and  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1845,  offering  the  reso-
lutions of  acceptance  of  the  terms  of  annexation


that  were  proposed  by  the  United  States.  He  was
appointed  an  associate  justice  of  the  supreme
court  in  184(5,  and  held  office  till  his  death.  His
opinions  are  published  in  Minor's.  Stewart "s.  and
Stewart  and  Porter's  reports,  and  in  the  first
seventeen  volumes  of  Texas  law  reports.

LIPSCOMB,  Andrew  Ad  irate,  educator,  b.  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  6  Sept.,  1816;  d.  in  Athens,
G»i.,  24  Nov.,  1890.  He  was  educated  in  a  cla.-sieal
seminary.  At  nineteen  years  of  age  he  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
was  pastor  successively  in  Baltimore,  Md..  Alex-
andria, Va.,  and  Washington,  I),  ft,  and  removed
in  1842  to  Montgomery.  Ala.  A  few  years  after-
ward he  was  elected  president  of  the  Alabama
conference,  but.  failure  of  health  necessitating  his
retirement  from  the  active  ministry,  he  engaged  in
teaching,  and  established  the  Metropolitan  insti-
tution for  the  education  of  young  women.  Mont-
gomery. Ala.  lie  was  subsequently  president  of
the  female  college  at  TusKegee,  Ala.,  and  in
1860-'74  was  chancellor  of  the  University  of
Georgia.  He  then  became  professor  of  philoso-
phy and  criticism  in  Vanderbilt  university,  and
afterward  professor  emeritus.  The  University  of
Alabama  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D..  and
Emory  college.  Oxford,  Ga..  that  of  LL.  D.  For
many  years  he  contributed  to  the  literary  and  re-
ligious reviews,  and  published,  besides  numerous
tracts  and  pamphlets,  "Studies  in  the  Forty
Davs "  (Nashville,  1885) ;  and  "  Supplementary
Studies  "  to  the  above  (1886).

LIRA,  Maximo  Rafael  (lee'-rah),  Chilian  pub-
licist, b.  in  Santiago  in  1845.  Early  in  life  he
began  to  contribute  to  political  and  literary
periodicals,  and  in  1871  he  became  editor  of  the
"  Independiente "  of  Santiago.  In  1873  he  was
elected  deputy  to  congress,  where  he  has  since
served.  He  was  elected  secretary  of  the  council  of
state  in  1874,  and  next  vear  appointed  secretary  of
the  Chilian  legation  in  Buenos  Ayres.  During  the
Bolivia-Peruvian  war  in  1879-'81  he  served  as
secretary  of  the  Chilian  commander-in-chief,  Gen.
Baquedano.  He  was  appointed  assistant  secretary
of  the  interior  in  1883.  but  resigned  in  1885  to  be-
come editor-in-chief  of  the  dailv  paper  "  Los  De-
bates," the  organ  of  the  Liberal  party,  which  post
he  still  (1887)  holds.  He  is  considered  the  first
parliamentary  orator,  and  one  of  the  principal
journalists  of  his  country.  He  has  published
"  Los  Jesuitas  y  sus  detractores  "  (Santiago,  1870) ;
"La  Comunay  sus  ensefianzas"  (1871);  and
"  Magdalena,"  a  novel  (1872).

LISBOA,  Joao  Francisco  (lis-bo'-ah),  Brazilian
journalist,  b.  in  Maranhao.  12  May,  1812;  d.  in
Lisbon,  Portugal,  26  April,  1863.  His  parents
were  country  people,  and  young  Joilo  spent  his
bovhood  on  their  farm,  reaching  the  age  of  seven-
teen before  he  was  able  to  read  and  write.  In
1829  he  had  made  enough  money  to  enter  the  col-
lege in  the  capital  of  his  province,  and  in  two  years
he  began  to  contribute  to  the  local  newspapers.
He  published  the  paper  "0  Brasileiro"  in  1832
and  the  "Pharol"  and  the  "Echo  do  Norte"  in
1833,  all  of  which  were  in  existence  till  1836.  In
1838-'41  he  published  the  "  Chronica."  From  1835
until  1848  he  was  chief  clerk  to  the  secretary  of
the  government  of  the  province  of  Rio  Janeiro.
He  took  an  active  interest  in  politics,  and  in  1840
was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  congress.  In
1848  he  retired  to  private  life,  giving  his  time  to
study,  and  in  1855  Pedro  II.  sent  Lisboa  to  Portu-

fal  to  obtain  data  for  completing  the  history  of
irazil. After  collecting  all  the  necessary  informa-
tion he  began  the  work,  but  died  without  finishing


736


LISBOA


LISBOA  SERRA


it.  He  also  published  "Jornal  de  Timon"  (1851);
"  Historia  do  Maranhao  "  (Maranhao,  1850) ;  and  a
life  of  Father  Vicera  (Lisbon,  18(30).

LISBOA,  Jos6  Antonio,  Brazilian  statesman,
b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  23  Feb.,  1777:  d.  there,  29  June,
1850.  He  received  his  early  education  in  his  native
city,  and  was  graduated  in  mathematics  at  Lisbon
in  1801.  He  afterward  went  to  France  and  England,
and  in  1804  returned  to  Portugal,  where  he  was  ac-
cused before  the  Inquisition  of  importing  irrelig-
ious books,  and  fled  to  Brazil.  In  1810  the  king  of
Portugal  created  several  new  institutions  in  con-
nection with  the  government  of  Brazil,  and  one  of
these,  the  Junta  do  commercio,  was  placed  under
the  direction  of  Lisboa.  He  was  appointed  super-
visor of  the  newly  founded  Bank  of  Brazil  in  1821,
and  in  1825  commissioned  to  treat  with  Portugal
and  England  regarding  the  liquidation  of  the  Bra-
zilian debt.  He  dismissed  many  of  the  English
claims,  and  in  1830  the  British  envoy  asked  the
government  of  Brazil  to  retire  him ;  but  this  re-
quest was  refused  in  a  note  dated  4  Sept.,  1830,
and  on  3  Nov.  Lisboa  was  called  to  occupy  the
ministry  of  finance.  In  1832  he  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  commission  for  forming  a  commer-
cial code,  which  was  finished  in  a  few  months.
From  1833  till  1835  he  steadily  worked  to  relieve
the  condition  of  the  treasury,  contributed  to  estab-
lish the  mint,  and  organized  a  new  bank.  During
the  reign  of  Pedro  II.  Lisboa's  services  to  the  na-
tion were  rewarded  with  several  decorations.  He
was  a  councillor  of  state  and  member  of  the  Insti-
tute historico-geographico  Brasileiro.  He  pub-
lished a  biography  of  his  friend  Silvestre  Pinheiro
Ferreira  (Rio  de  Janeiro,  1842).

LISBOA,  Jos6  da  Silva,  Brazilian  scholar,  b.
in  Bahia,  16  July,  1756 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  20  Aug.,
1835.  He  went  to  Portugal  in  1772,  and  was  gradu-
ated in  philosophy  at  Coimbra  in  1779.  He  was
made  assistant  teacher  of  Latin,  Greek,  and  He-
brew in  Coimbra  before  his  graduation,  and  on  his
return  to  his  native  country  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  languages  and  natural  philosophy  in  the
College  of  Bahia.  After  twenty  years  of  teaching
he  was  pensioned,  on  his  return  to  Portugal  in
1797,  by  the  prince  regent,  and  later  appointed  to
a  government  office  at  Bahia,  where  he  employed
his  leisure  time  in  writing  works  on  political  econo-
my. The  regent,  John  VI.,  after  the  arrival  of  the
royal  family  in  Brazil,  called  Lisboa  to  Rio  Janei-
ro, and  there  appointed  him  professor  of  political
economy.  To  his  efforts  was  due  the  royal  decree
of  21  Jan.,  1808,  opening  the  ports  of  Brazil  to  all
nations,  which  was  strongly  opposed  by  the  mer-
chants of  Portugal.  In  defence  of  this  measure
Lisboa  published  his  most  notable  work  "  Obser-
va§5es  sobre  o  commercio  franco "  (Rio  Janeiro,
1808).  When  the  "  Tribunal  da  junta  do  commer-
cio, agricultura,  fabricas  e  navegacao  do  Brazil "
was  created,  Lisboa  was  appointed  a  member,  or-
ganized the  first  tribunal  of  commerce,  and  formed
the  commercial  code  of  laws.  In  1821  he  was  ap-
pointed inspector  of  the  literary  establishments  of
Brazil,  and  in  that  year  began  to  take  part  in  poli-
tics, publishing  the  journal  "O  Conciliador  do
Reino  Qnido,"  which  favored  the  continued  union
of  Brazil  and  Portugal;  but  when  Prince  Pedro
declared  the  separation  of  Brazil  from  the  mother
country,  Lisboa  adhered  to  the  cause  of  independ-
ence, and  published  his  work  "  Reclamacoes  do
Brasil"  (Rio  de  Janeiro,  1822).  He  was  elected
from  his  province  to  the  constituent  assembly  of
Brazil,  in  1826  appointed  senator,  and  in  1831  Vis-
count de  Cayru.  From  that  year  till  his  death  he
was  contributor  to  the  official  paper,  "  Diario  do


Rio  de  Janeiro."  Besides  the  works  mentioned
above  he  published  "  Principios  de  Dereito  Mer-
cantile "  (Lisbon,  1801) ;  "  Principios  de  Economia
Politica,"  in  part  a  translation  of  the  work  of
Adam  Smith  (1804);  and  twenty-three  others,
nearly  all  relating  to  political  economy  and  the
politics  and  history  of  Brazil. — His  brother,  Bal-
thazar, b.  in  Bahia,  6  Jan.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Rio  Ja-
neiro, 14  Aug.,  1840,  studied  in  Coimbra  after
1775,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1784.  He
was  appointed  judge  of  the  city  of  Rio  de  Janei-
ro and  a  member  of  the  tribunal  of  forestry  in
1797,  and  in  his  leisure  hours  composed  several  of
his  works.  He  was  also  appointed  in  1812  to  study
and  report  on  the  mines  of  Bendego  and  Cotegipe.
He  resigned  from  the  tribunal  of  forestry  in  1817,
went  to  Lisbon  in  1818  for  his  health,  and  on  his
return  retired  to  his  estate  on  the  river  Das  Contas.
In  1823  he  was  accused  by  calumniators  of  being
an  enemy  of  independence  and  was  imprisoned;
but  he  proved  his  innocence,  and  was  appointed  by
Pedro  I.  to  the  council  of  state,  employing  his
leisure  in  writing.  In  1838  he  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  "  Institute  Historico  e  Geographi-
co  Brasileiro."  He  published  "  Phisica  dos  Bosques
dos  Ilheos  "  and  "  Descripcao  do  comarca  de  Ilhe-
os  "  (Lisbon,  1803) ;  "  Annales  da  provincia  da  Ba-
hia" (Bahia,  1820);  "  Bosque  jo  Historico  da  Lit-
teratura  portugueza  "  (Rio  Janeiro,  1838) ;  and  con-
tributions to  scientific,  literary,  and  political  jour-
nals.— Jose's  son,  Bento  da  Silva,  b.  in  Bahia,  4
Feb.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  26  Dec,  1864,  was
liberally  educated,  and  in  1816  entered  politics.
In  1821-'3  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  movement
for  independence.  During  the  government  of  Pe-
dro I.  he  held  several  offices  in  the  administration
and  represented  his  province  in  the  assembly.  At
the  dissolution  of  that  body  he  continued  to  be  a
friend  of  the  government.  During  the  regency  of
Father  Feijo  and  the  government  of  Pedro  II.  he
was  twice  secretary  of  state  and  special  envoy  to
Portugal,  England,  and  Germany,  and  was  also
commissioned  to  Italy  in  1843  to  settle  the  mar-
riage of  Pedro  II.  In  his  leisure  hours  he  com-
posed several  works,  and  also  wrote  biographies  of
his  father  and  his  uncle  Balthazar  (1841).  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  foundation  of  the  "  Instituto
Geographico  Brasileiro,"  wrote  several  years  for
its  journal,  and  was  a  member  of  several  scientific
and  literary  societies  in  Europe  and  America.  He
died  poor,  and  the  government  made  an  appropria-
tion for  the  support  of  his  family.

LISBOA  SERRA,  Joao  Duarte,  Brazilian  poet,
b.  in  Nossa  Senhora  das  Dores  de  Itapecurumirim,  31
May,  1818;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  16  April,  1855.  He
received  his  early  education  in  Maranhao,  and  was
graduated  in  arts  and  sciences  at  Coimbra,  Portu-
gal. From  early  life  he  cultivated  poetry  and
published  several  compositions  that  were  highly
praised,  including  "  Subindo  pelo  Vouga  "  and  "  No
Cemiterio  dos  Christaos."  In  1839  he  returned  to
Brazil  and  there  contributed  to  several  newspa-
pers. In  1842,  falling  heir  to  a  large  fortune,  he
abandoned  journalism  and  poetry,  and  in  1847  was
elected  to  congress  by  the  province  of  Maranhao.
In  1848  he  was  appointed  by  the  government  presi-
dent of  the  province  of  Bahia,  where  he  founded
the  provincial  bank.  In  1850  he  became  treasurer
of  the  nation,  councillor  of  state,  and  president  of
the  Bank  of  Brazil.  In  the  elections  of  1853  he
was  chosen  a  representative  in  his  native  province,
and  took  his  seat  in  the  assembly,  but  declined  the
post  of  a  cabinet  minister.  Feeble  health  finally
compelled  Lisboa  to  retire  to  private  life,  and,  his
taste  for  poetry  returning,  he  composed  several


LISPENARD


LITTLE


737


pieces  that  are  highly  esteemed.  The  best  known
are  "  O  Maranhense  "  and  "  Domine,  exaudi  ora-
tionem  meam,"  which  has  been  translated  into  sev-
eral foreign  languages.

LISPENARD,  Leonard,  merchant,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1716 ;  d.  there,  15  Feb.,  1790.  He  was
the  grandson  of  Anthony  Lispenard,  a  Huguenot
refugee,  who  came  to  New  York  about  the  middle
of  the  17th  century  and  became  a  merchant  there.
In  1741  he  married  Alice,  daughter  of  Anthony
Rutgers,  who  inherited  one  third  of  the  extensive
grant  that  was  made  by  George  II.  to  her  father,
and  subsequently  Mr.  Lispenard  acquired  by  pur-
chase the  remainder  of  the  land,  which  has  since
been  known  as  the  Lispenard  meadows.  His  coun-
try mansion  was  on  Lispenard  hill,  an  elevation
overlooking  what  later  was  called  St.  John's  park.
Mr.  Lispenard  was  assistant  alderman  from  the
north  ward  in  1750-'5,  and  alderman  in  1 756-' 62,
and  member  of  the  provincial  assembly  in  1765-7.
He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Stamp-act  con-
gress in  New  York  in  1765,  of  the  committee  of
one  hundred  that  was  elected  to  control  all  gen-
eral affairs  in  May,  1775,  and  of  the  first  provin-
cial congress  in  May,  1775.  He  was  also  treasurer
of  King's  (now  Columbia)  college,  one  of  the  origi-
nal members  of  the  Society  of  the  New  York  hos-
pital, and  one  of  its  governors  in  1770-'7. — His  two
sons,  Leonard  and  Anthony,  were  well-known
men  at  that  time.  The  three  streets,  Leonard.  An-
thony (now  Worth),  and  Thomas,  were  named  after
the  sons  of  Anthony,  and  Bache  street  (now  spelled
Beach)  after  his  son-in-law,  Paul  Bache,  while  Lis-
penard street  was  named  in  honor  of  the  family,
and  Barclay  street  after  Rev.  Thomas  Barclay  who
married  his  wife's  sister.

LIST,  Friedrich,  political  economist,  b.  in  Reut-
lingen,  Germany,  6  Aug.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Kufstien,  30
Nov.,  1846.  He  had  become  favorably  known  as  a
political  economist,  and  in  1821  was  elected  to  the
Wurtemberg  chamber  of  deputies,  but,  having  at-
tacked the  government  in  a  petition,  was  prevented
from  taking  his  seat  and  sentenced  to  ten  months'
imprisonment.  After  fruitless  attempts  to  obtain
pardon  and  several  years  of  exile,  he  was  impris-
oned in  the  fortress  "at  Asperg.  On  his  release  he
emigrated  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in
Pennsylvania,  where  he  became  an  extensive  land-
holder, and  was  active  in  the  establishment  of
railroads.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Ham-
burg in  1830,  and,  after  residing  for  some  time  in
Paris,  returned  to  Pennsylvania.  He  finally  set-
tled in  Leipsic  in  1833,  where  for  some  time  he
was  U.  S.  consul.  He  engaged  in  journalism  in
Paris  in  1837-43.  and  at  the  latter  date  estab-
lished in  Augsburg  the  "  Zollvereinsblatt,"  a  news-
paper in  which  he  advocated  the  enlargement  of
the  custom's  union,  and  the  organization  of  a  na-
tional commercial  svstem.  In  1846  he  visited  Eng-
land with  a  view  to  forming  a  commercial  alliance
between  that  countrv  and  Germany,  but  was  un-
successful, and,  losing  both  health  and  property,
he  shot  himself.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  New  Sys-
tem of  Political  Economy"  (Philadelphia,  1827).
His  literary  remains  were  published  with  a,  biogra-
phy by  Lu'dwig  Hausser  (Stuttgart,  1850-1).

LITTELL,  Eliakim,  editor,  b.  in  Burlington,
N.  J.,  2  Jan.,  1797;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  17  May.
1870.  His  grandfather,  Eliakim.  was  a  captain  in
the  Revolution,  and  did  good  service  in  the  defence
of  Springfield.  N.  J.,  4  June,  1780.  The  grandson
removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1819,  and  established
a  weekly  literary  paper  entitled  the  "National
Recorder,"  whose  name  he  changed  in  1821  to  the
"Saturdav  Magazine." In  July,  1822,  he  again


changed  it  to  a  monthly  called  the  "Museum  of
Foreign  Literature  and  Science,"  which  was  edited
during  the  first  year  by  Robert  Walsh,  and  subse-
quently by  himself  and  his  brother  Squier. After
conducting  this  with  great  success  for  nearly  twenty-
two  years,  he  removed  to  Boston,  Mass..  where  in
April.  1844.  he  began  "Littell's  Living  Age,"  a  weeklv
literary  periodical  which  is  still  (1887)  continued.
In  1855  ne  began  the  publication  in  Boston  of  the
"Panorama  of  Life  and  Literature,"  a  monthly.
Mr. Littell  was  the  author  of  the  "  Compromise
Tariff."  which  was  advocated  by  Henry  Clay  and
carried  through  congress  during  the  administra-
tion of  President  Jackson. — His  brother.  Squier.
physician,  b.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  9  Dec.,  1808  :  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  July,  1886.  was  graduated
at  the  medical department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1824,  the  next  year  practised  in
Buenos  Ayres,  South  America,  and,  returning  to
Philadelphia  in  1826,  was  a  physician  there  until
his  death. For  several  years  he  edited  in  Phila-
delphia the  "  Banner  of  the  Cross,"  and  with  his
brother  Eliakim  the  "  Museum  of  Foreign  Litera-
ture and  Science." He  was  surgeon  to  the  Wills
ophthalmic  hospital  in  1834-'64,  becoming  surgeon
emeritus  on  his  resignation,  consulting  physician
to  the  Philadelphia  dispensary,  and  a  member  of
various  foreign and domestic  medical societies.
Besides  various  professional  papers,  he  published
"  Manual  of  Diseases  of  the  Eye  "  (Philadelphia,
1837;  new  ed.,  with  notes,  by  Hugh  Houston.  Lon-
don. 1838) ; "  Illustrations  of  the  Prayer-Book  "
(1840) ;  and  he  edited  the  first  A merican  edition  of
Havnes  Walton's  "Treatise  on  Operative  Ophthal-
mic Surgery"  (1853).— His  brother,  John  Stock-
ton, author,  b.  in  Burlington.  N.  J.,  in  1806;  tl.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa..  11  July,  1875,  edited  with  bio-
graphical and  historical  notes,  Alexander  Gray-
don's  "  Memoirs  of  my  own  Times"  (Philadelphia,
1846);  and  published  "a  sketch  of  the  "  Life.  Char-
acter, and  Services  of  Henry  Clay." — Their  cousin,
William,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  Jersey  about  1780;
d.  in  Frankfort. Ky.,  in 1825,  was  an eminent
member  of  the  Kentucky  bar,  and  for  many  years
reporter  of  the  decisions  of  the  court  of  appeals  of
that  state. He  published  "The  Statute  Law  of
Kentucky  "  (5  vols..  Frankfort,  1808-"19);  "A  Di-
gest of  the  Statute  Law  of  Kentucky"  (2  vols..
1822) :  "  Reports  of  Cases  at  Common  Law  and  in
Chancery, decided by the Court of  Appeals  of
Kentucky  "  (4  vols.,  1822-'4) ;  "  Selected  Cases  from
the  Decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  of  Kentucky
from 1795  till 1825" (1825);  and "Festoons  o*f
Fancy  in  Essays,  Humorous,  Sentimental,  and  Po-
litical, in  Prose  and  Verse."

LITTLE,  Charles  Coffin,  publisher,  b.  in  Ken-
nebunk,  Me..  25  July,  1799 ;  d.  in  Cambridge.  Mass.,
11  Aug.,  1869.  He"  went  to  Boston  early  in  life,
and  entered  a  shipping-house,  and  afterward  the
book-store  of  Carter,  Hilliard,  and  Co.  He  subse-
quently became  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Hilliard,
Gray,  Little,  and  Wilkins,  in  which  he  continued
until  the  formation  of  his  partnership  with  James
Brown  in  the  vear  1837,  under  the  style  of  Charles
C.  Little  and  Co.  This  was  subsequently  changed,
by  the  admission  of  other  partners,  to  Little,  Brown,
and  Co.  The  house  were  not  only  large  publishers
of  standard  works,  but  for  many  years  the  most
extensive  law-publishers  in  the  United  States,  and
also  the  largest  importers  of  standard  English  law
and  miscellaneous  works,  introducing  to  American
buyers  the  "  Encvelopaedia  Britannica,"  the  dic-
tionaries of  Dr.  YVilham  Smith,  and  many  other
standard  works.  The  present  (1887)  head  of  the
firm  is  John  Bartlett  (q.  v.).


738


LITTLE


LITTLE


LITTLE,  George,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Marsh-
field,  Mass.,  10  April,  1754 ;  d.  in  Weymouth,
Mass.,  22  July,  1809.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of
the  Revolutionary  war  he  had  command  of  the
"  Boston,"  an  armed  vessel  belonging  to  Massachu-
setts, and  in  1779  he  was  1st  lieutenant  of  the  "  Pro-
tector." He  was  captured  by  a  British  frigate,  but
scaled  the  walls  of  his  prison  at  Plymouth,  Eng-
land, and  returning  to  the  United  States  obtained
command  of  the  sloop-of-war  "  Winthrop,"  in
which  he  cruised  with  success  during  the  remainder
of  the  war.  In  1798  he  was  appointed  to  the  com-
mand of  the  U  S.  frigate  "  Boston,"  and  he  was
made  a  captain  in  the  navy,  4  March,  1799,  captur-
ing several  armed  French  ships,  among  them  "  Le
Berceau "  after  a  severe  conflict.  He  was  dis-
charged from  the  service  under  the  peace  estab-
lishment, 22  Oct.,  1801,  and  retired  to  his  farm  at
Weymouth.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  American
Cruiser "  (Boston),  and  "  Life  on  the  Ocean,  or
Twenty  Years  at  Sea  "  (1844-'5).

LITTLE,  Harvey  D.,  journalist,  b.  in  Wethers-
field,  Conn.,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  22  Aug.,
1833.  He  was  the  son  of  poor  parents,  who  re-
moved to  the  west  about  1815,  settling  in  Franklin
county,  Ohio,  which  was  then  mostly  a  wilderness.
His  early  educational  advantages  were,  of  course,
limited,  but,  by  being  apprenticed  to  a  printer  in  Co-
lumbus and  using  all  his  opportunities,  he  became,
by  the  time  he  was  of  age,  an  excellent  English
scholar.  He  early  developed  a  talent  for  poetry,
and  was  in  the  habit  of  printing  his  verses  in  the
various  papers  with  which  he  successively  became
connected.  He  afterward  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  but  family  considerations  in-
duced him  to  return  to  newspaper  work,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death,  which  occurred  suddenly  from
Asiatic  cholera,  he  was  editing  the  "  Eclectic  and
Medical  Botanist."  His  poems  first  attracted  at-
tention about  1830,  and  were  written  over  the  sig-
nature of  "  Velasquez."

LITTLE,  James  Laurence,  surgeon,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  19  Feb.,  1836 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  4  April,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Col-
lege of  physicians  and  surgeons,  New  York  city,  in
1860,  and  appointed  junior  assistant  at  the  New
York  hospital,  where  he  subsequently  became
senior  assistant  and  house  surgeon.  Two  years
later  he  was  made  surgeon-in-charge  of  the  Park
barracks.  In  1863  he  was  appointed  clinical  as-
sistant to  Dr.  Willard  Parker  in  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  ihe  following  spring
he  began  the  delivering  of  a  series  of  lectures,  the
first  being  on  "Fractures  and  their  Treatment."
This  series  was  continued  until  1868,  when  he  was
appointed  lecturer  on  operative  surgery  and  surgi-
cal dressings,  which  office  he  held  for  ten  years.
In  1875  he  accepted  the  chair  of  surgery  in  the
University  of  Vermont,  although  continuing  to  re-
side in  New  York.  He  was  also  appointed  con-
sulting surgeon  in  the  Northwestern  dispensary,
and  attending  surgeon  to  both  St.  Luke's  and  St.
Vincent's  hospitals.  In  1880  he  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  clinical  surgery  in  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,
but  resigned  in  1882,  and  was  appointed  professor
of  surgery  in  the  New  York  post-graduate  medical
school,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  He
was  a  member  and  fellow  of  numerous  medical  so-
cieties, and  is  the  author  of  several  professional
papers  of  importance.  Dr.  Little  introduced  into
this  country  the  treatment  of  fractures  by  the
plaster-of- Paris  splint.  He  had  a  large  experience
in  cases  of  stone  in  the  bladder,  and  was  the  first,
in  1872,  to  puncture  that  organ  with  the  aspirator.


The  median  operation  was  performed  by  him  more
frequently  than  by  any  other  American  surgeon.
In  the  spring  of  1864  he  joined  in  the  movement,  in
New  York  for  sanitary  reform,  and  was  instru-
mental in  the  formation  of  its  board  of  health.

LITTLE,  Moses,  soldier,  b.  in  Newburv,  Mass.,
8  May,  1724;  d.  there,  27  May,  1798.  In  April,
1775,  he  marched  with  a  company  to  Lexington,
and  took  part  in  the  engagement  near  that  place.
He  was  promoted  colonel,  and  fought  in  the  battle
of  Bunker  Hill.  After  the  evacuation  of  Boston
he  was  ordered  to  New  York,  and  commanded  his
regiment  at  Trenton  and  Princeton,  N.  J.,  but  was
compelled  to  return  home  in  1777  on  account  of
impaired  health.  In  1779  he  was  appointed  by  the
state  of  Massachusetts  to  command  the  naval  ex-
pedition to  the  Penobscot,  but  declined.  In  1781
a  stroke  of  paralysis  deprived  him  of  speech.

LITTLE,  Peter,  legislator,  b.  in  Petersburg,
Huntingdon  co..  Pa.,  about  1775 ;  d.  in  Baltimore
county,  Md.,  5  Feb .  1830.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  and  was  apprenticed  to  a
trade.  Removing  to  Maryland,  he  settled  at  Free-
dom, Carroll  co.,  and  was  one  of  the  few  mechan-
ics who  have  been  sent  from  the  workshop  to  con-
gress: He  was  chosen  as  a  Federalist  from  Mary-
land, and  served  from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,
1813,  and,  being  re-elected,  from  2  Dec,  1816,  till
3  March,  1829,  or  over  eighteen  years  in  all.  He
was  appointed  by  President  Madison  colonel  of  the
38th  infantry  on  19  May,  1813,  and  served  till  15
June,  1815. — His  son,  Lewis  Henry,  b.  in  Balti-
more in  1818 ;  d.  in  Iuka,  Miss.,  19  Sept.,  1862,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1839,
and  assigned  to  the  5th  infantry.  He  was  made
1st  lieutenant,  18  April,  1845,  and  having  taken
part  in  the  Mexican  war,  he  was  brevetted  captain,
23  Sept.,  1846,  for  "  gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct at  Monterey.  He  was  given  the  full  rank  of
captain,  20  Aug.,  1847,  but  resigned,  7  May,  1861,  to
enter  the  Confederate  army.  He  was  appointed
adjutant-general  of  the  forces  in  Missouri  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  and  for  his  bravery  at
the  battle  of  Elk  Horn  was  promoted  brigadier-
general.  When  Van  Dorn  was  assigned  to  the
command  of  the  district  of  Northern  Mississippi,
Little  succeeded  to  the  command  of  Price's  divis-
ion. He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Iuka.

LITTLE,  Sophia  Louise,  poet,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  22  Aug.,  1799.  She  was  the  second  daughter
of  Asher  Robbins,  U.  S.  senator  from  Rhode  Island.
She  was  educated  in  her  native  town,  and  in  1824
married  William  Little,  Jr.,  of  Boston,  who  greatly
assisted  her  by  judicious  criticism  in  the  develop-
ment of  her  poetic  talent.  Her  first  poem  of  any
length,  a  description  of  a  New  England  Thanks-
giving, was  printed  in  1828  in  "  The  Token."  Mrs.
Little  took  an  active  interest  in  the  anti-slavery
movement,  and  was  a  life-long  friend  of  William
Lloyd  Garrison,  being  present  at  the  Boston  meet-
ing, at  which  he  was  mobbed.  She  was  also  presi-
dent of  the  Prisoner's  aid  association  of  Rhode  Isl-
and from  its  formation.  With  the  aid  of  friends
she  opened  a  free  reading-room  for  working  people
in  Newport,  which  proved  to  be  the  germ  Of  a  free
public  library.  She  also  established  a  Holly-tree
coffee-house,  and  is  still  (1887)  active  in  many  char-
itable enterprises.  Mrs.  Little,  besides  contributing
frequently  to  various  periodicals,  has  published  the
following  poems  :  "  The  Last  Days  of  Jesus  "  (Bos-
ton, 1839) ;  "  The  Annunciation  and  Birth  of  Jesus,
and  the  Resurrection"  (1842);  and  "Pentecost"
(1873).  In  1877  a  complete  edition  of  her  relig-
ious poems  was  published  at  Newport,  bearing
the  title, "Last  Days  of  Jesus,  and  Other  Po-


LITTLE  CROW

ems." — Her  son,  Bobbins,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  L,  15  Feb.,  1832,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1851,  and  was  subsequently  tutor  in  Greek  there.
He  afterward  studied  in  Harvard  law-school,  where
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.B.,  and  practised
law  in  New  York  city  in  partnership  with  William
Winthrop,  afterward  judge-advocate  in  the  U.  S.
army.  From  1865  till  1869  he  was  instructor  in  in-
ternational law  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy.  In
1873  he  became  an  examiner  of  claims  in  the  war
department  at  Washington,  remaining  in  that  office
until  1878,  when  he  was  elected  superintendent  and
later  a  trustee  of  the  Astor  library  in  New  York
city.  During  his  administration  "the  library  has
been  greatly  improved  and  enlarged,  the  endow-
ment has  been  increased  by  John  Jacob  Astor,
grandson  of  the  founder,  the"  hours  of  public  ad-
mission have  been  lengthened,  and  the  facilities
for  research  much  extended,  especially  by  the  pub-
lication of  a  new  catalogue  in  four  large  volumes.

LITTLE  CROW  (To-wai-aii-tah-doo-tah),  chief
of  the  Sioux,  b.  in  the  Indian  village  of  Kaposia,
near  St.  Paul,  Minn. ;  d.  near  Hutchinson,  Mc-
Leod  co.,  Minn.,  in  1863.  He  was  the  hereditary
chief  of  the  Kaposia  band  of  the  great  Dakota  or
Sioux  tribe.  The  name  Little  Crow  descended
from  father  to  son  through  several  generations.
The  father  of  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  a  firm
friend  of  the  Americans,  and  a  highly  intelligent  and
industrious  man.  He  was  accidentally  wounded
in  withdrawing  his  gun  from  a  wagon,  and  died  on
the  following  day.  His  parting  injunctions  to  his
son  and  successor,  in  the  presence  of  the  writer,
were  peculiarly  impressive.  Little  Crow  the
younger  paid  but  slight  heed  to  the  wise  counsels
of  his  father.  He  was  essentially  a  bad  man.  an
inveterate  liar,  and  a  drunkard,  but  possessed  of
cunning,  energy,  and  determination.  Subsequent
to  1851,  when  the  Sioux  Indians  ceded  by  treaty  to
the  U.  S.  government  their  lands  west  of  Missis-
sippi river,  the  several  bands,  including  the  Ka-
posias,  were  removed  to  large  reservations  on  the
upper  Minnesota,  where  they  dwelt  peacefully,  pro-
fessing warm  friendship  for  the  white  settlers,  by
whom  they  were  treated  kindly  and  hospitably.
Suddenly  and  unexpectedly  the  savages,  witli  a  few
exceptions,  rose  in  a  body,  on  18  Aug.,  1862.  mur-
dered their  traders  and  the  other  whites  at  the  two
U.S.  agencies,  and  then  spread  themselves  in  small
parties  along  a  line  of  frontier  more  than  two  hun-
dred miles  in  extent,  butchering  the  unsuspecting
men,  women,  and  children  without  mercy.  Nearly
1,000  settlers  fell  victims.  Little  Crow  was  the  rec-
ognized head  of  the  outbreak. .  After  the  decisive
defeat  of  the  combined  force  of  warriors  by  the
troops  under  the  command  of  Gen.  Henry  II.  Sib-
ley, at  Wood  Lake,  23  Sept..  1862.  Little  Crow,  and
two  or  three  hundred  of  the  most  desperate  of  his
followers,  fled  with  their  families  to  the  protection
of  the  powerful  bandsof  their  kindred  on  the  distant
prairies,  leaving  the  main  camp  to  lie  captured  with
more  than  2.000  souls,  with  the  release  of  female
white  prisoners  to  the  number  of  120.  About  40  of
the  303  warriors  that  were  found  guilty  and  con-
demned by  a  military  commission,  were  hanged  at
Mankato  in  December  following,  the  remainder
being  held  in  close  confinement  until  they  were  re-

Erieved,  despite  the  universal  protest,  by  President
incoln,  and  removed  by  his  order  to  a  reservation
on  Missouri  river.  Little  Crow  met  his  richly
merited  death  in  1863.  having  been  discovered  and
shot  by  a  Mr.  Lamson  and  his  son  while  he  was
engaged  with  a  small  party  in  a  raid.  His  scalp
was  deposited  in  the  collections  of  the  Minnesota
historical  society.


LITTLE  TURTLE


739


^^^>^2^-^


LITTLEJOHN,  Abram  Newkirk,  P.  E.  bish
op,  b.  in  Florida,  N.  Y.,  13  Dec,  1824.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  college  in  1845,  and  after
preparation  for  the  ministry  was  ordained  deacon
in  St.  Peter's  church,  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  19  March,
1848,  by  Bishop  De  Lancey,  and  priest  in  Christ
church.  Hartford,  Conn.,  12  June,  1849,  by  Bishop
Brownell.  During  his  diaconate  he  was  in  charge
for  a  brief  period  of  St.  Ann's  church,  Amsterdam,
N.  Y.,  and  St.  Anthony's  church,  Meriden,  Conn.
Early  in  1850  he
removed  to  Mas-
sachusetts, and
became  rector  of
Christ  church,
Springfield.  In
June,  1851,  he  ac-
cepted the  rector-
ship of  St.  Paul's
church.  New  Ha-
ven, Conn.  He
was  elected  presi-
dent of  Ilobart
college  in  1858,
but  declined.  For
a  period  of  seven
years  he  was  lec-
turer on  pastoral
theology  in  Ber-
keley divinity-
school.  Middletown,  Conn.  In  1860  he  accepted
the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity.
Brooklyn,  N.  V.,  which  post  he  occupied  for  eight
years.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1855.  He  was  elect-
ed bishop  of  central  New  York  in  1868,  but  de-
clined, and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  first  bishop
of  Long  Island,  and  consecrated  in  the  Church  of
the  Holy  Trinity,  Brooklyn.  27  Jan..  1869.  In
1874,  by  appointment  of  the  presiding  bishop,  he
took  charge  of  the  American  Episcopal  churches
on  the  continent  of  Europe.  Bishop  Littlejohn  is
a  facile  writer,  and  has  contributed  largely  to
church  and  general  literature.  Besides  charges,
criticisms,  essays,  and  revising,  he  has  published
"Conciones  ad  Clerum "  (1880);  "Individualism,
Discourses  before  the  University  of  Cambridge,
England " (1880) ;  and  "The  Christian  Mini-try  at
the  Close  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.'*  being  lec-
tures before  the  General  theological  seminary,  New
York  (1884).  In  1880  he  received  from  the  Univer-
sity of  Cambridge  the  degree  of  LL.  I).

LITTLEPAGE,  Lewis,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Han-
over county,  Va.,  19  Dec,  1762;  d.  in  Fredericks-
burg, Ya..  19  July,  1802.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary  in  1778.  and  being  a  relative  of
John  Jay.  then  minister  to  Madrid,  he  joined  him
abroad.  He  volunteered  in  the  expedition  of  the
Due  de  Crillon  against  Minorca  in  1782,  and  sub-
sequently accompanied  the  Prince  of  Nassau-Siegen
to  the  siei.re  of  Gibraltar,  and  thence  to  Constanti-
nople and  Warsaw,  lb'  was  honored  for  many
years  with  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  Stanislas,
king  of  Poland,  under  whom  he  held,  among  other
offices,  that  of  ambassador  to  Russia  He  was  cre-
ated a  knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Stanislas,  cham-
berlain and  confidential  secretary,  and  acted  as  a
special  envoy  in  several  important  negotiations.
When  Stanislas  sided  with  the  Torgovitza  Confed-
erate- in  1792.  Littlepage  returned  to  Yirginia.

LITTLE  TIRTLE  (Me-<  hk-cln  na  yi  a),  a
chief  of  the  Miami  Indians,  d.  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,
14  July,  1812.  It  is  supposed  that  he  was  partially
educated  at  a  Jesuit  school  in  Canada.  He  was
remarkable  for  his  mental  vigor  and  common  sense,


740


LIVERMORE


LIVERMORE


and  was  a  brave  and  skilful  military  leader.  He
took  part  in  the  border  warfare  of  the  west,  and
commanded  at  the  defeat  of  Gen.  Josiah  Harmar  on
Miami  river  in  October,  1790,  and  also  at  that  of
Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  at  St.  Mary's,  4  Nov.,  1791.
He  was  present,  although  not  in  command,  at  the
battle  of  Fallen  Timbers,  in  which  the  Indians
were  defeated  by  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne,  20  Aug.,
1794,  having  vainly  endeavored  to  dissuade  them
from  attacking  the  "  Chief- Who-Never-Sleeps,"
with  whom  he  urged  them  to  make  peace.  He
was  one  of  the  signers  of  the  treaty  of  Greenville
in  August,  1795.  Early  in  1797  he  visited  Presi-
dent Washington  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  also  met
Count  Volney,  the  French  philosopher,  and  was
presented  by  Gen.  Kosciuszko  with  his  own  pair
of  elegantly  mounted  pistols.

LIVERMORE,  Abiel  Abbot,  clergyman,  b.  in
Wilton,  N.  H.,  30  Oct.,  1811.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1833,  and  in  the  divinity-school  in
1836,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Unitarian
church  in  Keene,  N.  H.,  in  November  of  the  latter
year.  He  remained  there  until  May,  1850,  when
he  was  called  to  a  church  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  On
1  Jan.,  1857,  he  removed  to  New  York  city  to  as-
sume the  editorship  of  the  "  Christian  Inquirer,"
and  in  June  of  the  same  year  he  took  charge  of  the
1st  Unitarian  Congregational  church  in  Yonkers,
N.  Y.,  without  relinquishing  his  journalistic  duties.
In  1863  he  became  president  of  the  theological
school  at  Meadville,  Pa.,  which  office  he  still  (1887)
fills.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Commentary  on  the
New  Testament "  (6  vols.,  1842-'81) ;  "  Lectures  to
Young  Men  "  (1846) ;  "  The  Marriage  Offering,"  a
compilation  of  prose  and  poetry  (1848) ;  "  The
War  with  Mexico  Reviewed,  a  prize  essay  (1850) ;
"  Discourses  "  (1852) ;  "  Anti-Tobacco  "  (1883) ;  and
"  History  of  Wilton,  N.  H,"  which  will  probably  be
published  in  1888.  He  has  edited  Priestley's  "  Cor-
ruptions of  Christianity  "  (Boston,  1838),  and,  with
others,  "Christian  Hymns"  (1845),  a  compilation
that  has  passed  through  sixty  editions,  besides  con-
tributing to  the  "  North  American  Review,"  "  Chris-
tian Examiner,"  "  Christian  Repository,"  etc.

LIVERMORE,  George,  antiquarian,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  10  July,  1809;  d.  there,  30  Aug.,
1865.  He  was  educated  at  the  public  schools  and
trained  for  a  mercantile  career.  After  brief  ex-
periments elsewhere,  he  settled  in  Boston  and  be-
came one  of  the  foremost  commission-merchants  in
that  city.  Early  in  life  he  began  to  devote  his
leisure  to  historical  and  antiquarian  research,  in
which  he  became  a  recognized  authority,  having
one  of  the  finest  collections  of  different  editions  of
the  Bible  in  this  country.  He  was  fond  of  large-
paper  copies  and  illustrated  editions,  in  which  his
library  was  very  rich.  He  was  an  active  member
of  several  learned  societies,  and  wrote  for  the  news-
papers and  reviews  on  subjects  of  a  bibliographical
or  historical  character,  his  articles  displaying  ex-
tensive research.  Among  them  may  be  mentioned
one  on  the  "  New  England  Primer,"  in  the  "  Cam-
bridge Chronicle  "  (1849),  and  another  on  "  Public
Libraries "  in  the  "  North  American  Review "
(1850).  His  most  important  essay,  "  An  Historical
Research  respecting  the  Opinions  of  the  Founders
of  the  Republic  on  Negroes  as  Slaves,  as  Citizens
and  as  Soldiers,"  was  read  before  the  Massachusetts
historical  society,  14  Aug.,  1862,  printed  in  the
'•  Proceedings,"  and  issued  separately  in  four  other
editions.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  A.  M.  by
Harvard  in  1850.  See  a  sermon  delivered  in  his
memory  by  Rev.  Edward  E.  Hale,  entitled  "  The
Public  Service  of  a  Private  Man,"  and  other  trib-
utes by  Robert  C.  Winthrop  and  Charles  Deane.


LIVERMORE,  Mary  Ashton,  reformer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  19  Dec,  1821.  Her  maiden  name
was  Rice.  She  was  noted  in  childhood  for  resolu-
tion and  restless  activity,  being  foremost  in  all
healthful,  out-door  sports,  and  also  remarkable  for
proficiency  in  her  studies.  She  was  a  pupil  and
for  some  time  a  teacher  in  the  Charlestown,  Mass.,
female  seminary,  and  subsequently  became  a  gov-
erness in  southern  Virginia,  where  she  remained
two  years,  and  then  taught  at  Duxbury,  Mass.
There  she  met  Daniel  P.  Livermore,  a  Universalist
clergyman,  whom  she  married  and  accompanied
successively  to  Stafford,  Conn.,  Maiden  and  Wey-
mouth, Mass.,  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  and  Quincy,  111.,  in
which  places  he  had  pastorates.  In  1857  he  be-
came editor  and  publisher  of  the  "  New  Covenant "
at  Chicago.  During  this  period  Mrs.  Livermore
wrote  frequently  for  the  periodicals  of  her  denomi-
nation, and  edited  the  "  Lily,"  besides  assisting
her  husband  for  twelve  years  as  associate  in  his
editorial  labors.  At  the  beginning  of  1862  Mrs.
Livermore  was  appointed  one  of  the  agents  of  the
northwestern  branch  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commis-
sion, which  had  been  then  recently  established  in
Chicago.  During  that  year  she  travelled  through-
out the  northwest,  everywhere  organizing  sanitary
aid  societies.  In  the  following  December  she  at-
tended a  council  of  the  National  sanitaiy  commis-
sion at  Washington,  and  the  next  spring  was
ordered  to  make  a  tour  of  the  hospitals  and  mili-
tary posts  on  the  Mississippi.  At  this  time  sani-
tary supplies  were  low,  and  the  most  serious  results
at  the  v  icksburg  camps  were  feared ;  but  by  per-
sonal appeals,  by  circulars,  and  by  untiring  persist-
ence and  enthusiasm,  she  secured  immediate  relief.
She  also  took  an  active  part  in  the  organization
of  the  great  Northwestern  sanitary  fair  in  Chicago
in  1863,  from  which  nearly  $100,000  were  secured
for  the  purposes  of  the  association,  and  obtained
the  original  draft  of  his  Emancipation  proclama-
tion from  President  Lincoln,  which  sold  for  $3,000.
Since  the  war  she  has  labored  earnestly  in  the
woman  suffrage  and  temperance  movements,  often
appearing  on  the  platform,  and  editing  the  "  Wom-
an's Journal  "  (Boston,  1870-'l).  Her  success  as  a
lecturer  before  lyceums  has  been  great.  At  a  time
when  those  institutions  were  at  the  height  of  their
popularity,  she  was  one  of  the  four  lecturers  that
were  most  in  demand  and  that  commanded  the
largest  fees,  the  other  three  being  men.  For  years
she  spoke  five  nights  in  the  week  for  five  months  in
the  year,  travelling  25,000  miles  annually.  Among
her  more  popular  lectures  are  "  What  shall  we  do
with  our  Daughters  ?  "  "  Women  of  the  War,"  and
"  The  Moral  Heroism  of  the  Temperance  Reform."
The  first  of  the  foregoing  has  been  issued  in  book-
form  (Boston,  1883).  She  is  the  author  of  "  Pen
Pictures  "  (Chicago.  1865),  and  "  Thirty  Years  too
Late,"  a  temperance  tale  (Boston,  1878).  She  has
also  prepared  a  work  of  600  pages  giving  her  ex-
perience during  the  war,  which  will  probably  be
issued  during  the  present  vear  (1887).

LIVERMORE,  Samuel,  statesman,  b.  in  Wal-
tham,  Mass.,  14  May,  1732 ;  d.  in  Holderness,  N.  H.,
18  May,  1803.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1752,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1757,  beginning  to  practise  the  following  year  at
Portsmouth,  N.  H.  He  was  a  member  of  the  gen-
eral court  of  that  province  in  1768-'70,  and  in  1775
removed  to  Holderness,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the
original  grantees  and  the  principal  proprietor.  He
was  appointed  king's  attorney  in  1769,  and  after  the
change  of  government  he  was  state's  attorney  for
three  years.  He  was  also  judge-advocate  of  admi-
ralty before  the  Revolution,  and  a  delegate  to  the


LIVERMORE

Continental  congress  from  7  Feb.,  1780,  until  he
resigned,  21  June,  1782,  and  again  in  1785.  He  was
chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  from  1782
till  1789,  and  in  1788  a  member  of  the  convention
that  adopted  the  Federal  constitution.  He  was
elected  a  representative  from  New  Hampshire  to
the  1st  and  2d  congresses,  serving  from  4  March
1789,  till  2  March,  1793.  In  the  latter  year  he  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator,  served  as  president  of  the
senate  during  two  sessions,  and  resigned  in  1801
on  account  of  failing  health.— His  son,  Edward
St.  Loe,  lawyer,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  5  April,
1762 ;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  15  Sept.,  1832,  received
a  classical  education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  successfully  at  Concord,
Portsmouth,  Newburyport,  and  Boston.  He  was
state's  attorney  for  Rockingham  county  from  1791
till  1793,  and  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  New
Hampshire  from  1797  till  1799.  He  then  removed
to  Boston,  and  was  chosen  to  represent  Essex
county,  Mass.,  in  the  10th  and  11th  congresses,
serving  from  7  Dec,  1801,  till  3  March,  1811.  In
1799  he  delivered  at  Portsmouth  an  oration  "  On
the  Dissolution  of  the  Union  between  this  Country
and  France,"  and  on  6  Jan.,  1809,  an  oration  on
the  embargo  law.— Another  son,  Arthur,  jurist,  b.
in  Londonderry,  N.  H.,  26  July,  1776;  d.  in  Camp-
ton,  N.  EL,  1  July,  1853,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Concord  and  Chester.
He  sat  in  both  branches  of  the  legislature,  was  a
justice  of  the  superior  court  from  1799  till  1816,
presiding  as  chief  justice  from  1809  till  1813,  and
was  nominated  as  a  presidential  elector  on  the  John
Adams  ticket  in  1801.  He  was  elected  as  a  Demo-
crat to  congress,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1817,  till  3
March,  1821,  and  from  1  Dec,  1823,  till  3  March,
1825,  and  was  also  chief  justice  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  from  1825  till  1833.

LIVERMORE,  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  about  1786:
d.  in  New  Orleans  in  1833.  He  was  graduated  fit
Harvard  in  1804,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  subsequently  removing  to  New  Orleans,
where  he  attained  eminence.  He  is  the  author  of
"  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Principal  and  Agent,
and  of  Sales  by  Auction"  (Boston,  1811;  2  vols.,
Baltimore,  1818),  and  of  "  Dissertations  on  the  Ques-
tions which  arise  from  the  Contrariety  of  the  Posi-
tive Laws  of  Different  States  and  Nations  "  (New
Orleans,  1828).  "This  subject,  'The  Conflict  of
Laws,'  "  says  Allibone,  "  was  afterward  more  fully
treated  by  Judge  Story.  Mr.  Livermore's  work,
although  not  sufficiently  methodical,  is  very  able."

LIVINGSTON,  Robert,  first  ancestor  of  the
family  in  America,  b.  in  Ancrum,  Scotland,  13
Dec,  1654;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1725.
He  was  the  son  of  John  Livingston,  a  Scottish
Presbyterian  divine,  born  in  1603,  who  was  ban-
ished in  1663  for  non-conformity  and  went  to
Rotterdam,  where  he  died  in  1672.  Among  the
early  members  of  the  family  was  Mary  Living-
ston, who  went  to  France  with'  Mary  Stuart  as
one  of  her  maids  of  honor.  Robert  emigrated  to
Charlestown,  Mass.,  in  April,  1673,  settled  in  Al-
bany, and  as  early  as  1675  became  secretary  of  the
commissaries,  which  office  he  held  until  Albany  be-
came a  city  in  1686.  Subsequently  he  continued
to  hold  the  similar  office  of  town-clerk  until  1721.
Mr.  Livingston  was  a  member  of  the  colonial  as-
sembly from  the  city  and  county  of  Albany  in  1711.
and  after  1716  was  returned  from  his  manor  till
1725,  becoming  speaker  in  1718.  He  acquired  great
influence  over  the  Indians,  retaining  the  office  of
secretary  of  Indian  affairs,  which  he  received  from
Gov.  Edmund  Andros.  for  a  long  series  of  years.
In  1686  he  received  from  Gov.  Thomas  Dongan  a


LIVINGSTON


741


uswiadirrL^


grant  of  a  large  tract  of  land,  which  in  1715  was
confirmed  by  a  royal  charter  from  George  I.,  erect-
ing the  manor  and  lordship  of  Livingston,  with
the  privilege  of  holding  a  court  leet  and  a  court
baron,  and  with  the  right  of  advowson  to  all  the
churches  within  its  boundaries.  This  tract  em-
braced large  parts  of  what  are  now  the  counties  of
Dutchess  and
Columbia,  N.Y.,
and  is  still
known  as  the
Livingston  man-
or, though  most
of  it  has  long
since  passed  out
of  the  hands  of
the  family.  It
was  through  his
influence  that
means  were  pro-
cured to  fit  out
the  ship  with
which  Captain
William  Kidd
(q.  v.)  undertook
to  restrain  the
excesses  of  pi-
rates. He  mar-
ried in  1679  Ali-
da,  widow  of  the
Key.  Nicholas  Van  Rensselaer  and  daughter  of
Philip  Pietersen  Schuyler,  by  whom  he  had  three
sons,  Philip,  Robert,  and  Gilbert. — Robert's  son,
Philip,  second  lord  of  the  manor,  b.  in  Albany,
9  July,  1686;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  Pel).,  1749,
was  for  some  time  deputy  secretary  of  Indian  af-
fairs under  his  father,  and.  on  the  resignation  of
the  latter  in  1722,  succeeded  to  the  secretaryship.
In  1709  he  was  a  member  of  the  provincial  assem-
bly from  the  city  and  county  of  Albany,  and  he
was  also  county-clerk  in  1721-49.  Livingston
was  a  member  of  the  provincial  council  till  his
death.  He  married  Catherine  Van  Brugh,  of  Al-
bany, and  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life  enter-
tained with  great  magnificence  at  his  three  resi-
dences in  New  York,  Albany,  and  the  manor.
His  eldest  daughter,  Sarah,  married  William  Al-
exander, Lord  Stirling,  and  his  son,  Robert,  be-
came the  third  and  last  lord  of  the  manor. —
Philip's  son,  Peter  Van  Brugh,  merchant,  b.  in
Albany  in  October,  1710;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,
28  Dec,  1792,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1731.  and
soon  afterward  settled  in  New  York,  where  he
erected  a  large  mansion  on  the  east  side  of  what  is
now  Hanover  square,  with  grounds  extending  to
East  river.  He  engaged  in  the  shipping  business
with  William  Alexander,  Lord  Stirling,  whose  sis-
ter, Mary,  he  married  in  November,  1739,  and  one
of  the  transactions  in  which  he  was  engaged  was
the  furnishing  of  supplies  to  Gov.  William  Shir-
ley's expedition  to  Acadia  in  1755.  For  many
years  he  was  a  member  of  the  council  of  the  prov-
ince, and  he  was  also  one  of  the  committee  of  one
hundred.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  1st  and
2d  provincial  congresses  of  New  York  in  1775-'6,
being  president  of  the  1st  congress.  In  1776  he
was  made  treasurer  of  the  congress,  and  held  that
office  for  two  years,  also  participating  in  all  of  the
pre-Revolutionary  measures.  Late  in  life  he  re-
moved to  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  where  he  spent  his
last  years.  He  was  a  firm  Presbyterian,  and  in
1748  was  named  one  of  the  original  trustees  of  the
College  of  New  Jersey,  holding  that  office  until
1761.  John  Adams  spoke  of  him  as  "  an  old  man
extremely  stanch  in  the  cause  and  very  sensible." —


742


LIVINGSTON


LIVINGSTON


^^VL-^


Another  son  of  Philip,  Philip,  signer  of  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence;  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  15
Jan.,  1716;  d.  in  York,  Pa.,  12  June,  1778,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1737,  and  in  1746  was  re-
ferred to  as  one  of  the  fifteen  persons  in  the  colony
that  possessed  a  collegiate  education.  After  gradu-
ation he  engaged
in  business  suc-
cessfully as  an  im-
?orter  in  New
ork  city,  and  Sir
Charles  Hardy  said
of  him  in  1755
that  "  among  the
considerable  mer-
chants in  this  city
no  one  is  more  es-
teemed for  energy,
promptness,  hon-
esty, and  public
spirit,  than  Philip
Livingston."  He
was  elected  one  of
the  seven  aldermen
of  New  York  in
September,  1754,
and  held  that  of-
fice with  the  approbation  of  his  constituents  con-
tinuously for  nine  years.  He  was  also  returned
to  the  provincial  assembly  as  member  from  New
York  city,  and  so  continued  by  re-election  until
its  dissolution  in  January,  1769.  During  his  legis-
lative career  he  identified  himself  with  the  rising
opposition  to  the  arbitrary  measures  of  the  mother
country  and  was  active  in  the  conduct  of  public
business.  He  was  one  of  the  committee  of  corre-
spondence with  Edmund  Burke,  then  the  agent  for
the  colony  in  England,  and  the  great  knowledge
of  colonial  affairs  that  was  shown  by  Mr.  Burke  in
the  house  of  commons  was  derived  from  this  source.
In  September,  1764,  he  drew  up  a  spirited  address  to
Lieut.-Gov.  Cadwallader  Colden,  in  which  the  bold-
est language  was  employed  to  express  the  hopes  of
the  colonists  for  freedom  from  taxation,  and  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  stamp-act  congress  in  October,  1 765.
He  was  chosen  speaker  of  the  provincial  assembly
at  the  last  session  that  he  attended,  and  declined  a
re-election  from  the  city,  but  was  returned  for  his
brother's  manor  of  Livingston,  and  took  his  seat
in  April.  A  month  later  he  was  unseated  by  the
Tory  majority  on  the  plea  that  he  was  a  non-resi-
dent. .  Mr.  Livingston  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
first  Continental  congress  which  met  in  Philadel-
phia in  September,  1774,  and  continued  a  member
of  that  body  until  his  death.  At  the  first  conven-
tion he  was  appointed  one  of  the  committee  to  pre-
pare an  address  to  the  people  of  Great  Britain,
and  later  was  one  of  the  New  York  delegates  that
signed  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  Mean-
while he  was  also  active  in  local  affairs,  holding  the
office  of  president  of  the  provincial  congress  in
April,  1775,  and  in  February,  1776,  he  was  again
chosen  a  member  of  the  general  assembly.  It  was
at  his  house  on  Brooklyn  heights  that  Washington
held  the  council  of  war  in  August,  1776,  that  de-
cided on  the  retreat  from  Long  Island.  This  man-
sion, shown  in  the  illustration  on  this  page,  was
situated  on  what  is  now  Hicks  street,  a  little  to
the  south  of  Joralemon.  It  was  on  the  highest
point  of  the  property,  which  included  about  forty
acres,  and  commanded  a  magnificent  view  of  New
York  harbor.  The  house  itself  was  elegantly  fin-
ished, containing  exquisitely  carved  Italian  marble
mantels,  and  was  magnificently  furnished.  Dur-
ing the  Revolutionary  war  the  British  took  posses-


sion of  the  building  and  converted  it  into  a  navai
hospital.  The  property  soon  went  to  decay,  and
the  old  mansion  was  ultimately  destroyed  by  fire.
In  May,  1777,  he  was  chosen  a  state  senator,  and  in
September  he  attended  the  first  meeting  of  the  first
legislature  of  the  state  of  New  York.  He  was  then
elected  one  of  the  first  delegates  to  congress  under
the  new  confederation.  Mr.  Livingston  was  active
in  the  movements  tending  to  develop  the  interests
of  New  York  city.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  New  York  society  library  in  1754  and  of  the
Chamber  of  commerce  in  1770,  one  of  the  first  gov-
ernors of  the  New  York  hospital,  chartered  in  1771,
and  one  of  the  earliest  advocates  of  the  establish-
ment of  Kings  (now  Columbia)  college.  In  1746
he  aided  in  founding  the  professorship  of  divinity
that  bears  his  name  in  Yale,  and  was  one  of  the
contributors  to  the  building  of  the  first  Methodist
church  in  the  United  States. — Another  son  of
Philip,  William,  governor  of  New  Jersey,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1723  ;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,
N.  J.,  25  July,  1790,  was  the  protege  of  his  ma-
ternal grandmother,  Sarah  Van  Brugh,  with  whom
his  boyhood  days  were  spent.  Before  he  was  four-
teen years  old  he  lived  an  entire  year  among  the
Mohawk  Indians,  under  the  care  of  an  English
missionary.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1741,  at
the  head  of  his  class,  and  then  began  the  study  of
law  in  the  office  of  James  Alexander,  completing
his  course  under  William  Smith.  In  October,
1748,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  soon  became
one  of  the  leaders  in  his  profession,  acquiring  the
name  of  the  Presbyterian  lawyer.  He  was  elected
to  the  provincial  legislature  from  his  brother's
manor  of  Livingston,  and  served  for  three  years,
meanwhile  also  continuing  his  practice.  In  1760
he  purchased  property  near  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,
and  there  erected  a  country-seat  which  is  cele-
brated as  ""Liberty  Hall,"  and  in  May,  1772,
having  reduced  his  professional  practice,  he  re-
moved to  that  place  with  his  family.  It  was  of
this  residence,  shown  in  the  illustration  on  page


743,  that  his  daughter  Susan  said,  •"  We  are  go-
ing into  cloister  seclusion,"  as  she  bade  adieu  to
her  city  friends,  but  "  the  toilsome  and  muddy
way  from  New  York  was  kept  well  trodden  by
brilliant  and  ever  welcome  guests,"  who  came,  to
pay  their  addresses  to  the  four  young  ladies.
Among  their  visitors  was  John  Jay,  who  in  1774
married  Miss  Sarah  V.  B.  Livingston  from  this
mansion,  and  to  it  came  also  Alexander  Hamil-
ton, a  boy  from  the  West  Indies,  with  letters  to
Gov.  Livingston  from  Dr.  Hugh  Knox.  It  had
an  eventful  history  during  the  Revolutionary  war,
and  more  than  once  attempts  were  made  to  burn
it.  The  stairs  still  show  the  cuts  that  were  left  by
the  angry  Hessians  when  they  were  baffbd  in  their
attempts  to  capture  its  owner.  After  the  war  its
graceful  hospitalities  were  renewed,  and  here  in
May,  1789,  Mrs.  Washington  was  entertained  over


LIVINGSTON

night  while  on  her  journey  to  meet  the  president,
after  his  inauguration.  The  hall  was  decorated
with  flowers,  and  a  brilliant  assemblage  of  distin-
guished guests  gathered  to  do  her  honor.  In  the
morning  Washington  himself  came  out  to  escort
her  to  the  city.  His  retirement  was  soon  inter-
rupted by  the  progress  of  public  events,  and  he  was
elected  a  deputy  for  the  province  of  New  Jersey  to
the  1st  Continental  congress  in  July,  1774,  and  re-
elected to  the  2d  and  3d  congresses.  In  June,
1776,  he  left  congress  for  Elizabethtown,  to  assume
the  duties  of  brigadier-general  and  commander-in-
chief  of  the  New  Jersey  militia,  an  invasion  by  the
British  being  feared.  This  duty  prevented  his  re-
turn to  Philadelphia,  and  explains  the  absence  of
his  name  from  the  signers  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence.  In  August  he  was  elected  first
governor  of  the  state  of  New  Jersey,  and  after
resigning  his  military  command  he  continued  in
office  until  his  death.  Gov.  Livingston,  in  his
message  in  1777  to  the  assembly,  recommended  the
abolition  of  slavery,  and  in  1786,  through  his  in-
fluence, caused  the  passage  of  an  act  forbidding
the  importation  of  slaves,  he  himself  liberating
those  in  his  own  possession,  with  the  resolution
never  to  own  another.  During  the  occupancy  of
New  Jersey  by  British  troops  he  filled  his  office
with  great  efficiency,  as  is  shown  by  Washington's
writings.  Several  expeditions  were  made  for  the
purpose  of  kidnapping  him,  but  he  was  always
fortunate  in  escaping.  Gov.  Livingston  was  known
as  the  "  Itinerant  Dey  of  New  Jersey,"  "  the  Knight
of  the  most  honorable  Order  of  Starvation  and
Chief  of  the  Independents,"  and  the  "  Don  Quixote
of  the  Jerseys,"  on  account  of  his  being  very  tall
and  thin.  A  "female  wit  "  dubbed  him  "  the  whip-
.ping-post."  In  1787  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  con-
vention that  framed  the  U.  S.  constitution,  and  he
had  previously  declined  the  appointment  of  com-
missioner to  superintend  the  construction  of  the
Federal  buildings,  and  that  of  minister  to  Holland.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale  in
1788,  was  among  the  original  trustees  of  the  New
York  society  library,  and  in  1751  was  made  one  of
the  trustees  of  Kings  (now  Columbia)  college,  but
declined  to  qualify  when  he  found  that  the  presi-
dent must  be  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land. For  some  time  he  was  president  of  the
"Moot,"  a  club  of  lawyers  formed  in  1770  and
well  known  in  the  early  history  of  New  York  city.
and  he  was  also  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society  and  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences.  President  Timothy  Dwight.  of
Yale,  says  of  him:  ''The  talents  of  Gov.  Living-
ston were  very  various.  His  imagination  was
brilliant,  his  wit  sprightly  and  pungent,  his  under-
standing powerful,  his  taste  refined,  and  his  con-
ceptions bold  and  masterly.  His  views  of  politi-
cal subjects  were  expansive,  clear,  and  just.  Of
freedom,  both  civil  and  religious,  he  was  a  distin-
guished champion."  Gov.  Livingston  began  the
publication  in  1752  of  "The  Independent  Re-
flector," a  weekly  political  and  miscellaneous  jour-
nal, in  which  he  opposed  the  establishment  of  an
American  episcopate  and  the  incorporation  of  an
Episcopal  college  in  New  York.  It  was  discon-
tinued after  the  publication  of  fifty-two  numbers.
He  wrote  largely  for  the  newspapers,  and.  besides
numerous  political  tracts,  published  "  Philosophic
Solitude,  or  the  Choice  of  a  Rural  Life,"  a  poem
(New  York,  1747) ;  "  A  Funeral  Elogium  on  the
Rev.  Aaron  Burr"  (1757);  "  A  Soliloquy  "  (1770);
and,  with  William  Smith,  Jr.,  "A  Digest  of  the
Laws  of  New  York -1691 -1762"  (1752-62).  See
"Life  and  Letters  of William Livingston,"  by


LIVINGSTON


743


Theodore  Sedgwick,  Jr.  (New  York,  1833).— Will-
iam's son,  Henry  Brockholst,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  26  Nov.,  1757 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
19  March,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1774,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war
entered  the  American  army  with  the  grade  of  cap-
tain, and,  being  selected  by  Gen.  Philip  Schuvler
as  one  of  his  aides,  was  attached  to  the  north'ern
department  with  the  rank  of  major.  Subsequently
he  was  aide  to  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  during  the
siege  of  Ticonderoga.  and  was  with  Benedict  Ar-


nold at  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne's  army  in  Oc-
tober, 1777.  Later  he  served  again  with  Gen.
Schuyler,  and  obtained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel. In  1779  he  accompanied  his  brother-in-law,
John  Jay.  to  Spain,  as  private  secretary.  On  his
return  voyage  in  1782  he  was  captured  by  a  British
vessel,  and  on  reaching  New  York  was  thrown  into
prison.  He  was  liberated  on  the  arrival  of  Sir  Guy
Carleton.  who  sent  him  home  to  his  father,  saying
that  he  came  to  conciliate  and  not  to  fight.  Liv-
ingston then  went  to  Albany,  where  he  began  the
study  of  law  with  Peter  Yates,  ami  in  IT*:}  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  After  the  evacuation  of  New
York  he  established  himself  in  that  city,  and  from
that  time  he  dropped  his  first  name.  He  was  re-
garded as  "one  of  the  most  accomplished  scholars,
able  advocates,  and  fluent  speakers  of  his  time  in
the  city,  but  violent  in  his  political  feelings  and
conduct."  In  June,  1802.  he  was  made  a  puisne
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and  in  1807  he
succeeded  William  Patterson  as  associate  justice  of
the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  Judge  Livingston  was
appointed  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  New  York
society  library,  on  its  reorganization  in  1?KS,  and
was  elected  2d  vice-president  <if  the  New  York  his-
torical society  on  its  organization  in  1805.  He  was
also  one  of  the  first  corporators  of  the  public-school
system  of  New  York  city.  In  1S18  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Harvard,  and
in  1790  he  delivered  an  oration  before  the  president
and  other  notable  persons  in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  New
York,  on  the  occasion  of  the  anniversary  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence.  He  also  contributed
political  articles  to  the  press  of  his  time  under  the
pen-name  of  Decius.— The  second  Philip's  grand-
son, Walter,  lawyer,  b.  in  1740;  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  May.  1797.  was  a  resident  of  Albany,  and
a  member  of  the  provincial  congresses  that  were
held  in  New  York  during  April  and  May.  1775.
In  1777  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  judges  for
Albany  by  the  convention  that  made  his  kinsman,
Robert  R.  Livingston,  chancellor.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  17S4-*5,  and  appointed  in  1785
one  of  the  first  commissioners  of  the  treasury.  Mr.
Livingston  married  Cornelia  Schuyler,  step-daugh-
ter of  Dr.  John  Cochrane.  In  17*79  Mrs.  Living-
ston and  Mrs.  Cochrane  were  specially  invited  to
dine  with  Gen.  Washington,  whose  headquarters


744


LIVINGSTON


LIVINGSTON


were  then  at  West  Point.  In  the  letter  of  invita-
tion Washington  writes :  "  If  the  ladies  can  put  up
with  such  entertainment,  and  will  submit  to  partake
of  it  on  plates  once  tin,  but  now  iron  (not  become
so  by  the  labor  of  scouring),  I  shall  be  happy  to
see  them." — Walter's  son,  Henry  Walter,  lawyer,
b.  in  Livingston  Manor,  Linlithgow,  N.  Y.,  in
1768;  d.  there,  22  Dec,  1810,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1786,  and,  after  studying  law,  began  the
practice  of  his  profession  in  New  York  city.  In
1792  he  accompanied  Gouverneur  Morris  as  private
secretary,  when  the  latter  was  sent  as  minister
plenipotentiary  to  Prance,  and  returned  with  him
in  1794.  Mr.  Morris  sent  him  to  the  president  with
the  statement,  '•  You  will  find  Mr.  Livingston  is  to
be  trusted,  for,  although  at  a  tender  age,  his  dis-
cretion may  always  be  depended  on."  For  some
time-  he  was  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
Columbia  county,  and  was  twice  elected  to  con-
gress, serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1807.
He  married  the  granddaughter  of  the  chief  justice
of  Pennsylvania,  Mary  Penn  Allen,  who  was  well
known  in  New  York  society  as  "  Lady  Mary." —
John  William,  a  descendant  of  John,  third  son  of
the  first  Philip,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York  city,
22  May,  1804 ;  d.  there,  10  Sept.,  1885,  was  the  son
of  William  Turk,  a  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  who
married  Eliza  Livingston.  The  son  sought,  in
1843,  and  obtained  permission  from  the  legisla-
ture to  assume  his  mother's  surname.  In  March,
1824,  he  was  appointed  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.
navy  from  New  York,  and  served  in  the  Mediter-
ranean squadron  during  the  war  with  the  pirates.
He  received  his  commission  as  lieutenant  in  June,
1832,  and  was  assigned  to  the  frigate  "  Congress,"
serving  in  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1846-'7,  seeing
active  service  during  the  war  with  Mexico,  then  in
the  East  India  squadron  in  1848-'9,  after  which  he
was  on  duty  at  the  navy-yard  in  New  York.  In
May,  1855,  he  was  made  commander,  given  charge
of  the  "  St.  Louis,"  and  cruised  off  the  coast  of
Africa  in  1856-'8.  He  then  commanded  the  "  Pen-
guin," and  was  attached  to  the  blockading  squad-
ron in  1861,  during  which  year  he  was  promoted
captain,  and  also  captured  several  vessels.  In  July,
1862,  he  was  made  commodore,  and  given  charge
of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  after  its  evacuation  by
the  Confederate  forces  until  1864,  and  in  1865  he
was  sent  to  the  naval  station  at  Mound  City,  111.
He  was  detached  from  this  duty  in  1866,  and
ordered  on  special  service,  having  charge  princi-
pally of  the  sale  of  condemned  government  ves-
sels. In  May,  1868.  he  was  commissioned  rear-
admiral,  and  in  1874  placed  on  the  retired  list,  after
which  he  lived  in  New  York  city. — Robert  R
(the  initial  R  was  assumed  in  order  to  distinguish
him  from  other  members  of  the  family  having  the
same  name),  son  of  Robert,  the  second  son  of  the
first  Robert,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  in  August,  1718 :
d.  in  Clermont,  N.  Y„  9  Dec,  1775,  turned  his  at-
tention to  law,  and  became  well  known  in  that  pro-
fession. In  1760  he  was  made  judge  of  the  admi-
ralty court,  and  in  1763  a  justice  of  the  New  York
supreme  court.  He  represented  Dutchess  county
in  the  provincial  assembly  in  1759-68,  and  was
chairman  of  the  committee  that  corresponded  with
Robert  Charles,  the  agent  of  New  York  in  Eng-
land. Judge  Livingston  was  a  member  of  the
stamp-act  congress  in  1765,  and  was  energetic  in
his  refusal  to  sustain  measures  compelling  the
adoption  of  stamps.  In  1767,  and  again  in  1773,
he  served  on  commissions  to  locate  the  boundary-
line  between  New  York  and  Massachusetts,  and  he
was  also  a  member  of  the  committee  of  one  hun-
dred that  was  elected  in  1775  to  control  in  all  gen-


eral affairs.  He  married  Margaret,  daughter  of
Col.  Henry  Beekman,  and  while  he  resided  princi-
pally at  Clermont,  he  also  had  a  city  residence  on
Broadway,  near  Bowling  Green.  SirHenry  Moore,
governor  of  New  York,  describes  him  as  "  a  man
of  great  ability  and  many  accomplishments,  and
the  greatest  [richest]  landholder,  without  any  ex-
ception, in  New  York."  His  daughter,  Janet,
married  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery.  See  "  History
of  Clermont  or  Livingston  Manor,"  by  Thomas  S.
Clarkson  (Clermont,  1869). — Robert  R,  son  of
Robert  R,  statesman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  27  Nov.,
1746 ;  d.  in  Clermont,  N.  Y.,  26  Feb.,  1813,  was  grad-
uated at  Kings  (now  Columbia)  college  in  1765,  and
studied  law  with  William  Smith  and  his  kinsman,
William  Livingston.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1773,  and  for  a  short  time  was  associated  in
partnership  with  John  Jay,  who  had  been  his  con-
temporary in  college.  Mr.  Livingston  met  with
great  success  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,  and
was  appointed  re-
corder of  the  city
of  New  York  by
Gov.  William  Try-
on  in  1773,  but  lost
this  office  in  1775,
owing  to  his  active
sympathy  with  the
revolutionary  spirit
of  the  times.  In
1775  he  was  elected
to  the  provincial
assembly  of  New
York  from  Dutch-
ess county,  and  sent
by  this  body  as  a
delegate  to  the  Con-
tinental congress,
where  he  was  cho-
sen one  of  a  com-
mittee of  five  to
draft  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  He  was
prevented  from  signing  this  document  by  his  hasty
return  to  the  meeting  of  the  provincial  convention,
taking  his  seat  in  that  assembly  on  8  July,  1776,
the  day  on  which  the  title  of  the  "  province  "  was
changed  to  that  of  the  "  state  "  of  New  York,  and  he
was  appointed  on  the  committee  to  draw  up  a  state
constitution.  At  the  Kingston  convention  in  1777
the  constitution  was  accepted,  and  he  was  appoint-
ed first  chancellor  of  New  York  under  its  provis-
ions, which  office  he  held  until  1801.  Chancellor
Livingston  continued  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress  until  1777,  was  again  one  of  its  members
in  1779-81,  and  throughout  the  entire  Revolution
was  most  active  in  behalf  of  the  cause  of  inde-
pendence. As  chancellor  he  administered  the  oath
of  office  to  George  Washington  on  his  inaugura-
tion as  first  president  of  the  United  States.  The
ceremony  took  place  at  the  City  Hall  (where  the
present  U.  S.  sub-treasury  building,  stands),  then
fronting  on  Wall  street.  It  had  been  specially
fitted  up  for  the  reception  of  congress,  and  the
exact  spot  where  Washington  stood  is  now  marked
by  a  colossal  statue  of  the  first  president,  which
rests  on  the  original  stone  upon  which  the  cere-
mony took  place.  The  statue  was  designed  by
John  Q.  A.  Ward,  and  unveiled  on  the  centennial
celebration  of  the  evacuation  of  New  York,  25
Nov.,  1883.  '  Immediately  after  administering  the
oath  Chancellor  Livingston  exclaimed  in  deep  and
impressive  tones:  "  Long  live  George  Washington,
president  of  the  United  States."  He  held  the
office  of  secretary  of  foreign  affairs  for  the  United
States  in  1781-3,  and  in  1788  was  chairman  of  the


LIVINGSTON


LIVINGSTON


745


New  York  convention  to  consider  the  U.  S.  con-
stitution, whose  adoption  he  was  largely  instru-
mental in  procuring.  The  post  of  minister  to
France  was  declined  by  him  in  1794,  and  he  also
refused  the  secretaryship  of  the  navy  under  Thomas
Jefferson,  but  in  1801,  being  obliged,  by  consti-
tutional provision  to  resign  the  chancellorship,
he  accepted  the  mission  to  France.  He  enjoyed
the  personal  friendship  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,
who,  on  Livingston's  departure  in  1805,  presented
him  with  a  splendid  snuff-box  containing  a  minia-
ture likeness  of  himself,  painted  by  Isabey.  It  is
said  that  "  he  appeared  to  be  the  favorite  foreign
envoy."  He  was  successful  in  accomplishing  the
cession  of  Louisiana  to  the  United  States  in  1803,
and  also  began  the  negotiations  tending  toward  a
settlement  for  French  spoliations  on  the  commerce
of  the  United  States.  Subsequent  to  his  resigna-
tion he  travelled  extensively  through  Europe.
While  in  Paris  he  met  Robert  Fulton,  and  together
they  successfully  developed  a  plan  of  steam  navi-
gation. Mr.  Livingston  had  previously  been  im-
pressed with  the  advantage  that  was  to  be  derived
from  the  application  of  steam  to  navigation,  and
he  obtained  from  the  legislature  of  the  state  of
New  York  the  exclusive  right  to  navigate  its  wa-
ter-ways by  steam-power  for  twenty  years.  He
then  constructed  a  boat  of  thirty  tons  burden,
with  which  he  succeeded  in  making  three  miles  an
hour,  but  the  concession  was  made  on  condition  of
attaining  a  speed  of  four  miles  an  hour,  and  other
duties  intervened  to  prevent  success.  He  made
numerous  experiments  with  Fulton,  and  finally
launched  a  boat  on  the  Seine,  which,  however,  did
not  fully  realize  their  expectations.  Later,  on
their  return  to  the  United  States,  their  experi-
ments were  continued  until  1807,  when  the  "  Cler-
mont "  succeeded  in  accomplishing  five  miles  an
hour.  (See  Fulton,  Robert.)  After  his  retire-
ment from  public  service,  Livingston  devoted  con-
siderable time  and  attention  to  the  subject  of
agriculture,  and  it  was  through  his  efforts  that  the
use  of  gypsum  for  fertilizing  purposes  became
general.  He  was  also  the  first  to  introduce  the
merino  sheep  into  the  farming  communities  west
of  Hudson  river.  He  was  the  principal  founder
of  the  American  academy  of  fine  arts  in  New  York
in  1801,  and  its  first  president,  for  some  time
president  of  the  New  York  society  for  the  promo-
tion of  useful  arts,  and  a  trustee  of  the  New  York
society  library  on  its  reorganization  in  1788.  In  1792
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
the  regents  of  the  University  of  the  state  of  New
York.  He  published  an  oration  that  he  delivered
before  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  on  4  July,
1787,  an  address  to  the  Society  for  promoting  the
arts  (1808),  and  "Essays  on  Agriculture'*  and
"Essay  on  Sheep"  (New  York,  1809,  and  London.
1811).  Benjamin  Franklin  called  him  the  "  Cicero
of  America,"  and  his  statue,  with  that  of  George
Clinton,  forms  the  group  of  the  two  most  emi-
nent citizens  of  New  York  being  placed  by  act
of  congress  in  the  Capitol  in  Washington.  See
"  Biographical  Sketch  of  Robert  R.  Living-
ston "  by  Frederic  De  Pevster  (New  York,  1876).
—Another  son  of  the  first  Robert  R.  Henry
Beekman,  soldier,  b.  in  Clermont,  N.  Y.,  9  Nov.,
1750;  d.  in  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y,  5  Nov..  1831,  raised
a  company  of  soldiers  in  August,  1775,  and  accom-
panied his  brother-in-law,  Gen.  Richard  Mont-
gomery, on  his  expedition  to  Canada.  For  his
services  in  the  capture  of  Chambly  in  1775  he  was
voted  a  sword  of  honor  by  congress  in  December
of  that  year.  In  February,  1776,  he  became  aide-
de-camp  to  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler,  and  in  November


he  was  made  colonel  of  the  4th  battalion  of  New
York  volunteers,  but  he  resigned  that  command  in
1779. He  also  served  with  Lafayette  in  Rhode
Island,  and  was  with  him  at  Valley  Forge. At  the
close  of  the  war  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general.
While  on  his  way  to  Albany  in  1824,  after  spending
the  night  at  Clermont,  Lafayette  inquired  of  Col.
Nicholas  Fish,  "  Where  is  my  friend.  Col.  Harry
Livingston  f  " Soon  afterward,  while  the  steamer
was  at  the  Kingston  dock,  Col.  Livingston,  having
crossed  the  river  in  a  small  boat  from  Rhinebeck,
came  on  board.  As  soon  as  their  eyes  met,  the  two
friends — the  marquis  and  the  colonel — now  old  men,
rushing into  each other's  arms, embraced and
kissed  each  other,  to  the  astonishment  of the
Americans  present. Col.  Livingston  was  one  of
the  original  members  of  the  New  York  society  of
the  Cincinnati. He  inherited  the  Beekman  estate
at  Rhinebeck,  and  married  Miss  Ann  Home  Ship-
pen, niece  of Henry Lee,  president of the 1st
congress. — Edward, youngest son of the  first
Robert  R,  statesman,  b.  in  Clermont,  N.  Y..  26
May,  1764:  d.  in  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,  23  May.  1836,
was  graduated  al  Princeton  in  1781.  having  entered
the  junior  class,  and  then  began  the  study  of  law
in  Albany  with  John  Lansing. He  was  admitted
to practice in January, 1785,  after  studying  in
New  York  city  with  his  brother  Robert,  and  at
once  took  a  high  rank  at  the  New  York  bar,  having
for  competitors  Egbert  Benson,  Aaron  Burr,  and
Alexander  Hamilton. He  was  sent  to  congress  in
1?!I4.  and twice  re-elected,  serving  from  7  Dec,
1795,  till  March,  1801. He  opposed  the  adminis-
tration, and  introduced  the  resolution  calling  for
the  instructions  that  had  been  given  by  the  execu-
tive to  John  Jay  at  the  time  of  the  formation  of
the  treaty  with  Great Britain. With  the  unani-
mous approval  of  his  cabinet,  Washington  declined
to  furnish  these,  although  Livingston's  resolution
was  carried  by  a  vote  of  62  to  37. With  Madison
and  Gallatin  he  shared the  distinction  of  being
"the  most  enlightened  members  of  congress  in  the
party  of  the  oppo-
sition."  At  the  time
of  Jefferson's  eleva-
tion to  the  presiden-
cy a  tie  vote  existed
in  the  electoral  col-
lege, in  consequence
of  which the elec-
tion passed to the
house, where after
35 ballots he was
chosen  to  office.  The
New York delega-
tion stood  6  to  4  in
favor  of Jefferson,
and  effort  was  made
to  induce  Livingston
to vote for Aaron
Burr, but without
success. In  March.
1801, he was ap-
pointed U.  S.  attorney  for  the  district  of  New
York,  and  in  August"  of  the  same  year  he  was
elected mavor  of New York city. During his
mayoraltv  the  present  city-hall  was  built,  the  front
and sides being constructed of white marble,
while  a  dark-colored  stone  was  considered  good
enough  for  the  north  wall,  since  "  it  would  be  out
of  sight  to  all  the  world." The  yellow  fever  visited
the  city  during  the  summer  of  1803,  and  his  intre-
pidity in  remaining  at  his  post  nearly  cost  him  his
life. Toward  the  close  of  the  epidemic  he  was
stricken  with  the  disease,  and  when  his  physician


6fe^^^^^^


746


LIVINGSTON


LIVINGSTON


recommended  madeira  for  his  recovery,  not  a  bot-
tle of  that  or  any  other  kind  of  wine  was  to  be
found  in  his  cellar:  he  had  prescribed  every  drop
for  others ;  but  as  soon  as  this  fact  was  known  the
best  wines  were  sent  to  him  from  all  directions.
A  crowd  thronged  the  street  near  his  residence,
No.  1  Broadway,  to  obtain  the  latest  news  of  his
condition,  and  young  people  vied  with  each  other
for  the  privilege  of  watching  by  his  bed.  His  pri-
vate affairs  became  involved,  so  that  he  was  un-
able to  meet  his  obligations,  and  he  was  a  debtor
for  a  considerable  sum  to  the  U.  S.  government.
This  condition  of  affairs  was  due  to  a  misappropri-
ation of  funds  by  his  business  agent.  Without
waiting  for  an  adjustment  of  his  accounts,  he  vol-
untarily confessed  judgment  in  favor  of  the  United
States  for  $100,000,  but  the  exact  sum  was  after-
ward found  to  be  $43,666.21.  He  also  conveyed  all
of  his  property  to  a  trustee  for  sale,  with  directions
to  apply  all  proceeds  to  the  payment  of  his  debts,
and  immediately  resigned  from  both  his  offices,
although  he  continued  to  hold  the  mayoralty
until  about  October,  1803.  His  elder  brother,
Robert,  had  just  successfully  completed  the  ne-
gotiations by  which  the  territory  of  Louisiana
became  the  property  of  the  United  States.  In
December,  1803,  he  left  New  York  for  New  Orleans
by  sailing-vessel,  reaching  the  latter  city  in  Feb-
ruary, 1804,  where  he  at  once  resumed  his  profes-
sional career,  hoping  thereby  to  retrieve  his  for-
tunes. By  accepting  fees  in  land  in  lieu  of  ready
money,  he  soon  acquired  property  that  promised
to  become  a  fortune  within  a  few  years.  He  found
that  the  legal  practice  in  the  new  province  con-
sisted of  an  unfortunate  medley  of  the  civil  and
Spanish  law,  and  in  consequence  he  drew  up  a  code
of  procedure  that  in  1805  was  adopted  by  the
Louisiana  legislature.  Among  his  private  debts
at  the  time  of  his  leaving  New  York  was  a  judg-
ment that  had  been  assigned  to  Aaron  Burr,  for
which  the  latter  applied  through  his  agent  in  New
Orleans.  Gen.  James  Wilkinson,  obtaining  this
information,  attempted  in  court  to  connect  Liv-
ingston with  Burr's  conspiracy ;  but  the  effort
failed,  and  Wilkinson  made  himself  ridiculous  by
his  interference  in  the  matter.  One  of  the  most
celebrated  cases  of  the  time  was  his  controversy
with  Thomas  Jefferson,  who  was  then  president  of
the  United  States,  over  the  title  and  possession  of
the  property  known  as  Batture  Sainte  Marie.
Among  his  early  clients  was  John  Gravicr,  for
whom  he  obtained  a  title  to  that  ground  from  the
city  of  New  Orleans,  receiving  as  his  fee  part  of
the  land.  When  he  was  about  to  improve  it,  the
people  of  New  Orleans  objected,  claiming  it  as
their  property,  and  appealed  to  the  national  gov-
ernment to  sustain  their  rights,  in  consequence  of
which  the  attorney-general  decided  in  their  favor,
and  Livingston  was  dispossessed  by  the  authority
of  the  United  States.  An  action  was  at  once
brought  by  Livingston  in  the  Federal  court  of
New  Orleans  to  recover  damages  for  his  expul-
sion, and  a  restoration  to  possession,  and  some-
what later  another  action  was  brought  against  Jef-
ferson. As  the  litigation  approached  decision  in
New  Orleans,  Jefferson  circulated  a  pamphlet  that
reflected  somewhat  sharply  on  his  adversary,  which
was  promptly  responded  to  in  a  similar  way  by
Livingston.  The  latter  finally  triumphed  in  the
courts,  although  the  delay  was  such  that  complete
pecuniary  fruits  of  the  victory  only  came  to  his
family  long  after  his  death.  The  unfortunate
termination  of  his  career  in  New  York,  and  the
accusation  of  Wilkinson,  destroyed  Jefferson's  con-
fidence in  him,  and  so  made  his  opposition  possible


in  the  Batture  controversy.  Later  in  life  the  two
men  became  reconciled,  and  cordial  expressions  of
sympathy  and  appreciation  were  received  by  Liv-
ingston from  Monticello.  During  the  second  war
with  England,  Livingston  acted  as  aide  to  Andrew
Jackson  while  the  latter  commanded  the  U.  S.
army  in  the  southwest,  and  he  is  said  to  have
served  as  "aide-de-camp,  military  secretary,  inter-
preter, orator,  spokesman,  and  confidential  adviser
upon  all  subjects."  His  acquaintance  with  Jack-
son, begun  when  they  were  fellow-members  of  con-
gress, now  ripened  into  a  deep  friendship  that  con-
tinued through  life,  and,  before  leaving  New  Or-
leans, Jackson  caused  his  portrait  to  be  painted  on
ivory,  and  presented  it  to  Livingston  "  as  a  mark
of  the  sense  I  entertain  of  his  public  services,  and
a  token  of  my  private  friendship  and  esteem."  In
1820  he  was  elected  to  the  lower  house  of  the
Louisiana  legislature,  and  in  1822  he  was  sent  to
congress  from  the  New  Orleans  district,  serving,
with  two  re-elections,  from  23  Dec,  1822,  till  3
March,  1829.  In  1823  he  was  appointed,  with  Louis
Moreau  Lislet,  to  revise  the  civil  code  of  Louisiana,
a  work  which  was  completed  the  next  year,  and
substantially  ratified  by  enactment.  Meanwhile,
in  1821,  he  was  intrusted  solely  with  the  task  of
preparing  a  code  of  criminal  law  and  procedure.
The  next  year  he  made  a  report  of  his  plan  for  the
work,  which  was  afterward  reprinted  in  London
and  Paris.  His  code  was  submitted  to  the  legisla-
ture in  1826,  but  never  directly  accepted.  It  was
very  favorably  received  by  the  legal  profession  in
this  country  and  Europe,  adding  greatly  to  his
fame.  It  visibly  influenced  the  legislation  of  sev-
eral countries,  and  parts  of  it  were  adopted  en-
tirely in  Guatemala.  He  paid  his  long-standing
debt  to  the  government  in  1826,  with  interest
amounting  to  $100,014.89,  by  the  disposal  to  the
United  States  of  property  in  New  Orleans,  to
which  his  title  was  clear  and  undisputed.

The  action  of  President  Jackson  in  directing  the
U.  S.  treasurer  to  receipt  for  this  sum  caused  some
unfortunate  comment  at  the  time,  especially  as
others  that  were  indebted  to  the  government  were
confined  in  prison.  As  soon  as  this  receipt  was
recorded,  Livingston  at  once  presented  an  account
for  salary  that  was  due  him  as  member  of  con-
gress, which,  on  account  of  his  being  a  debtor  to
the  government,  he  had  previously  been  unable  to
collect.  During  his  career  in  congress  his  course
was  marked  by  a  close  adherence  to  the  routine
business  of  legislation,  and  by  his  efforts  to  reform
the  criminal  code,  to  extend  laws  for  the  protec-
tion and  relief  of  American  seamen  in  foreign
lands,  and  to  promote  the  establishment  and  in-
crease of  the  navy.  In  1829  he  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator  from  Louisiana,  but  served  only  until
March,  1831,  when  he  was  invited  to  accept  the
office  of  secretary  of  state,  which  had  been  made
vacant  by  the  resignation  of  Martin  Van  Buren.
He  was  generally  credited  with  the  preparation  of
the  state  papers  of  Jackson,  and  the  celebrated
nullification  proclamation  of  10  Dec,  1832,  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  written  by  him.  He  was  sent
as  minister  to  France  in  1833,  and  resided  in  Paris
until  1835,  conducting  with  great  skill  the  difficult
matters  that  resulted  in  the  payment  of  the
French  spoliation  claims.  His  friendship  with
Lafayette,  beginning  when  as  a  boy  he  visited  the
marquis  at  his  headquarters,  and  continuing
through  long  years  by  correspondence,  and  kind
attentions  to  Livingston's  son,  Lewis,  was  now
renewed.  On  his  return  home,  Livingston  retired
to  the  Montgomery  place  near  Rhinebeck,  which
had  been  bequeathed  to  him  in  1828  by  his  sister


LIVINGSTON


LIVIUS


747


Janet,  the  wife  of  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery.  In
January,  1836,  he  appeared  before  the  supreme  court
in  Washington  as  counsel  for  the  city  of  New  Orleans
against  the  United  States,  and  this  was  his  last
absence  from  his  family.  Livingston's  celebrity
as  a  lawyer  was  due  to  his  extended  knowledge  of
law,  having  probably  no  superior  as  a  master  of
the  various  systems  in  the  civilized  world.  His
works  include  "  Judicial  Opinions  delivered  in  the
Mayor's  Court  of  the  City  of  New  York  in  the
Year  1802  "  (New  York,  1803) ;  "  Report  of  the
Plan  of  the  Penal  Code  "  (New  Orleans,  1822) ;
"  System  of  Penal  Law  for  the  State  of  Louisiana  "
(1826);  "System  of  Penal  Law  for  the  United
States"  (Washington,  1828);  also  "Complete
Works  on  Criminal  Jurisprudence  "  (New  York,
1873).  See  "  Recollections  of  Livingston,"  by  Au-
guste  D'Avezac,  originally  published  in  the  "Dem-
ocratic Review "  (1840),  and  "  Life  of  Edward
Livingston,"  by  Charles  H.  Hunt  (New  York,
1864).  Mr.  Livingston  married  in  1805,  as  his
second  wife,  Louise  D'Avezac,  widow  of  a  Jamaica
planter  named  Moreau.  She  was  barely  nineteen
years  of  age  at  the  time  of  her  second  marriage,
and  unable  to  speak  English ;  but  she  soon  acquired
the  language,  and  rendered  great  aid  to  her  hus-
band by  her  tact  and  grace.  Mrs.  Livingston  was
an  ardent  patriot,  and  never  allowed  an  affront  to
the  United  States  or  a  word  in  its  disparagement
to  pass  unrebuked.  One  day  the  Prussian  ambas-
sador at  Paris  spoke  of  the  city  of  Washington  as
a  mere  village,  and,  turning  to  her,  asked  what  its
population  was.  She  replied,  with  a  smile  :  "  A  peu
pres  celle  de  Potsdam."  See  "  Memoir  of  Mrs.
Edward  Livingston,"  by  Louise  Livingston  Hunt
(New  York,  1886). — John  Henry,  grandson  of
Gilbert,  third  son  of  the  first  Robert,  clergyman.
b.  in  Poughkeepsie.  N.  Y..  30  May,  1746 ;  d.  in
New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  20  Jan.,  1825.  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1  ?<>2,
and  began  the  study
of  law,  but  impaired
health  led  to  its  dis-
continuance. On
his  recovery  he  de-
termined to  prepare
for  the  ministry,and
accordingly  went  to
Holland,  where  he
entered  the  Univer-
sity of  Utrecht.  In
1767  he  received  his
doctorate  from  the
university,  on  exam-
ination, and  was  or-
dained by  the  classis
of  Amsterdam,  af-
ter being  invited  to
become  one  of  the
pastors  of  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  in  New  York.  While  in  Hol-
land he  procured  the  independence  of  the  American
churches  from  the  Dutch  classis,  and  within  two
years  from  the  time  of  his  return  bad  succeeded  in
reconciling  the  Coetus  and  Conferentic  parties,
into  which  the  church  had  divided.  He  reached
New  York  in  September,  1770,  and  at  once  entered
on  the  active  duties  of  his  pastorate,  having  the
North  Dutch  church  at  the  corner  of  Fulton  and
William  streets  under  his  charge.  He  continued  in
this  office  until  1810,  although  subsequent  to  1775,
owing  to  the  British  occupation  of  New  York,  he
spent  some  time  at  the  Livingston  Manor,  also
preaching  at  Kingston,  N.  Y,  in  1776,  at  Albany
in  1776-'9,  at  Lithgow  in  1779-81,  and  at  Pough-


$•  Jf-  ptft+Jl^pjfon


keepsie,  N.  Y.,  in  1781-3.  After  the  evacuation
of  New  York  in  1783  he  returned  to  his  pastorate,
being  the  only  survivor  of  his  four  colleagues,  and
for  three  years  he  alone  performed  the  work  which
formerly  required  the  services  of  these  ministers.
In  October,  1784,  he  received  the  appointment  of
professor  of  theology  from  the  general  synod  on
the  recommendation  of  the  theological  faculty  of
Utrecht,  but  it  was  not  until  1795  that  a  regular
seminary  was  opened  in  Flatbush,  L.  1.  This  was
closed  two  years  later  for  lack  of  proper  support.
He  then  returned  to  New  York,  and  in  1807  was
made  professor  of  theology  and  president  of
Queen's  college  (now  Rutgers).  New  Brunswick.
N.  J.  In  1810  he  removed  to  that  place,  where  he
continued  to  hold  these  two  offices  until  his  death.
Mr.  Livingston  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  during
the  sessions  of  the  Provincial  congress  that  were
held  in  New  York  in  1775  he  was  frequentlv  called
on  to  open  the  meetings  with  prayer.  He  was
vice-president  of  the  first  missionary  society  in
New  York,  having  for  its  object  the  propagation
of  the  gospel  among  the  American  Indians,  and
he  was  also  one  of  the  regents  of  the  University
of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1784-'7.  His  publi-
cations include,  besides  several  sermons  and  ad-
dresses, "Funeral  Service,  or  Meditations  adapted
to  Funeral  Addresses"  (New  York,  1812),  and  "  A
Dissertation  on  the  Marriage  of  a  Man  with  his
Sister-in-Law"  (1816);  and  in  1787  he  was  chair-
man of  a  committee  to  make  selection  of  psalms
for  the  use  of  the  church  in  public  worship.  He
was  styled  "the  father  of  tne  Dutch  Reformed
church  in  this  country."  See  "Memoirs  of  John
II.  Livingston,"  by  Alexander  Gunn  (New  York,
1829). — James,  soldier,  b.  in  Canada  27  March.
1747:  d.  in  Saratoga  county.  N.  Y..  29  Nov..  1832,
was  the  son  of  John,  and  grandson  of  Robert,
the  nephew  of  the  first  Robert.  His  father  mar-
ried Catherine,  daughter  of  Gen.  Abraham  Ten
Broeck.and  settled  in  Montreal.  At  the  beginning
of  the  Revolutionary  war  James  was  given  com-
mand of  a  regiment  of  Canadian  auxiliaries  which
he  had  raised.  Thisregimenl  was  attached  to  the
command  of  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery,  and  par-
ticipated in  the  capture  of  Fort  Chambly  with  its
farrison  and  stores.  Later  he  accompanied  Gen.
_  lontgomery  on  his  invasion  of  Canada,  and  par-
ticipated iii  the  assault  on  Quebec,  where  the
commanding  general  was  killed.  Subsequently  lie
continued  with  the  American  army  until  the  close
of  the  war,  and  his  presence  is  noted  at  the  battle
of  Stillwater,  in  1777,  and  at  the  surrender  of
Burgoyne  in  October  of  that  year.  Col.  Living-
ston had  command  of  Stony  Point  at  the  time  of
Benedict  Arnold's  treason  in  1780.  and  while  as  a
subordinate  of  Arnold's  he  was  liable  to  suspicion,
Washington  himself  expressed  to  him  his  gratifi-
cation "  that  the  post  was  in  the  hands  of  an  officer
so  devoted  as  yourself  to  the  cause  of  your  coun-
try." Lieut.-Col.  Richard  and  ('apt.  Abraham,  of
the  same  corps,  were  his  brothers.  A  very  elabo-
rate history  of  "The  Livingstons  of  Callendar  and
their  Principal  Cadets,"  by  Edwin  Brockholst  Liv-
ingston, to  be  issued  in  six"  parts,  has  been  privately
printed  in  Europe  for  presentation  only,  and  the
edition  is  limited  to  seventv-five  sets  (1*87).

LI  VI  IS.  Peter,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Bedford,
England,  in  1727;  d.  in  England.  23  July,  1795.
He  came  to  this  country,  resided  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  was  a  member  of  the  council  under  the
royal  government,  and  was  proscribed  as  a  Loyalist
in"  1778.  On  31  May,  1777.  he  was  appointed  chief
justice  in  Canada,  and  acted  as  such  till  1786,  when
he  went  to  England. Harvard  gave  him  the  hon-


748


LIZANA  Y  BEAUMONT


LLOYD


orary  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1767,  and  he  also  became
a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of  London.
LIZANA  Y  BEAUMONT,  Francisco  Javier

He  (lee-thah'-nah),  viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Arnedo,
Spain,  3  Dec,  1750 ;  d.  in  Mexico,  6  March,  1811.
He  studied  philosophy  in  Calatayud,  was  grad-
uated as  doctor  in  theology  and  law  in  Saragossa,
and,  after  entering  the  priesthood,  was  appointed
professor  of  theology  at  Alcala.  He  became  attor-
ney of  the  bishopric  of  Alcala,  then  canon  of  the
cathedral  of  Zamora,  vicar-general  of  that  see,
assistant  bishop  of  Toledo,  bishop  of  Teruel,  and
finally  archbishop  of  Mexico.  He  established  in
the  university  the  chair  of  church  discipline,
founded  several  colleges,  and  in  Lower  California
the  village  and  mission  of  Concepcion  de  Arnedo.
In  1809  the  junta  of  Cadiz  appointed  the  arch-
bishop viceroy,  replacing  Gen.  Garibay,  and,  on  19
July,  Lizana  took  charge  of  the  government.  He
faithfully  sustained  the  central  junta,  but  without
independent  action,  limiting  himself  to  executing
the  orders  that  he  received.  He  solicited  subscrip-
tions to  assist  the  junta  in  their  resistance  to  in-
vasion, and  sent  $11,000,000  to  Cadiz.  He  ordered
the  proclamations  of  King  Joseph,  which  were  scat-
tered over  the  country  by  order  of  Napoleon,  to  be
collected  and  publicly  burned  in  the  square  of
Mexico,  he  established  a  foundry  for  cannon  and  a
small-arms  factory,  and  collected  14,000  troops  at
Jalapa  against  a  threatened  French  invasion.  But,
as  he  did  not  submit  to  the  influence  of  Yermo  and
other  prominent  Spanish  merchants,  he  was  calum-
niated at  Cadiz,  an  order  arrived  from  the  junta
relieving  him  from  the  government,  and  on  8  May,
1810,  he  delivered  the  executive  to  the  audiencia
until  the  arrival  of  the  new  viceroy,  Venegas.  He
gave  his  salary  as  viceroy  to  the  public  treasury,
and  retired  to  his  episcopal  residence,  where  he
died  in  the  following  year.

LIZARRAGA,  Reginaldo  de  (lee-thar'-rah-
gah),  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Biscay,  Spain,  in  1545 ;  d.
in  Asuncion,  Paraguay,  in  1615.  He  went  with
his  parents  to  Quito,  studied  theology  in  Lima,  en-
tering the  novitiate  of  the  Dominicans  in  1560.
After  his  profession  he  was  sent  to  the  university.
He  was  ordained  priest  and  at  once  appointed  su-
perior of  a  convent.  In  1586,  while  prior  of  the
convent  of  Lima,  he  was  elected  provincial  of  Chili.
As  soon  as  he  arrived  in  Chili  he  wrote  to  the
king  of  Spain  for  missionaries,  and  his  request  was
answered  by  the  despatch  of  a  large  number  of  Do-
minicans to  the  New  World,  who  were  sent  among
the  Indians.  He  went  himself  among  the  fiercest
of  the  natives,  whom  the  Spaniards  had  never  con-

?uered,  and  was  treated  with  the  greatest  respect,
n  1590  he  returned  to  Peru,  and  on  his  arrival  in
Lima  was  installed  master  of  novices  in  the  convent
of  San  Rosario.  In  1596  he  was  appointed  bishop  of
Villa  Imperial,  in  the  south  of  Chili.  Shortly  after
he  reached  his  episcopal  see  it  was  besieged  by  the
Araucanians.  His  conduct  during  this  incident
has  been  variously  treated  by  Spanish  historians.
Some  say  that  he  deserted  his  flock,  while  others
insist  that  his  departure  from  the  city  during  the
siege  was  owing  to  his  desire  to  protect  the  nuns,
who  accompanied  him  in  his  flight.  After  the
destruction  of  Villa  Imperial  he  transferred  his
episcopal  see  to  Concepcion.  In  1607  he  was  nomi-
nated bishop  of  Asuncion,  in  Paraguay.  He  made
vain  efforts  to  protect  the  Indians,  and  was  so
affected  one  day  at  the  sight  of  the  barbarous  treat-
ment inflicted  upon  some  of  them  that  he  never
recovered  from  the  shock.  Lizarraga  was  an  able
writer  and  eloquent  preacher.  He  left  three  vol-
umes of  sermons  in  folio. He  wrote  also  "De  la


Descripcion  y  Poblacion  de  las  Indias."  His  prin-
cipal works,  however,  are  his  exposition  of  the  five
books  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  the  concordance  of
those  different  texts  of  the  Scriptures  the  sense  of
which  appears  to  be  contradictory.

LLO YD,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  the  parish  of  Mar-
ravon,  Montgomeryshire,  North  Wales,  in  1656 ;  d.
in  Pennsylvania  in  1731.  He  received  a  legal  edu-
cation, and  in  1686  was  sent  by  William  Penn  to
his  new  colony  to  act  as  attorney-general  of  the
province.  His  pleasing  manners,  persistent  energy,
and  natural  abilities  served  to  advance  him  rapidly
in  the  esteem  of  all  classes  of  the  community,  and
he  was  quickly  preferred  to  many  offices  of  trust
and  profit.  He  became  successively  clerk  of  the
county  court  of  Philadelphia,  deputy  to  the  master
of  the  rolls,  and  clerk  of  the  provincial  court.  In
this  last  post  he  resisted  the  attempts  of  Gov.
Blackwell  to  extort  from  him  the  records  with
which  he  had  been  intrusted.  In  1689  he  was  clerk
of  the  assembly,  and  in  1693-'4  he  was  returned  as
a  member  of  that  body.  Between  this  time  and
the  end  of  the  century  he  served  for  four  years  as
a  member  of  the  provincial  council,  and  during
this  period  first  developed  that  sincere  attachment
to  the  popular  interests  which  formed  so  marked  a
feature  of  the  rest  of  his  career.  He  played  a
prominent  part  in  procuring  from  Gov.  Markham
the  new  charter  of  privileges  in  1696,  and  was  the
author  of  many  legislative  schemes  for  the  security
and  improvement  of  the  province.  In  1703  he  ac-
cepted the  office  of  deputy  judge  and  advocate  to
the  admiralty.  The  beginning  of  the  18th  century
saw  him  pitted  against  James  Logan  and  the  pro-
prietary in  defence  of  the  popular  rights,  and  he
continued  for  years  an  object  alike  of  fear  and  of
hatred  to  the  proprietary.  He  was  chosen  many
times  speaker  of  the  assembly,  and  his  mind  found
employment  in  forming  new  schemes  of  judicial
reform.  Most  of  the  important  court  laws  that
were  passed  up  to  the  date  of  his  death  were  the
results  of  his  pen,  or  at  least  were  framed  with  the
benefit  of  his  counsel  and  advice.  Being  a  thorough
Welsh  scholar,  he  had  studied  the  laws  of  his  an-
cestors, and  made  them  the  basis  of  his  reforms.
In  1718  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  prov-
ince. Lloyd  was  warmly  attached  to  his  friends,
but  implacable  to  his  enemies.  The  historian
Robert  Proud  regarded  him  as  possessing  political
talents,  but  said  they  tended  rather  to  divide  than
to  unite,  and  James  Logan,  in  a  letter  to  William
Penn,  Jr.,  said  he  "was  a  good  lawyer,  and  of
sound  judgment,  but  extremely  pertinacious  and
somewhat  revengeful."  He  had  the  defects  of  his
race,  one  of  which  was  an  inordinate  confidence  in
his  own  wisdom.  He  had  also  a  hot  Welsh  tem-
per, and  was  very  passionate  and  bitter  when  pro-
voked ;  but  he  was  most  highly  regarded  by  his
Welsh  countrymen,  and  when  Rev.  Abel  Morgan's
"Cyd-Gordiad,"  or  Welsh  concordance  of  the
Bible,  was  published  (1730),  it  was  dedicated  to
Chief-Justice  Lloyd,  as  a  token  of  their  esteem  and
.of  his  devotion  to  the  principles  of  liberty.  His
declining  years  were  marked  by  a  peaceful  repose
that  formed  a  striking  contrast  to  the  stormy
scenes  of  his  earlier  life.  Laying  aside  the  bitter
prejudices  and  rancorous  feelings  which  years  of
strife  had  fostered,  he  actively  and  heartily  co-
operated with  his  former  adversaries  in  several
measures  that  were  calculated  to  promote  the  pros-
perity of  the  province.  Even  before  his  death  the
great  bulk  of  the  community  had  come  to  enter-
tain feelings  of  respect  and  gratitude  toward  him
as  the  first  lawyer  of  Pennsylvania.  He  published
"A  Vindication  of  the  Legislative  Powers,"  etc


LLOYD


LOAYZA


749


(Philadelphia,  1725);  "A  Salutation  to  the  Brit-
ains,"  etc.,  revised  by  R.  Ellis  and  David  Lloyd
(1727) ;  "  A  Defence  of  the  Legislative  Constitution
of  the  Province  of  Pennsylvania,"  etc.  (1728).

LLOYD,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  Maryland  in
1799 ;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  2  June,  1834.  He  was
elected  to  congress  from  Maryland  in  place  of
Joseph  H.  Nicholson,  resigned,  and  served  from  3
Dec,  1806,  till  3  March,  1809.  He  was  governor  of
Maryland  in  1809-'ll,  and  U.  S.  senator  from  that
state  from  6  Dec,  1819,  till  January,  1826,  when  he
resigned.  He  was  state  senator  and  president  of
the  senate  in  1826-'31. — His  grandson,  Henry,
governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in  Hambrooke,  Dorches-
ter co.,  Md.,  21  Feb.,  1852,  removed  with  his  par-
ents to  Cambridge,  Md.,  and  was  educated  there.
He  then  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1873,  but  taught  till  1880,  when  he  engaged  in
practice.  He  held  several  local  offices,  was  elected
to  the  Maryland  senate  in  1881,  and  in  1885  be-
came president  of  that  body.  On  the  appointment
of  Gov.  Robert  M.  McLane  to  the  French  mission,
in  March  of  that  year,  Mr.  Lloyd  became  ex-officio
governor  of  the  state,  and  in  January,  1886,  he
was  chosen  by  the  legislature  to  fill  the  unexpired
term,  ending  in  1888.

LLOYD,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Maryland.  He
received  a  classical  education,  was  elected  a  U.  S.
senator  from  Maryland  in  place  of  John  Henry,  re-
signed, and  served  from  11  Jan.,  1798.  On  19
March,  1800,  Mr.  Lloyd  was  appointed  on  a  com-
mittee to  report  on  the  subject  of  general  quaran-
tine laws.  On  Tuesday,  15  April,  he  "obtained
leave  of  absence  after  Monday  next,"  and  on  15
May  he  resigned  his  seat.

LLOYD,  James,  physician,  b.  on  Long  Island
in  April,  1728;  d.  in  BoVon,  14  March,  1810.  His
grandfather,  James,  came  from  Somersetshire,
England,  about  1670.  The  grandson  studied  medi-
cine at  Stratford,  Conn.,  at  Boston,  and  in  London
for  two  years,  and,  on  his  return  to  Boston  in  1752,
obtained  an  extensive  practice.  He  was  for  some
time  a  surgeon  at  Castle  William,  and  in  1764  was
a  strenuous  advocate  for  general  inoculation.  He
was  a  moderate  Loyalist,  and  remained  in  Boston
while  it  was  occupied  by  the  British  troops.  In
1789  he  went  to  England  to  obtain  compensation
for  losses  that  he  had  sustained  during  the  Revolu-
tion ;  but  his  application  was  refused  unless  he
should  consent  to  declare  himself  a  British  sub-
ject, which  he  did  not  feel  disposed  to  do. — His
son,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Boston  in  1769;  d.  in
New  York,  5  April,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1787,  and  afterward  engaged  in  mercantile
pursuits  for  some  time.  He  visited  Europe  about
1792,  resided  for  a  year  at  St.  Petersburg,  and,  on
returning  to  Boston,  was  elected  in  1800  a  member
of  the  state  house  of  representatives.  After  a  re-
election he  was  chosen  first  to  the  state  senate  and
then  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Federalist  in  place  of
John  Quincy  Adams,  serving  from  7  Nov.,  1808,
till  1813,  when  he  also  resigned.  He  was  afterward
re-elected  in  place  of  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  serving
from  2  Dec,  18.22,  till  23  May,  1826,  when  he  again
resigned.  He  published  some  political  tracts,  the
last  of  which  related  to  British  colonial  intercourse.
The  last  vears  of  his  life  were  passed  in  Philadelphia.

LLOYD,  Thomas,  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  b.
in  Dolobran,  Montgomeryshire.  Wales,  about  1640;
d.  in  Pennsylvania,  10  Sept.,  1694.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Oxford  in  1661,  became  a  Quaker,  and  in
1664  was  arrested  and  kept  under  surveillance  till
1672,  when  Charles  II.  dispensed  with  the  laws
that  inflicted  punishment  for  religious  offences.
He  became  a  physician  and  enjoyed  a  large  prac-


tice; but  in  1683  he  and  his  family  came  to  this
country  with  William  Penn,  who  made  him  master
of  the  rolls  on  27  Dec  He  was  chosen  to  the  pro-
vincial council  in  January,  1684,  and  as  its  presi-
dent administered  the  government,  after  Penn
sailed  for  England  in  August,  till  9  Dec,  1687,
when  he  was  one  of  an  executive  commission  of
five  that  held  power  for  ten  months.  He  was
again  elected  to  the  council  in  1689,  and  took  his
seat  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  governor,
John  Blackwell,  with  whom  he  and  others  of  the
Quaker  party  had  a  controversy.  Blackwell  was
removed  from  office  by  Penn,  and  Lloyd  was  again
chosen  president  of  the  council  and  afterward  com-
missioned lieutenant-governor  by  Penn,  holding
office  in  1690-3.  During  his  administration  the
schism  headed  by  George  Keith  (q.  v.)  took  place.
He  published  "An  Epistle  to  my  dear  and  well
beloved  Friends  of  Dolobran,"  etc,  dated  1682
(Philadelphia,  1788),  and  a  "  Letter  to  John  Eccles
and  Wife,"  dated  1682  (1805).

LOAYZA,  or  LOA  YSA,  Jeronimo  de  (lo-i'-sah),
Spanish- American  bishop,  b.  in  Truxillo,  Spain,
about  1500;  d.  in  Lima.  Peru,  in  1575.  He  be-
longed to  one  of  the  noblest  families  in  Spain,
and  at  an  early  age  entered  the  College  of  Saint
Paul  of  Cordova,  where  he  joined  the  Dominican
order,  and  went  to  the  College  of  St.  Gregory  in
Valladolid  to  finish  his  studies.  He  embarked  for
America  in  1526.  Carthagena  was  assigned  him
as  a  field  of  missionary  labor,  and  he  devoted
himself  zealously  to  the  conversion  of  the  natives,
and,  notwithstanding  the  extreme  heat  of  the  cli-
mate and  dangers  of  every  kind,  he  visited  the
barbarous  tribes  along  the  coast,  converting  many
of  them  to  Christianity.  After  five  years  he  re-
turned to  Spain  to  defend  the  Indians  and  de-
nounce the  conduct  of  their  conquerors,  who,  in
contempt  of  the  repeated  orders  of  the  emperor,
persisted  in  enslaving  the  natives.  In  1537  he  was
nominated  bishop  of  Carthagena.  As  a  condition
of  acceptance  he  desired  that  Charles  V.  should
display  more  energy  in  the  protection  of  the  Indi-
ans, build  a  cathedral  and  a  Dominican  convent
in  Carthagena,  and  send  out  six  missionaries  of
the  order  even'  year  to  his  diocese;  and  all  of
these  petitions  "were  granted.  He  then  gathered  a
colony  of  priests  and  monks  from  the  Dominican  and
other  communities  and  distributed  them  through
every  part  of  his  immense  diocese.  He  began  his
cathedral  in  1538,  and  was  engaged  in  founding  a
school  in  Carthagena,  after  the  model  of  the  propa-
ganda in  Rome,  for  the  education  of  the  children
of  the  caciques  and  principal  Indians,  when  he
received  letters  from  Charles  V.  announcing  his
translation  to  the  see  of  Lima,  which  was  created
in  1540.  He  reached  Lima  in  1543,  and  (hiring  the
insurrection  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  offered  his  services
to  the  viceroy,  Blasco  Nunez  de  Vela,  and  consented
to  visit  Pizarro  in  Cuzco  with  the  view  of  obtaining
his  submission.  Although  he  was  at  first  received
with  distrust  by  the  rebels,  many  of  them  were
finally  convinced  by  his  arguments  and  spoke  of
going  to  Lima  to  make  their  submission,  when  the
auditors,  irritated  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  viceroy,
opened  the  gates  of  Lima  to  Pizarro.  Loayza  was
prominent  in  the  events  that  followed,  and  after
the  defeat  of  Pizarro  prevented  the  victors  from
coming  to  blows  over  the  spoils.  Meanwhile  the
see  of  Lima  had  been  erected  into  an  archbish-
opric, and  he  received  the  pallium  and  the  bull  by
which  he  was  named  archbishop  of  that  city.  As
soon  as  peace  was  re-established  he  summoned  a
provincial  council  in  1552,  in  which  he  defined  the
path  to  follow  for  the  instruction  of  the  Indians,  and


750


LOBECK


LOCKE


approved  of  the  translations  of  the  catechism  and
other  religious  works  into  Quichua  and  Aymara,
the  principal  languages  of  Peru.  He  announced
to  the  secular  clergy,  some  of  whom  had  fallen  into
disorderly  habits,  that  he  had  obtained  an  ordi-
nance from  the  emperor  empowering  him  to  grant
ecclesiastical  benefices  to  the  priests  of  his  diocese,
or  withdraw  them,  without  having  recourse  to  the
viceroy  or  members  of  the  royal  audience.  While
he  was  thus  occupied  with  the  affairs  of  his  dio-
cese, a  new  rebellion  arose  headed  by  Francisco  Her-
nandez Giron,  a  wealthy  Spaniard,  who  was  dissat-
isfied with  his  share  of  the  plunder  after  the  death
of  Pizarro.  The  viceroy  Mendoza  being  dead,  the
archbishop  put  himself  at  the  head  of  an  army  and
marched  against  the  rebels.  He  was  obliged  to  re-
turn to  Lima  during  the  campaign ;  but  the  rebels
were  defeated  and  Giron  taken  and  executed.  As
soon  as  peace  was  restored  he  visited  every  part  of
his  diocese  to  remedy  the  evils  produced  by  civil
war.  He  was  entirely  successful,  being,  according
to  the  historian  Melendez,  "  as  fit  for  the  things  of
peace  as  for  those  of  war.  He  could  command  an
army  of  soldiers  as  well  as  he  could  govern  a  dio-
cese." The  great  work  of  his  life,  however,  was
the  erection  of  the  hospital  of  St.  Anne  for  Indi-
ans, which  still  exists  in  Lima.  To  effect  this  he
sold  all  his  possessions,  and  when  the  building  was
finished  he  brought  call  the  Indians  attacked  by
disease  whom  he  could  find  in  the  city  and  then
established  himself  in  a  poor  room  in  order  to  be
within  reach  of  the  dying.  As  the  revenues  of  his
archbishopric  were  insufficient  for  the  support  of
the  hospital,  he  begged  from  door  to  door  in  Lima
and  appealed  for  help  to  Europe.  He  died  in  the
hospital  a  few  months  after  he  had  made  the  ar-
rangements to  assure  its  continuance.

LOBECK,  Justus  Florian,  German  natural-
ist, b.  in  Germany ;  d.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  August,
1869.  He  was  long  a.  resident  in  Chili,  where  he
had  made  large  contributions  to  natural  science,
and  was  for  several  years  professor  of  natural  his-
tory in  the  University  of  Santiago.

LOBO,  Martin,  Mexican  clergyman,  b.  in  Mexi-
co about  1580 ;  d.  in  Trujillo,  Central  America,  in
1642.  He  entered  the  order  of  St.  Francis,  and
early  in  the  17th  century  was  sent  as  superior  to
the  convent  of  Guatemala,  where  he  followed  his
favorite  study  of  mathematics,  and  soon  acquired
fame  as  a  cosmographer  and  hydraulic  engineer.
The  provincial  of  his  order,  believing  that  Lobo's
projects  were  worthy  of  consideration  by  the  home
government,  obtained  the  election  of  Lobo  in  1641
as  delegate  of  the  order  to  the  general  council  in
Rome  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  explain  his
plans  in  Madrid.  Lobo  set  out  for  the  Atlantic
coast  of  Honduras  to  await  an  opportunity  for
sailing,  but  died  of  fever  in  the  convent  of  Tru-
jillo. His  manuscripts  were  sent  to  Spain,  and,
although  Father  Vasquez  in  his  "Cronica"  says
that  he  has  seen  them,  they  are  lost  or  hidden  in
the  government  archives  in  Spain.  They  are  "  Ar-
bitrios  para  que  en  el  Reino  de  Guatemala  se  cojan
todos  los  frutos,  yerbas  y  plantas  de  Europa  y
todo  el  Mundo,"  an  essay  favoring  the  acclimatiza-
tion of  foreign  plants  in  Central  America,  and
"  Medios  y  modo  de  juntar  el  Mar  del  Norte  con  el
del  Sur,  para  el  paso  de  los  Gal  eon  es  de  Espana
hasta  el  Callao  de  Lima,  sin  necesidad  de  buscar
el  Estrecho  de  Magallanes,"  probably  the  first
work  describing  the  project  of  an  interoceanic
canal.  Although  neither  the  author  nor  Father
Vasquez  mentions  the  location  of  the  projected
canal,  it  is  probable  that  the  Nicaragua  route  was
proposed,  as  the  author  had  travelled  there  for


many  years  and  made  observations.  Some  believe
that  Lobo's  work  is  identical  with  a  manuscript
that  has  been  found  in  the  National  library  of
Mexico,  without  name  or  exact  date,  which  treats
of  a  projected  canal  between  the  rivers  Coatzaco-
alcos  and  Tehuantepec

LOCHMAN,  John  George,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Dec,  1773:  d.  in  Harrisburg,
Pa.,  10  Julv,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1789  and  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1794,  and  became  pastor  of  the  Lu-
theran congregation  at  Lebanon,  Pa.,  where  he  la-
bored for  twenty-one  years,  also  serving  several
congregations  in  the  vicinity.  In  1815  he  became
pastor  at  Harrisburg,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  He  was  president  of  the  first  convention  of
the  general  synod  held  at  Frederick,  Md.,  in  1821.
He  devoted  much  time  to  the  preparation  of  young
men  for  the  ministry,  and  many  of  his  students  oc-
cupied high  offices  in  his  church.  He  published  a
"  Farewell  Sermon  "  (Lebanon,  Pa.,  1815) ;  "  Intro-
ductory Sermon  "  (Harrisburg,  Pa.,  1815) ;  "  History,
Doctrine,  and  Discipline  of  the  Lutheran  Church  "
(1818) ;  "  Evangelical  Catechism  "  (1822) ;  and  vari-
ous sermons  and  addresses. — His  son,  Augustus
Herman,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Pa.,  5  Oct.,  1802,  was  grad-
uated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1823,
and  studied  theology  under  his  father.  After  his
ordination  by  the  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania  he
became  pastor  of  the  Lutheran  church  at  Harris-
burg, Pa.,  as  his  father's  successor,  •  after  having
charge  of  the  Lutheran  congregation  at  York,  Pa.,
which  he  served  for  forty-four  years.  He  has  trans-
lated several  volumes  from  the  German,  which  have
been  published  by  the  Lutheran  board  of  publica-
tion, Philadelphia,  in  its  "  Fatherland  "  series.

LOCHRANE,  Osborne  Augustus,  jurist,  b.  in
Middletown,  Armagh,  Ireland,  22  Aug.,  1829 ;  d.
in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  17  June,  1887.  He  arrived  in  New
York,  21  Dec,  1846,  and  soon  afterward  went  to
Athens,  Ga.,  where  he  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1849.  He  began  practice  in
Savannah  in  March,  1850,  but  removed  to  Macon
in  October  of  that  year.  In  September,  1861,  he
was  appointed  judge  of  the  Macon  circuit,  and
twice  re-elected  by  the  legislature  to  the  same
office,  but  resigned  in  1865.  He  then  removed  to
Atlanta,  and  in  August,  1870,  became  judge  of
that  circuit.  In  January,  1871,  he  was  appointed
chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  but
resigned  in  December  of  that  year  and  resumed
practice  at  the  bar.  He  was  a  popular  public
speaker,  and  many  of  his  speeches  and  orations
have  been  published  in  pamphlet-form.

LOCKE,  David  Ross,  satirist,  b.  in  Vestal,
Broome  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Sept.,  1833;  d.  in  Toledo,
Ohio,  15  Feb.,  1888.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  and  learned  the  printer's  trade  in  Cort-
land. After  being  connected  with  several  western
papers  as  a  local  reporter,  he  was  successively  edi-
tor and  publisher  in  Ohio,  from  1852  to  18*60,  of
the  Plymouth  "  Advertiser,"  Mansfield  "  Herald,"
Bucyrus  "Journal,"  and  Findlay  " Jeffersonian."
In  the  last  named  he  published  in  1860,  under  the
signature  of  "  Rev.  Petroleum  Vesuvious  Nasby."  a
letter  purporting  to  come  from  an  ignorant  and
penniless  Kentucky  Democrat,  who  was  devoted  to
free  whiskey  and  the  perpetuation  of  slavery,  and
who  desired  to  be  a  postmaster.  The  development
of  this  character  resulted  in  the  long  series  of
"  Nasby "  letters,  which  were  soon  transferred  to
the  "  Toledo  Blade,"  of  which  their  author  became
a  proprietor  and  editor.  At  the  close  of  the  war
George  S.  Boutwell  said  in  a  speech  at  Cooper  Union
that  the  crushing  of  the  rebellion  could  be  credited


LOCKE

to  three  forces,  "the  army,  the  navy,  and  theNasbv
letters."  President  Lincoln  offered  to  appoint  Mr.
Locke  to  office,  and  Gen.  Grant  urged  him  to  ac-
cept a  foreign  mission,  but  he  declined.  In  1871
he  removed  to  New  York  city  and  became  manag-
ing editor  of  the  "  Evening  Mail,"  but  still  main-
tained his  connection  with  the  "  Blade."  Several
years  afterward  he  returned  to  Ohio.  Mr.  Locke
published  "  Divers  Views,  Opinions,  and  Prophe-
cies of  Yours  Truly "'  (Cincinnati,  1865) ;  "  Swing-
in'  Round  the  Cirkle"  (Boston,  1866);  "Ekkoes
from  Kentucky"  (1867);  "The  Moral  History  of
America's  Life  Struggle"  (1872);  "The  Struggles
of  P.  V.  Nasby "  (1873) ;  "  The  Morals  of  Abou
ben  Adhera ;  or,  Eastern  Fruit  in  Western  Dishes  "
(1875) ;  "  A  Paper  City,"  a  novel,  being  the  history
of  a  western  land  speculation  (1878);  "Hannah
Jane,"  a  poem,  and  "Nasby  in  Exile"  (1882);  and
pamphlets  on  political,  social,  and  literary  topics.

LOCKE,  Jane  Ermina,  author,  b.  in  Worth-
ington,  Mass.,  25  April,  1805 ;  d.  in  Ashburnham.
Mass.,  8  March,  1859.  Her  maiden  name  was
Starkweather,  and  she  married  in  1829  John  G.
Locke,  of  Boston,  author  of  a  "  Genealogy  of  the
Locke  Family"  (Boston,  1853).  They  resided  in
Lowell  from  1833  till  1839,  and  subsequently  in
Boston.  Mrs.  Locke's  first  published  composi-
tions were  poems,  which  appeared  in  the  "  Ladies'
American  Magazine  "  about  1830.  She  was  long  a
contributor  to  newspapers  and  periodicals,  and  is
the  author  of  a  volume  of  "  Poems "  (Boston.
1842):  "Rachel,  or  the  Little  Mourner"  (1844);
"Boston,"  a  poem  (1846);  "The  Recalled,  or
Voices  of  the  Past "  (1855) ;  and  a  "  Eulogy  on  the
Death  of  Webster"  in  rhyme  (1855).

LOCKE,  John,  phvsicist,  b.  in  Frveburg.  Me..
19  Feb.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  10  July,  1856.
He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of
Yale  in  1819,  and  afterward  became  geologist  on
the  U.  S.  explorations  of  the  northwest  territories
and  on  the  state  survey  of  Ohio.  For  many  years
after  1836  he  was  professor  of  chemistry  in  the
Medical  college  of  Ohio.  Prof.  Locke  was  one  of
the  pioneers  in  the  sciences  of  botany,  geology,
and  electricity,  making  many  discoveries  in  these
branches,  especially  in  terrestrial  magnetism.  He
made  various  improved  and  original  instruments
for  use  in  optics,  physics,  electricity,  and  magnet-
ism, among  which  were  the  gravity  escapement  for
regulator-clocks  (1844),  which  has  never  been  sur-
passed, and  his  electro-chronograph  (1848).  subse-
quently purchased  for  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory
at  an  expense  of  $10,000;  also  a  spirit-level  (1850),
.vhich  is  still  in  use  among  civil  engineers.  Prof.
Locke  contributed  to  the  proceedings  of  various
scientific  societies  and  to  the  "  American  Journal
of  Science,"  and  published  text-books  on  botany
and  on  English  grammar.

LOCKE,  Matthew,  statesman,  b.  near  Salisbury',
Rowan  co.,  N.  C,  in  1730 ;  d.  there.  7  Sept.,  1801.  lie
was  among  the  earliest  supporters  of  the  Revolu-
tion, and  was  one  of  the  commission  that  was  chosen
by  the  people  of  North  Carolina  in  1771  to  receive
the  fees  of  sheriffs  and  other  colonial  officers.  He
was  a  member  of  the  house  of  commons  of  North
Carolina  in  1775,  and  of  the  convention  that
framed  the  state  constitution  in  1776.  He  was
afterward  elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  2
Dec,  1793,  till  3  March,  1799.  He  was  a  brigadier-
general  of  state  troops,  served  thirty  years  in  the
legislature,  and  was  a  member  of  that  body  when
the  United  States  constitution  was  ratified. — His
nephew,  Francis,  jurist,  b.  in  Rowan  countv.  X.  ('..
31  Oct.,  1766;  d.  there,  8  Jan.,  1823,  studied  and
practised  law,  was  elected  a  judge  of  the  superior


LOCKWOOD


751


court  of  North  Carolina  in  1803,  and  resigned  in
1814,  when  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator.  In  1815
he  resigned,  before  taking  his  seat  in  the  senate.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1809.

LOCKE,  Richard  Adams,  journalist,  b.  in  NYw
York  in  1800 ;  d.  on  Staten  island,  16  Feb.,  1871.
He  was  at  one  time  editor  of  the  "  New  York  Sun  "
and  "  The  New  Era,"  but  in  consequence  of  feeble
health  he  left  journalism  several  years  before  his
death,  and  received  an  appointment  in  the  New
York  custom-house.  In  1835  he  created  a  sensa-
tion by  the  publication  of  what  purported  to  be
the  astronomical  observations,  especially  on  the
moon,  of  Sir  John  Herschel,  the  younge'r.  at  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  describing  in  detail,  among
other  things,  the  discovery  of  lunar  inhabitants.
The  whole  account  was  so  plausible  and  circum-
stantial that  it  was  believed  even  by  many  scien-
tific men.  It  is  generally  known  as  the  "Moon
Hoax,"  and  was  reprinted  in  a  pamphlet  (New
York,  1871).  Afterward  he  wrote  "  The  Lost  Manu-
script of  Mungo  Park,"  another  hoax.

LOCKE,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1732;  d.  in  Sherburne,  Mass..  15
Jan.,  1778.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1655,
ordained  a  minister  at  Sherburne.  7  Nov.,  1759,  and
retained  this  pastorate  till  1759.  when  he  was  ap-
pointed president  of  Harvard.  21  March.  1770.  On
1  Dec.  1773,  he  resigned  from  the  presidency,  and
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  retirement.  Har-
vard conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  I).  D.  in  1773.
The  only  production  of  Dr.  Locke's  in  print  is  his
"Convention  Sermon"  (1772).

LOCKWOOD,  Belva  Ann  Bennett,  reformer,
b.  in  Royalton,  X.  Y..  24  <  >et.,  1830.  She  was  edu-
cated in  district  schools,  and  taught  at  the  age  of
fourteen.  In  1848  she  married  Uriah  H.  McNall,
a  farmer,  who  died  in  1853.  and  in  1868  she  married
Dr.  Ezekiel  Lockwood,  who  died  in  1*77.  In  1*57
she  was  graduated  at  Syracuse  university.  After
teaching  in  Xew  York  state,  she  removed  to  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  where  she  opened  a  school,  and  in
1870  began  to  study  law.  She  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1873,  and  in  1879  was  permitted  to  practise
before  the  supreme  court  and  the  court  of  claims.
In  1870  she  obtained  the  passage  of  a  bill  "to  se-
cure to  women  employes  of  the  government  equal
pay  with  men  for  equal  work."  She  has  been  an
active  advocate  of  woman  suffrage,  and  in  1884
was  nominated  by  the  National  equal  rights  party
in  California  for  the  presidency  of  the  United
States. She  has  delivered  manv  lectures.

LOCKWOOD,  Henry  Hayes,  soldier,  b.  in
Kent  county.  Del.,  17  Aug.,  1814.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1836,  as-
signed to  the  2d  artillery,  and  served  against  the
Seminoles  in  Florida  in  1836-'7,  but  resigned  his
commission  on  12  Sept..  1837.  and  engaged  in
farming  in  Delaware  until  1841.  He  was  then
appointed  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  V.  S.
navy  and  ordered  to  the  frigate  " United  States,"
on  which  he  participated  in  the  capture  of  Mon-
terey, Cal.,  in  October,  1842.  On  his  return  he
wasordered  to  the  naval  asylum  at  Philadelphia,
and  subsequently  to  the  naval  school  at  AnnajH>lis,
as  professor  of  natural  and  experimental  philoso-
phy. In  1851  he  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of
field  artillery  and  infantry  tactics,  serving  also  as
professor  of  astronomy  and  gunnery  till  1866.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  coionel  of  the
1st  Delaware  regiment,  and  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  8  Aug.,  1861.  He  com-
manded an  expedition  to  the  eastern  shore  of  Vir-
ginia, theq  had  charge  of  Point  Lookout  and  the
defences  of  the  lower  Potomac,  commanded  a  bri-


752


LOCKWOOD


LOCKWOOD


JhT^^Cer


gade  at  Gettysburg,  and,  from  December,  1863.  till
April,  1864,  was  at  the  head  of  the  middle  depart-
ment, with  headquarters  at  Baltimore.  He  then
participated  in  the  Richmond  campaign  in  May
and  June,  1864,  and  commanded  provisional  troops
against  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early,  in  July,  1864.  From
that  date  until  August,  1865,  he  commanded  a  bri-
gade in  Baltimore.  He  was  mustered  out  of  service
on  25  Aug.,  1865,  and  returned  to  the  naval  school
in  Annapolis.  He  was  retired  on  4  Aug.,  1876.  In
addition  to  a  tract  entitled  "  Manual  of  Naval  Bat-
teries," he  has  published  "  Exercises  in  Small  Arms
and  Field  Artillery,  arranged  for  the  Naval  Ser-
vice "  (Washington,  1852).— His  son,  James  Booth,
explorer,  b.  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  Annapolis,
Md.,  9  Oct.,  1852 ;  d.  at  Cape  Sabine,  arctic  re-
gions, 9  April,  1884,  was  sent  to  a  private  school  at

Bethlehem,  Pa.,  and
later  to  St.  John's
college,  Annapolis.
After  some  experi-
ence in  farming  and
as  a  railway  survey-
or, he  was  commis-
sioned 2d  lieutenant
in  the  23d  U.  S.  in-
fantry, 1  Oct.,  1873.
He  served  in  the
west  for  the  succeed-
ing seven  years,  and
became  proficient  not
only  in  ordinary  mil-
itary duties,  but  also
in  surveying,  teleg-
raphy, and  phonog-
raphy. He  volun-
teered for  duty  with
the  Lady  Franklin  bay  expedition  (see  Greeey,
Adolphus  W.)  and,  as  second  in  command,  was  in-
trusted with  the  most  important  field-work  of  the
expedition,  also  assisting  in  the  magnetic  observa-
tions. In  preliminary  sledging  he  was  in  the  field
twenty-two  days  after  the  sun  had  left  for  the  win-
ter, and  six  days  before  its  return.  In  March,  1882,
Lieut.  Lockwood,  with  a  dog-sledge,  made  a  few
days'  trip  across  Robeson  channel  to  Newman  bay
in  temperatures  ranging  from  30°  to  55°,  Fahren-
heit, below  zero.  On  3  April,  1882,  he  started  on
the  successful  journey  that  fixes  his  fame  as  an  arc-
tic explorer.  Using  a  dog-sledge  and  assisted  by
eight  men,  he  reached  Cape  Bryant,  on  the  north
Greenland  coast,  on  1  May,  and  thence  he  sent  back
the  man-sledges,  and  with  dog-sledge,  accompanied
by  Sergt.  Brainard  and  the  Eskimo  Christiansen,
started  northward.  The  party  reached  Cape  Bri-
tannia on  the  fifth  day's  march,  and  thenceforward
travelled  along  land  before  unknown.  Lockwood
island,  in  latitude  83°  24'  N.,  longitude  40°  46'  W.,
the  most  northerly  point  on  land  or  sea  that  ever
has  been  attained  by  man,  was  reached  on  13  May,
and  two  days  were  spent  in  observations.  The
Greenland  coast  yet  trended  to  the  northeast,
being  visible  as  far  as  Cape  Washington.  83°  35'
N.,  but  there  was  no  land  to  the  north  or  north-
west within  the  sixty  miles  that  were  visible  from
the  summit  of  an  adjacent  cliff.  Vegetation  was
comparatively  abundant,  while  birds  were  seen  and
animal  traces  found.  Fort  Conger  was  again  reached
on  17  June.  In  sixty  days  Lieut.  Lockwood  travelled
1,069  statute  miles  and  experienced  temperature  as
low  as  49°  below  zero,  Fahrenheit,  without  serious
accident. His  discoveries  extended  the  boundary


of  known  lands  28  miles  nearer  the  north  pole,  and
added  125  miles  of  entirely  new  coast  line  to
Greenland.  The  farthest  point  that  was  seen  on
the  Arctic  ocean  was  within  350  miles  of  the  pole.
A  most  promising  attempt  in  1883  to  surpass  the
latitude  of  1882  failed  only  through  the  disin-
tegration of  the  polar  ice-pack.  Later  in  the  year,
despite  his  misgivings,  Lieut.  Lockwood,  "with
Sergt.  Brainard,  supplemented  Lieut.  Greely's  dis-
coveries of  1882  by  crossing  Grinnell  land  and
reaching,  by  dog-sledge,  a  point  on  the  coast,  50
miles  beyond  Mount  C.  A.  Arthur,  which  had
been  attained  by  that  officer  on  foot.  In  the  re-
treat of  the  Greely  expedition  in  the  autumn  of
1883,  and  in  the  terrible  winter  at  Camp  Clay,
Lieut.  Lockwood  bore  his  part  bravely.  His  re-
mains were  brought  to  the  United  States  by  the
relief  expedition  under  Capt.  Winfield  S.  Schley,
and  buried  in  the  grounds  of  the  naval  academy.
See  Charles  Lanman's  "Farthest  North"  (New
York,  1885),  and  "  The  Official  Report  of  the  Lady
Franklin  Bay  Expedition  "  (Washington,  1887).

LOCKWOOD,  Homer  Nichols,  topographer,
b.  in  Victory,  Cayuga  eo.,  N.  Y.,  23  June,  1833.
He  was  educated  in  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  and  from  1858
till  1865  travelled  in  the  southern  states,  and  the
West  Indies.  He  aided  in  building  the  New  York
Southern -Central  railroad  in  1865-'71,  and  in
1866-'7  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  Since
1880  he  has  resided  in  New  York  city.  He  has
published  maps  of  several  of  the  southern  states,
topographical  maps  in  Spanish  of  Cuba  and  Porto
Rico,  and  school  maps  of  these  islands.

LOCKWOOD,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mans-
field, Nottinghamshire,  England,  20  Jan.,  1819.
He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  the  city  of
New  York  in  1847,  and  at  New  Brunswick  theo-
logical seminary  in  1850.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  New  York  classis  of  the  Dutch
Reformed  church,  and  held  pastorates  in  Cortland,
N.  Y.,  Gilboa,  N.  Y.,  and  Keyport,  N.  J.,  until
1867,  when  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of
public  instruction  for  Monmouth  county,  N.  J.,
which  office  he  has  since  held.  For  some  time  he
was  lecturer  on  natural  sciences  in  Rutgers  col-
lege grammar-school,  and  he  has  contributed  to
scientific  journals  discoveries  in  botany,  paleon-
tology, and  zoology.  He  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York  in  1869,  and  is  now  (1887)  president  of  the
New  Jersey  state  microscopical  society  and  of  the
American  postal  microscopical  club.  His  writings
include  "  Temperance,  Fortitude,  Justice "  (New
York,  1855) ;  "  Abnormal  Entozoa  in  Man  "  (1881) ;
"The  American  Oyster"  (Trenton,  N.  J.,  1883);
"  The  Life  of  an  Oyster  "  (New  York,  1885) ;  "  Rais-
ing Diatoms  in  the  Laboratory  "  (1887) ;  and  "  Ani-
mal Memoirs  "  (1889).

LOCKWOOD,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Connecticut,  24  Jan.,  1803.  He  was  appointed
midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy  on  12  July,  1820,
and  in  1826  served  in  the  sloop  "  Warren,"  which
was  engaged  in  suppressing  piracy  in  the  Greek
waters.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant  in  1828,  and
in  1847-8  commanded  the  steamers  " Petrel "  and
"  Scourge,"  assisting  in  the  capture  of  Vera  Cruz,
Tuspan,  and  Tobasco.  In  1850  he  was  made  com-
mander, and  in  1857  commodore.  In  1861-'2  he
had  charge  of  the  blockade  of  Wilmington  and
Beaufort,  and  of  York  river  and  Newport  News.
Com.  Lockwood  also  assisted  in  the  capture  of
Fort  Macon. He  was  retired,  1  Oct.,  1864.


END OF VOLUME III.
